good morning .
thank you all for coming .
i take great joy in making this announcement .
it 's going to be one of the most important initiatives that my administration not only discusses , but implements .
first , it 's good to have so many groups represented here -- religious and non - religious ; catholic , jewish , protestant , and muslim ; foundations and other non - profits .
i want to thank you all for coming .
this is a collection of some of the finest america has got to offer -- people who lead with their hearts , and in turn , have changed the communities in which they live for the better .
this meeting is a picture of the strength and diversity and compassion of our country .
this is a diverse group , but we share things in common .
they provide more than practical help to people in need .
they touch and change hearts .
and for this , america is deeply appreciative .
everyone in this room knows firsthand that there are still deep needs and real suffering in the shadow of america 's affluence .
problems like addiction and abandonment and gang violence , domestic violence , mental illness and homelessness .
we are called by conscience to respond .
as i said in my inaugural address , compassion is the work of a nation , not just a government .
it is more than the calling of politicians ; it is the calling of citizens .
it is citizens who turn mean streets into good neighborhoods .
it is citizens who turn cold cities into real communities .
it is one of the great goals of my administration to invigorate the spirit of involvement and citizenship .
we will encourage faith - based and community programs without changing their mission .
we will help all in their work to change hearts while keeping a commitment to pluralism .
i approach this goal with some basic principles : government has important responsibilities for public health or public order and civil rights .
yet government -- and government will never be replaced by charities and community groups .
yet when we see social needs in america , my administration will look first to faith - based programs and community groups , which have proven their power to save and change lives .
we will not fund the religious activities of any group , but when people of faith provide social services , we will not discriminate against them .
as long as there are secular alternatives , faith - based charities should be able to compete for funding on an equal basis , and in a manner that does not cause them to sacrifice their mission .
and we will make sure that help goes to large organizations and to small ones as well .
we value large organizations with generations of experience .
we also value neighborhood healers , who have only the scars and testimony of their own experience .
tomorrow i will begin turning these principles into a legislative agenda .
i will send to congress a series of ideas and proposals .
today , i want to raise the priority and profile of these issues within my own administration .
i want to ensure that faith - based and community groups will always have a place at the table in our deliberations .
in a few moments , i will sign two executive orders .
the first executive order will create a new office , called the white house office of faith - based and community initiatives .
the head of this office will report directly to me and be charged with important responsibilities .
he will oversee our initiatives on this issue .
he will make sure our government , where it works with private groups , is fair and supportive .
and he will highlight groups as national models so others can learn from them .
the second executive order will clear away the bureaucratic barriers in several important agencies that make private groups hesitate to work with government .
it will establish centers in five agencies -- justice , hud , hhs , labor and education -- to ensure greater cooperation between the government and the independent sector .
these centers will report back on regulatory barriers to working with non - profit groups , and make recommendations on how those barriers can be removed .
i have put this broad effort into the hands of two exceptional people -- first , steve goldsmith , known as one of the most innovative mayors in america , who pioneered ways to promote community efforts .
he will continue to advise me on these issues .
and i have asked steve to serve on the board of the corporation for national service .
this organization has done some good work in mobilizing volunteers of all ages .
i 've asked steve to report to me on how we can make the corporation do better , and to get help where it 's most needed .
and secondly , professor john dilulio will head the new office i am announcing today .
he is one of the most influential social entrepreneurs in america .
i ca n't tell you how honored i am for him to leave his post in academia to join us .
he is the author of a respected textbook on american government .
he has a servant 's heart on the issues that we will confront .
he 's worked with disadvantaged children .
he has been a major force in mobilizing the city of philadelphia to support faith - based and community groups .
it 's a fantastic team .
i 'm honored to have them on my team .
i look forward to hearing from them , as well as i look forward to working with the people in this room and the social entrepreneurs all across america who have heard the universal call to love a neighbor like they 'd like to be loved themselves ; to exist and work hard , not out of the love of money , but out of the love of their fellow human beings .
i 'm absolutely convinced the great fabric of the nation exists in neighborhoods , amongst unsung heroes who do heroic acts on a daily and hourly basis .
it 's the fabric of the country that makes america unique .
it is -- the power of promise that makes the future so promising is the power of the missions that stand behind me .
this is an effort that will be an effort from , now the second week of my administration to the last week of my administration , because i am confident that this initiative , when fully implemented , will help us realize the dream that america , its hopes , its promise , its greatness , will extend its reach throughout every single neighborhood , all across the land .
and now it is my honor to sign the two executive orders .

thank you all .
mr. chairman -- mr. chairman , delegates , fellow citizens : i am honored by your support , and i accept your nomination for president of the united states .
when i -- when i said those words four years ago , none of us could have envisioned what these years would bring .
in the heart of this great city , we saw tragedy arrive on a quiet morning .
we saw the bravery of rescuers grow with danger .
we learned of passengers on a doomed plane who died with a courage that frightened their killers .
we have seen a shaken economy rise to its feet .
and we have seen americans in uniform storming mountain strongholds , and charging through sandstorms , and liberating millions , with acts of valor that would make the men of normandy proud .
since 2001 , americans have been given hills to climb , and found the strength to climb them .
now , because we have made the hard journey , we can see the valley below .
now , because we have faced challenges with resolve , we have historic goals within our reach , and greatness in our future .
we will build a safer world and a more hopeful america -- and nothing will hold us back .
in the work we have done , and the work we will do , i am fortunate to have a superb vice president .
i have counted on dick cheney 's calm and steady judgment in difficult days , and i am honored to have him at my side .
i am grateful to share my walk in life with laura bush .
americans -- americans have come to see the goodness and kindness and strength i first saw 26 years ago , and we love our first lady .
i 'm a fortunate father of two spirited , intelligent , and lovely young women .
i 'm blessed with a sister and brothers who are my closest friends .
and i will always be the proud and grateful son of george and barbara bush .
my father served eight years at the side of another great american -- ronald reagan .
his spirit of optimism and goodwill and decency are in this hall , and are in our hearts , and will always define our party .
two months from today , voters will make a choice based on the records we have built , the convictions we hold , and the vision that guides us forward .
a presidential election is a contest for the future .
tonight i will tell you where i stand , what i believe , and where i will lead this country in the next four years .
i believe -- i believe every child can learn , and every school must teach -- so we passed the most important federal education reform in history .
because we acted , children are making sustained progress in reading and math , america 's schools are getting better , and nothing will hold us back .
i believe we have a moral responsibility to honor america 's seniors -- so i brought republicans and democrats together to strengthen medicare .
now seniors are getting immediate help buying medicine .
soon every senior will be able to get prescription drug coverage , and nothing will hold us back .
i believe in the energy and innovative spirit of america 's workers , entrepreneurs , farmers , and ranchers -- so we unleashed that energy with the largest tax relief in a generation .
because we acted , our economy is growing again , and creating jobs , and nothing will hold us back .
i believe the most solemn duty of the american president is to protect the american people .
if america shows uncertainty or weakness in this decade , the world will drift toward tragedy .
this will not happen on my watch .
i 'm running for president with a clear and positive plan to build a safer world , and a more hopeful america .
i 'm running with a compassionate conservative philosophy : that government should help people improve their lives , not try to run their lives .
i believe this nation wants steady , consistent , principled leadership -- and that is why , with your help , we will win this election .
the story of america is the story of expanding liberty : an ever - widening circle , constantly growing to reach further and include more .
our nation 's founding commitment is still our deepest commitment : in our world , and here at home , we will extend the frontiers of freedom .
the times in which we live and work are changing dramatically .
the workers of our parents ' generation typically had one job , one skill , one career , often with one company that provided health care and a pension .
and most of those workers were men .
today , workers change jobs , even careers , many times during their lives , and in one of the most dramatic shifts our society has seen , two - thirds of all moms also work outside the home .
this changed world can be a time of great opportunity for all americans to earn a better living , support your family , and have a rewarding career .
and government must take your side .
many of our most fundamental systems -- the tax code , health coverage , pension plans , worker training -- were created for the world of yesterday , not tomorrow .
we will transform these systems so that all citizens are equipped , prepared -- and thus truly free -- to make your own choices and pursue your own dreams .
my plan begins with providing the security and opportunity of a growing economy .
we now compete in a global market that provides new buyers for our goods , but new competition for our workers .
to create more jobs in america , america must be the best place in the world to do business .
to create jobs , my plan will encourage investment and expansion by restraining federal spending , reducing regulation , and making the tax relief permanent .
to create jobs , we will make our country less dependent on foreign sources of energy .
to create jobs , we will expand trade and level the playing field to sell american goods and services across the globe .
and we must protect small business owners and workers from the explosion of frivolous lawsuits that threaten jobs across america .
another drag on our economy is the current tax code , which is a complicated mess -- filled with special interest loopholes , saddling our people with more than six billion hours of paperwork and headache every year .
the american people deserve -- and our economic future demands -- a simpler , fairer , pro - growth system .
in a new term , i will lead a bipartisan effort to reform and simplify the federal tax code .
another priority in a new term will be to help workers take advantage of the expanding economy to find better and higher - paying jobs .
in this time of change , many workers want to go back to school to learn different or higher - level skills .
so we will double the number of people served by our principal job training program and increase funding for our community colleges .
i know that with the right skills , american workers can compete with anyone , anywhere in the world .
in this time of change , opportunity in some communities is more distant than in others .
to stand with workers in poor communities -- and those that have lost manufacturing , textile , and other jobs -- we will create american opportunity zones .
in these areas , we will provide tax relief and other incentives to attract new business , and improve housing and job training to bring hope and work throughout all of america .
as i 've traveled the country , i 've met many workers and small business owners who have told me they are worried they can not afford health care .
more than half of the uninsured are small business employees and their families .
in a new term , we must allow small firms to join together to purchase insurance at the discounts available to big companies .
we will offer a tax credit to encourage small businesses and their employees to set up health savings accounts , and provide direct help for low - income americans to purchase them .
these accounts give workers the security of insurance against major illness , the opportunity to save tax - free for routine health expenses , and the freedom of knowing you can take your account with you whenever you change jobs .
we will provide low - income americans with better access to health care : in a new term , i will ensure every poor county in america has a community or rural health center .
as i have traveled our country , i have met too many good doctors , especially ob / gyns , who are being forced out of practice because of the high cost of lawsuits .
to make health care more affordable and accessible , we must pass medical liability reform now .
and in all we do to improve health care in america , we will make sure that health decisions are made by doctors and patients , not by bureaucrats in washington , d. c. 
 in this time of change , government must take the side of working families .
in a new term , we will change outdated labor laws to offer comp - time and flex - time .
our laws should never stand in the way of a more family - friendly workplace .
another priority for a new term is to build an ownership society , because ownership brings security , and dignity , and independence .
thanks to our policies , homeownership in america is at an all - time high .
tonight we set a new goal : seven million more affordable homes in the next 10 years so more american families will be able to open the door and say : welcome to my home .
in an ownership society , more people will own their health care plans , and have the confidence of owning a piece of their retirement .
we 'll always keep the promise of social security for our older workers .
with the huge baby boom generation approaching retirement , many of our children and grandchildren understandably worry whether social security will be there when they need it .
we must strengthen social security by allowing younger workers to save some of their taxes in a personal account -- a nest egg you can call your own , and government can never take away .
in all these proposals , we seek to provide not just a government program , but a path -- a path to greater opportunity , more freedom , and more control over your own life .
and the path begins with our youngest americans .
to build a more hopeful america , we must help our children reach as far as their vision and character can take them .
tonight , i remind every parent and every teacher , i say to every child : no matter what your circumstance , no matter where you live , your school will be the path to promise of america .
we are transforming our schools by raising standards and focusing on results .
we are insisting on accountability , empowering parents and teachers , and making sure that local people are in charge of their schools .
by testing every child , we are identifying those who need help -- and we are providing a record level of funding to get them that help .
in northeast georgia , gainesville elementary school is mostly hispanic and 90 percent poor -- and this year 90 percent of the students passed state tests in reading and math .
the principal -- the principal expresses the philosophy of his school this way : " we do n't focus on what we ca n't do at this school ; we focus on what we can do .
and we do whatever it takes to get kids across the finish line . "
see , this principal is challenging the soft bigotry of low expectations .
and that is the spirit of our education reform , and the commitment of our country : no dejaremos a ningn nio atrs .
we will leave no child behind .
we are making progress -- we are making progress , and there is more to do .
in this time of change , most new jobs are filled by people with at least two years of college , yet only about one in four students gets there .
in our high schools , we will fund early intervention programs to help students at risk .
we will place a new focus on math and science .
as we make progress , we will require a rigorous exam before graduation .
by raising performance in our high schools , and expanding pell grants for low and middle income families , we will help more americans start their career with a college diploma .
america 's children must also have a healthy start in life .
in a new term , we will lead an aggressive effort to enroll millions of poor children who are eligible but not signed up for the government 's health insurance programs .
we will not allow a lack of attention , or information , to stand between these children and the health care they need .
anyone who wants more details on my agenda can find them online .
the web address is not very imaginative , but it 's easy to remember : georgewbush .
com .
these changing times can be exciting times of expanded opportunity .
and here , you face a choice .
my opponent 's policies are dramatically different from ours .
senator kerry opposed medicare reform and health savings accounts .
after supporting my education reforms , he now wants to dilute them .
he opposes legal and medical liability reform .
he opposed reducing the marriage penalty , opposed doubling the child credit , opposed lowering income taxes for all who pay them .
wait a minute , wait a minute : to be fair , there are some things my opponent is for .
he 's proposed more than two trillion dollars in new federal spending so far , and that 's a lot , even for a senator from massachusetts .
and to pay for that spending , he 's running on a platform of increasing taxes -- and that 's the kind of promise a politician usually keeps .
his tax -- his policies of tax and spend -- of expanding government rather than expanding opportunity -- are the policies of the past .
we are on the path to the future -- and we 're not turning back .
in this world of change , some things do not change : the values we try to live by , the institutions that give our lives meaning and purpose .
our society rests on a foundation of responsibility and character and family commitment .
because family and work are sources of stability and dignity , i support welfare reform that strengthens family and requires work .
because a caring society will value its weakest members , we must make a place for the unborn child .
because -- because religious charities provide a safety net of mercy and compassion , our government must never discriminate against them .
because the union of a man and woman deserves an honored place in our society , i support the protection of marriage against activist judges .
and i will continue to appoint federal judges who know the difference between personal opinion and the strict interpretation of the law .
my opponent recently announced that he is the conservative -- the candidate of " conservative values , " which must have come as a surprise to a lot of his supporters .
there 's some problems with this claim .
if you say the heart and soul of america is found in hollywood , i 'm afraid you 're not the candidate of conservative values .
if you voted against the bipartisan defense of marriage act , which president clinton signed , you are not the candidate of conservative values .
if you gave a speech , as my opponent did , calling the reagan presidency eight years of " moral darkness , " then you may be a lot of things , but the candidate of conservative values is not one of them .
this election will also determine how america responds to the continuing danger of terrorism -- and you know where i stand .
three days after september the 11th , i stood where americans died , in the ruins of the twin towers .
workers in hard hats were shouting to me , " whatever it takes . "
a fellow grabbed me by the arm and he said , " do not let me down . "
since that day , i wake up every morning thinking about how to better protect our country .
i will never relent in defending america , whatever it takes .
so we have fought the terrorists across the earth -- not for pride , not for power , but because the lives of our citizens are at stake .
our strategy is clear .
we have tripled funding for homeland security and trained a half a million first responders , because we are determined to protect our homeland .
we are transforming our military and reforming and strengthening our intelligence services .
we are staying on the offensive -- striking terrorists abroad -- so we do not have to face them here at home .
and we are working to advance liberty in the broader middle east , because freedom will bring a future of hope , and the peace we all want .
and we will prevail .
our strategy is succeeding .
four years ago , afghanistan was the home base of al - qaeda , pakistan was a transit point for terrorist groups , saudi arabia was fertile ground for terrorist fundraising , libya was secretly pursuing nuclear weapons , iraq was a gathering threat , and al - qaeda was largely unchallenged as it planned attacks .
today , the government of a free afghanistan is fighting terror , pakistan is capturing terrorist leaders , saudi arabia is making raids and arrests , libya is dismantling its weapons programs , the army of a free iraq is fighting for freedom , and more than three - quarters of al - qaeda 's key members and associates have been detained or killed .
we have led , many have joined , and america and the world are safer .
this progress involved careful diplomacy , clear moral purpose , and some tough decisions .
and the toughest came on iraq .
we knew saddam hussein 's record of aggression and support for terror .
we knew his long history of pursuing , even using , weapons of mass destruction .
and we know that september the 11th requires our country to think differently : we must , and we will , confront threats to america before it is too late .
in saddam hussein , we saw a threat .
members of both political parties , including my opponent and his running mate , saw the threat , and voted to authorize the use of force .
we went to the united nations security council , which passed a unanimous resolution demanding the dictator disarm , or face serious consequences .
leaders in the middle east urged him to comply .
after more than a decade of diplomacy , we gave saddam hussein another chance , a final chance , to meet his responsibilities to the civilized world .
he again refused , and i faced the kind of decision that comes only to the oval office -- a decision no president would ask for , but must be prepared to make .
do i forget the lessons of september the 11th and take the word of a madman , or do i take action to defend our country ?
faced with that choice , i will defend america every time .
because we acted to defend our country , the murderous regimes of saddam hussein and the taliban are history , more than 50 million people have been liberated , and democracy is coming to the broader middle east .
in afghanistan , terrorists have done everything they can to intimidate people -- yet more than 10 million citizens have registered to vote in the october presidential election -- a resounding endorsement for democracy .
despite ongoing acts of violence , iraq now has a strong prime minister , a national council , and national elections are scheduled for january .
our nation is standing with the people of afghanistan and iraq , because when america gives its word , america must keep its word .
as importantly , we are serving a vital and historic cause that will make our country safer .
free societies in the middle east will be hopeful societies , which no longer feed resentments and breed violence for export .
free governments in the middle east will fight terrorists instead of harboring them , and that helps us keep the peace .
so our mission in afghanistan and iraq is clear : we will help new leaders to train their armies , and move toward elections , and get on the path of stability and democracy as quickly as possible .
and then our troops will return home with the honor they have earned .
our troops know the historic importance of our work .
one army specialist wrote home : " we are transforming a once sick society into a hopeful place .
the various terrorist enemies we are facing in iraq , " he continued , " are really aiming at you back in the united states .
this is a test of will for our country .
we soldiers of yours are doing great and scoring victories and confronting the evil terrorists . "
that young man is right -- our men and women in uniform are doing a superb job for america .
tonight i want to speak to all of them , and to their families : you are involved in a struggle of historic proportion .
because of your service and sacrifice , we are defeating the terrorists where they live and plan , and you 're making america safer .
because of you , women in afghanistan are no longer shot in a sports stadium .
because of you , the people of iraq no longer fear being executed and left in mass graves .
because of you , the world is more just and will be more peaceful .
we owe you our thanks , and we owe you something more .
we will give you all the resources , all the tools , and all the support you need for victory .
again , my opponent and i have different approaches .
i proposed , and the congress overwhelmingly passed , $ 87 billion in funding needed by our troops doing battle in afghanistan and iraq .
my opponent and his running mate voted against this money for bullets , and fuel , and vehicles , and body armor .
when asked to explain his vote , the senator said , " i actually did vote for the 87 billion dollars before i voted against it . "
then he said he was " proud " of that vote .
then , when pressed , he said it was a " complicated " matter .
there 's nothing complicated about supporting our troops in combat .
our allies also know the historic importance of our work .
about 40 nations stand beside us in afghanistan , and some 30 in iraq .
and i deeply appreciate the courage and wise counsel of leaders like prime minister howard , and president kwasniewski , and prime minister berlusconi -- and , of course , prime minister tony blair .
again , my opponent takes a different approach .
in the midst of war , he has called american allies , quote , a " coalition of the coerced and the bribed . "
that would be nations like great britain , poland , italy , japan , the netherlands , denmark , el salvador , australia , and others -- allies that deserve the respect of all americans , not the scorn of a politician .
i respect every soldier , from every country , who serves beside us in the hard work of history .
america is grateful , and america will not forget .
the people we have freed wo n't forget either .
not long ago , seven iraqi men came to see me in the oval office .
they had x 's branded into their foreheads , and their right hands had been cut off , by saddam hussein 's secret police , the sadistic punishment for imaginary crimes .
during our emotional visit one of the iraqi men used his new prosthetic hand to slowly write out , in arabic , a prayer for god to bless america .
i am proud that our country remains the hope of the oppressed , and the greatest force for good on this earth .
others understand the historic importance of our work .
the terrorists know .
they know that a vibrant , successful democracy at the heart of the middle east will discredit their radical ideology of hate .
they know that men and women with hope and purpose and dignity do not strap bombs on their bodies and kill the innocent .
the terrorists are fighting freedom with all their cunning and cruelty because freedom is their greatest fear -- and they should be afraid , because freedom is on the march .
i believe in the transformational power of liberty : the wisest use of american strength is to advance freedom .
as the citizens of afghanistan and iraq seize the moment , their example will send a message of hope throughout a vital region .
palestinians will hear the message that democracy and reform are within their reach , and so is peace with our good friend , israel .
young women across the middle east will hear the message that their day of equality and justice is coming .
young men will hear the message that national progress and dignity are found in liberty , not tyranny and terror .
reformers , and political prisoners , and exiles will hear the message that their dream of freedom can not be denied forever .
and as freedom advances -- heart by heart , and nation by nation -- america will be more secure and the world more peaceful .
america has done this kind of work before -- and there have always been doubters .
in 1946 , 18 months after the fall of berlin to allied forces , a journalist wrote in the new york times , " germany is -- a land in an acute stage of economic , political and moral crisis .
capitals are frightened .
in every   headquarters , one meets alarmed officials doing their utmost to deal with the consequences of the occupation policy that they admit has failed . "
end quote .
maybe that same person is still around , writing editorials .
fortunately , we had a resolute president named truman , who , with the american people , persevered , knowing that a new democracy at the center of europe would lead to stability and peace .
and because that generation of americans held firm in the cause of liberty , we live in a better and safer world today .
the progress we and our friends and allies seek in the broader middle east will not come easily , or all at once .
yet americans , of all people , should never be surprised by the power of liberty to transform lives and nations .
that power brought settlers on perilous journeys , inspired colonies to rebellion , ended the sin of slavery , and set our nation against the tyrannies of the 20th century .
we were honored to aid the rise of democracy in germany and japan and nicaragua and central europe and the baltics -- and that noble story goes on .
i believe that america is called to lead the cause of freedom in a new century .
i believe that millions in the middle east plead in silence for their liberty .
i believe that given the chance , they will embrace the most honorable form of government ever devised by man .
i believe all these things because freedom is not america 's gift to the world , it is the almighty god 's gift to every man and woman in this world .
this moment in the life of our country will be remembered .
generations will know if we kept our faith and kept our word .
generations will know if we seized this moment , and used it to build a future of safety and peace .
the freedom of many , and the future security of our nation , now depend on us .
and tonight , my fellow americans , i ask you to stand with me .
in the last four years , you and i have come to know each other .
even when we do n't agree , at least you know what i believe and where i stand .
you may have noticed i have a few flaws , too .
people sometimes have to correct my english .
i knew i had a problem when arnold schwarzenegger started doing it .
some folks look at me and see a certain swagger , which in texas is called " walking . "
now and then i come across as a little too blunt -- and for that we can all thank the white - haired lady sitting right up there .
one thing -- one thing i have learned about the presidency is that whatever shortcomings you have , people are going to notice them --   -- and whatever strengths you have , you 're going to need them .
these four years have brought moments i could not foresee and will not forget .
i 've tried to comfort americans who lost the most on september the 11th -- people who showed me a picture or told me a story , so i would know how much was taken from them .
i 've learned first - hand that ordering americans into battle is the hardest decision , even when it is right .
i have returned the salute of wounded soldiers , some with a very tough road ahead , who say they were just doing their job .
i 've held the children of the fallen , who are told their dad or mom is a hero , but would rather just have their mom or dad .
i 've met with the wives and husbands who have received a folded flag , and said a final goodbye to a soldier they loved .
i am awed that so many have used those meetings to say that i 'm in their prayers and to offer encouragement to me .
where does strength like that come from ?
how can people so burdened with sorrow also feel such pride ?
it is because they know their loved one was last seen doing good .
because they know that liberty was precious to the one they lost .
and in those military families , i have seen the character of a great nation : decent , idealistic , and strong .
the world saw that spirit three miles from here , when the people of this city faced peril together , and lifted a flag over the ruins , and defied the enemy with their courage .
my fellow americans , for as long as our country stands , people will look to the resurrection of new york city and they will say : here buildings fell , here a nation rose .
we see america 's character in our military , which finds a way or makes one .
we see it in our veterans , who are supporting military families in their days of worry .
we see it in our young people , who have found heroes once again .
we see that character in workers and entrepreneurs , who are renewing our economy with their effort and optimism .
and all of this has confirmed one belief beyond doubt : having come this far , our tested and confident nation can achieve anything .
to everything we know there is a season -- a time for sadness , a time for struggle , a time for rebuilding .
and now we have reached a time for hope .
this young century will be liberty 's century .
by promoting liberty abroad , we will build a safer world .
by encouraging liberty at home , we will build a more hopeful america .
like generations before us , we have a calling from beyond the stars to stand for freedom .
this is the everlasting dream of america -- and tonight , in this place , that dream is 
 renewed .
now we go forward -- grateful for our freedom , faithful to our cause , and confident in the future of the greatest nation on earth .
god bless you , and may god continue to bless our great country .

good evening .
tonight in iraq , the armed forces of the united states are engaged in a struggle that will determine the direction of the global war on terror -- and our safety here at home .
the new strategy i outline tonight will change america 's course in iraq , and help us succeed in the fight against terror .
when i addressed you just over a year ago , nearly 12 million iraqis had cast their ballots for a unified and democratic nation .
the elections of 2005 were a stunning achievement .
we thought that these elections would bring the iraqis together , and that as we trained iraqi security forces we could accomplish our mission with fewer american troops .
but in 2006 , the opposite happened .
the violence in iraq -- particularly in baghdad -- overwhelmed the political gains the iraqis had made .
al qaeda terrorists and sunni insurgents recognized the mortal danger that iraq 's elections posed for their cause , and they responded with outrageous acts of murder aimed at innocent iraqis .
they blew up one of the holiest shrines in shia islam -- the golden mosque of samarra -- in a calculated effort to provoke iraq 's shia population to retaliate .
their strategy worked .
radical shia elements , some supported by iran , formed death squads .
and the result was a vicious cycle of sectarian violence that continues today .
the situation in iraq is unacceptable to the american people -- and it is unacceptable to me .
our troops in iraq have fought bravely .
they have done everything we have asked them to do .
where mistakes have been made , the responsibility rests with me .
it is clear that we need to change our strategy in iraq .
so my national security team , military commanders , and diplomats conducted a comprehensive review .
we consulted members of congress from both parties , our allies abroad , and distinguished outside experts .
we benefitted from the thoughtful recommendations of the iraq study group , a bipartisan panel led by former secretary of state james baker and former congressman lee hamilton .
in our discussions , we all agreed that there is no magic formula for success in iraq .
and one message came through loud and clear : failure in iraq would be a disaster for the united states .
the consequences of failure are clear : radical islamic extremists would grow in strength and gain new recruits .
they would be in a better position to topple moderate governments , create chaos in the region , and use oil revenues to fund their ambitions .
iran would be emboldened in its pursuit of nuclear weapons .
our enemies would have a safe haven from which to plan and launch attacks on the american people .
on september the 11th , 2001 , we saw what a refuge for extremists on the other side of the world could bring to the streets of our own cities .
for the safety of our people , america must succeed in iraq .
the most urgent priority for success in iraq is security , especially in baghdad .
eighty percent of iraq 's sectarian violence occurs within 30 miles of the capital .
this violence is splitting baghdad into sectarian enclaves , and shaking the confidence of all iraqis .
only iraqis can end the sectarian violence and secure their people .
and their government has put forward an aggressive plan to do it .
our past efforts to secure baghdad failed for two principal reasons : there were not enough iraqi and american troops to secure neighborhoods that had been cleared of terrorists and insurgents .
and there were too many restrictions on the troops we did have .
our military commanders reviewed the new iraqi plan to ensure that it addressed these mistakes .
they report that it does .
they also report that this plan can work .
now let me explain the main elements of this effort : the iraqi government will appoint a military commander and two deputy commanders for their capital .
the iraqi government will deploy iraqi army and national police brigades across baghdad 's nine districts .
when these forces are fully deployed , there will be 18 iraqi army and national police brigades committed to this effort , along with local police .
these iraqi forces will operate from local police stations -- conducting patrols and setting up checkpoints , and going door - to - door to gain the trust of baghdad residents .
this is a strong commitment .
but for it to succeed , our commanders say the iraqis will need our help .
so america will change our strategy to help the iraqis carry out their campaign to put down sectarian violence and bring security to the people of baghdad .
this will require increasing american force levels .
so i 've committed more than 20,000 additional american troops to iraq .
the vast majority of them -- five brigades -- will be deployed to baghdad .
these troops will work alongside iraqi units and be embedded in their formations .
our troops will have a well - defined mission : to help iraqis clear and secure neighborhoods , to help them protect the local population , and to help ensure that the iraqi forces left behind are capable of providing the security that baghdad needs .
many listening tonight will ask why this effort will succeed when previous operations to secure baghdad did not .
well , here are the differences : in earlier operations , iraqi and american forces cleared many neighborhoods of terrorists and insurgents , but when our forces moved on to other targets , the killers returned .
this time , we 'll have the force levels we need to hold the areas that have been cleared .
in earlier operations , political and sectarian interference prevented iraqi and american forces from going into neighborhoods that are home to those fueling the sectarian violence .
this time , iraqi and american forces will have a green light to enter those neighborhoods -- and prime minister maliki has pledged that political or sectarian interference will not be tolerated .
i 've made it clear to the prime minister and iraq 's other leaders that america 's commitment is not open - ended .
if the iraqi government does not follow through on its promises , it will lose the support of the american people -- and it will lose the support of the iraqi people .
now is the time to act .
the prime minister understands this .
here is what he told his people just last week : " the baghdad security plan will not provide a safe haven for any outlaws , regardless of   sectarian or political affiliation . "
this new strategy will not yield an immediate end to suicide bombings , assassinations , or ied attacks .
our enemies in iraq will make every effort to ensure that our television screens are filled with images of death and suffering .
yet over time , we can expect to see iraqi troops chasing down murderers , fewer brazen acts of terror , and growing trust and cooperation from baghdad 's residents .
when this happens , daily life will improve , iraqis will gain confidence in their leaders , and the government will have the breathing space it needs to make progress in other critical areas .
most of iraq 's sunni and shia want to live together in peace -- and reducing the violence in baghdad will help make reconciliation possible .
a successful strategy for iraq goes beyond military operations .
ordinary iraqi citizens must see that military operations are accompanied by visible improvements in their neighborhoods and communities .
so america will hold the iraqi government to the benchmarks it has announced .
to establish its authority , the iraqi government plans to take responsibility for security in all of iraq 's provinces by november .
to give every iraqi citizen a stake in the country 's economy , iraq will pass legislation to share oil revenues among all iraqis .
to show that it is committed to delivering a better life , the iraqi government will spend $ 10 billion of its own money on reconstruction and infrastructure projects that will create new jobs .
to empower local leaders , iraqis plan to hold provincial elections later this year .
and to allow more iraqis to re - enter their nation 's political life , the government will reform de - baathification laws , and establish a fair process for considering amendments to iraq 's constitution .
america will change our approach to help the iraqi government as it works to meet these benchmarks .
in keeping with the recommendations of the iraq study group , we will increase the embedding of american advisers in iraqi army units , and partner a coalition brigade with every iraqi army division .
we will help the iraqis build a larger and better - equipped army , and we will accelerate the training of iraqi forces , which remains the essential u. s. security mission in iraq .
we will give our commanders and civilians greater flexibility to spend funds for economic assistance .
we will double the number of provincial reconstruction teams .
these teams bring together military and civilian experts to help local iraqi communities pursue reconciliation , strengthen the moderates , and speed the transition to iraqi self - reliance .
and secretary rice will soon appoint a reconstruction coordinator in baghdad to ensure better results for economic assistance being spent in iraq .
as we make these changes , we will continue to pursue al qaeda and foreign fighters .
al qaeda is still active in iraq .
its home base is anbar province .
al qaeda has helped make anbar the most violent area of iraq outside the capital .
a captured al qaeda document describes the terrorists ' plan to infiltrate and seize control of the province .
this would bring al qaeda closer to its goals of taking down iraq 's democracy , building a radical islamic empire , and launching new attacks on the united states at home and abroad .
our military forces in anbar are killing and capturing al qaeda leaders , and they are protecting the local population .
recently , local tribal leaders have begun to show their willingness to take on al qaeda .
and as a result , our commanders believe we have an opportunity to deal a serious blow to the terrorists .
so i have given orders to increase american forces in anbar province by 4,000 troops .
these troops will work with iraqi and tribal forces to keep up the pressure on the terrorists .
america 's men and women in uniform took away al qaeda 's safe haven in afghanistan -- and we will not allow them to re - establish it in iraq .
succeeding in iraq also requires defending its territorial integrity and stabilizing the region in the face of extremist challenges .
this begins with addressing iran and syria .
these two regimes are allowing terrorists and insurgents to use their territory to move in and out of iraq .
iran is providing material support for attacks on american troops .
we will disrupt the attacks on our forces .
we 'll interrupt the flow of support from iran and syria .
and we will seek out and destroy the networks providing advanced weaponry and training to our enemies in iraq .
we 're also taking other steps to bolster the security of iraq and protect american interests in the middle east .
i recently ordered the deployment of an additional carrier strike group to the region .
we will expand intelligence - sharing and deploy patriot air defense systems to reassure our friends and allies .
we will work with the governments of turkey and iraq to help them resolve problems along their border .
and we will work with others to prevent iran from gaining nuclear weapons and dominating the region .
we will use america 's full diplomatic resources to rally support for iraq from nations throughout the middle east .
countries like saudi arabia , egypt , jordan , and the gulf states need to understand that an american defeat in iraq would create a new sanctuary for extremists and a strategic threat to their survival .
these nations have a stake in a successful iraq that is at peace with its neighbors , and they must step up their support for iraq 's unity government .
we endorse the iraqi government 's call to finalize an international compact that will bring new economic assistance in exchange for greater economic reform .
and on friday , secretary rice will leave for the region , to build support for iraq and continue the urgent diplomacy required to help bring peace to the middle east .
the challenge playing out across the broader middle east is more than a military conflict .
it is the decisive ideological struggle of our time .
on one side are those who believe in freedom and moderation .
on the other side are extremists who kill the innocent , and have declared their intention to destroy our way of life .
in the long run , the most realistic way to protect the american people is to provide a hopeful alternative to the hateful ideology of the enemy , by advancing liberty across a troubled region .
it is in the interests of the united states to stand with the brave men and women who are risking their lives to claim their freedom , and to help them as they work to raise up just and hopeful societies across the middle east .
from afghanistan to lebanon to the palestinian territories , millions of ordinary people are sick of the violence , and want a future of peace and opportunity for their children .
and they are looking at iraq .
they want to know : will america withdraw and yield the future of that country to the extremists , or will we stand with the iraqis who have made the choice for freedom ?
the changes i have outlined tonight are aimed at ensuring the survival of a young democracy that is fighting for its life in a part of the world of enormous importance to american security .
let me be clear : the terrorists and insurgents in iraq are without conscience , and they will make the year ahead bloody and violent .
even if our new strategy works exactly as planned , deadly acts of violence will continue -- and we must expect more iraqi and american casualties .
the question is whether our new strategy will bring us closer to success .
i believe that it will .
victory will not look like the ones our fathers and grandfathers achieved .
there will be no surrender ceremony on the deck of a battleship .
but victory in iraq will bring something new in the arab world -- a functioning democracy that polices its territory , upholds the rule of law , respects fundamental human liberties , and answers to its people .
a democratic iraq will not be perfect .
but it will be a country that fights terrorists instead of harboring them -- and it will help bring a future of peace and security for our children and our grandchildren .
this new approach comes after consultations with congress about the different courses we could take in iraq .
many are concerned that the iraqis are becoming too dependent on the united states , and therefore , our policy should focus on protecting iraq 's borders and hunting down al qaeda .
their solution is to scale back america 's efforts in baghdad -- or announce the phased withdrawal of our combat forces .
we carefully considered these proposals .
and we concluded that to step back now would force a collapse of the iraqi government , tear the country apart , and result in mass killings on an unimaginable scale .
such a scenario would result in our troops being forced to stay in iraq even longer , and confront an enemy that is even more lethal .
if we increase our support at this crucial moment , and help the iraqis break the current cycle of violence , we can hasten the day our troops begin coming home .
in the days ahead , my national security team will fully brief congress on our new strategy .
if members have improvements that can be made , we will make them .
if circumstances change , we will adjust .
honorable people have different views , and they will voice their criticisms .
it is fair to hold our views up to scrutiny .
and all involved have a responsibility to explain how the path they propose would be more likely to succeed .
acting on the good advice of senator joe lieberman and other key members of congress , we will form a new , bipartisan working group that will help us come together across party lines to win the war on terror .
this group will meet regularly with me and my administration ; it will help strengthen our relationship with congress .
we can begin by working together to increase the size of the active army and marine corps , so that america has the armed forces we need for the 21st century .
we also need to examine ways to mobilize talented american civilians to deploy overseas , where they can help build democratic institutions in communities and nations recovering from war and tyranny .
in these dangerous times , the united states is blessed to have extraordinary and selfless men and women willing to step forward and defend us .
these young americans understand that our cause in iraq is noble and necessary -- and that the advance of freedom is the calling of our time .
they serve far from their families , who make the quiet sacrifices of lonely holidays and empty chairs at the dinner table .
they have watched their comrades give their lives to ensure our liberty .
we mourn the loss of every fallen american -- and we owe it to them to build a future worthy of their sacrifice .
fellow citizens : the year ahead will demand more patience , sacrifice , and resolve .
it can be tempting to think that america can put aside the burdens of freedom .
yet times of testing reveal the character of a nation .
and throughout our history , americans have always defied the pessimists and seen our faith in freedom redeemed .
now america is engaged in a new struggle that will set the course for a new century .
we can , and we will , prevail .
we go forward with trust that the author of liberty will guide us through these trying hours .
thank you and good night .

good morning , thanks for the warm welcome .
in a few moments i will have the honor of signing an historic act of congress into law .
i 'm pleased that all of you are here to witness the greatest advance in health care coverage for america 's seniors since the founding of medicare .
with the medicare act of 2003 , our government is finally bringing prescription drug coverage to the seniors of america .
with this law , we 're giving older americans better choices and more control over their health care , so they can receive the modern medical care they deserve .
with this law , we are providing more access to comprehensive exams , disease screenings , and other preventative care , so that seniors across this land can live better and healthier lives .
with this law , we are creating health savings accounts --   -- we do so , so that all americans can put money away for their health care tax - free .
our nation has the best health care system in the world .
and we want our seniors to share in the benefits of that system .
our nation has made a promise , a solemn promise to america 's seniors .
we have pledged to help our citizens find affordable medical care in the later years of life .
lyndon johnson established that commitment by signing the medicare act of 1965 .
and today , by reforming and modernizing this vital program , we are honoring the commitments of medicare to all our seniors .
the point man in my administration on this issue was secretary tommy thompson , and he and his team did a fabulous job of working with the congress to get this important piece of legislation passed .
tommy , i want to thank you for your leadership .
this bill passed the congress because of the strong leadership of a handful of members , starting with the speaker of the house denny hastert .
mr. speaker --   mr. speaker was joined by senator bill frist , the senate majority leader of the senate , in providing the leadership necessary to get this bill done .
i want to thank you both .
i appreciate the hard work of the house majority leader , tom delay , in seeing that this bill was passed .
i also appreciate the hard work of the chairman of the ways and means committee , chairman bill thomas , for his good work .
the chairman of the finance committee in the senate , senator chuck grassley , did a noble job .
and he was joined in this task by the ranking member of the finance committee , senator max baucus of montana .
and the entire senate effort was boosted by the efforts of a man from louisiana , senator john breaux .
and speaking about louisiana , billy tauzin of the house of representatives did great work on this bill .
senator orrin hatch from utah made a significant contribution .
nancy johnson , the house member from connecticut , did a great job .
mike bilirakis from florida worked hard on this piece of legislation .
i want to thank all the other members of the congress and the senate who have joined us .
thank you all for taking time out of your busy schedules to share in this historic moment .
i appreciate tom scully , the administrator of the centers for medicare and medicaid services , for his good work .
the director of the cdc , julie gerberding , is with us today .
julie , thank you for coming .
the food and drug administration commissioner mark mcclellan is here .
jo anne barnhart , the commissioner of the social security administration , is with us .
thank you for coming , jo anne .
kay james who is the director of the office of personnel management , is with us .
thank you for coming , kay .
a lot of this happened -- this bill happened because of grassroots work .
a lot of our fellow citizens took it upon themselves to agitate for change , to lobby on behalf of what 's right .
we had some governor support around the country -- governor craig benson from new hampshire is with us today .
governor , thank you for coming .
but the groups that speak for the elderly did fantastic work on this legislation .
see , there was a lot of pressure not to get something done -- for the wrong reasons , i might add .
but bill novelli , the ceo of aarp , stood strong in representing the people he was supposed to represent and he worked hard to get this legislation passed .
and , bill , i want to thank you for your leadership .
you were joined by jim parkel , who is the president of the aarp .
jim , i want to thank you , as well , for doing what was right , for focusing on the needs of the seniors of our country .
jim martin , the president of 60 plus association , worked hard .
charlie jarvis , the chairman and ceo of united seniors association , worked hard .
mike maves , the executive vice president and ceo of the ama , worked hard on this piece of legislation .
mary martin , the chairman of the board of the seniors coalition , worked hard .
the truth of the matter is , a lot of good people worked hard to get this important legislation done , and i thank you for your work .
medicare is a great achievement of a compassionate government and it is a basic trust we honor .
medicare has spared millions of seniors from needless hardship .
each generation benefits from medicare .
each generation has a duty to strengthen medicare .
and this generation is fulfilling our duty .
first and foremost , this new law will provide medicare coverage for prescription drugs .
medicare was enacted to provide seniors with the latest in modern medicine .
in 1965 , that usually meant house calls , or operations , or long hospital stays .
today , modern medicine includes out - patient care , disease screenings , and prescription drugs .
medicine has changed , but medicare has not -- until today .
medicare today will pay for extended hospital stays for ulcer surgery .
that 's at a cost of about $ 28,000 per patient .
yet medicare will not pay for the drugs that eliminate the cause of most ulcers , drugs that cost about $ 500 a year .
it 's a good thing that medicare pays when seniors get sick .
now , you see , we 're taking this a step further -- medicare will pay for prescription drugs , so that fewer seniors will get sick in the first place .
drug coverage under medicare will allow seniors to replace more expensive surgeries and hospitalizations with less expensive prescription medicine .
and even more important , drug coverage under medicare will save our seniors from a lot of worry .
some older americans spend much of their social security checks just on their medications .
some cut down on the dosage , to make a bottle of pills last longer .
elderly americans should not have to live with those kinds of fears and hard choices .
this new law will ease the burden on seniors and will give them the extra help they need .
seniors will start seeing help quickly .
during the transition to the full prescription benefit , seniors will receive a drug discount card .
this medicare - approved card will deliver savings of 10 to 25 percent off the retail price of most medicines .
low - income seniors will receive the same savings , plus a $ 600 credit on their cards to help them pay for the medications they need .
in about two years , full prescription coverage under medicare will begin .
in return for a monthly premium of about $ 35 , most seniors without any prescription drug coverage can now expect to see their current drug bills cut roughly in half .
this new law will provide 95 percent coverage for out - of - pocket drug spending that exceeds $ 3,600 a year .
for the first time , we 're giving seniors peace of mind that they will not have to face unlimited expenses for their medicine .
the new law offers special help to one - third of older americans will low incomes , such as a senior couple with low savings and an annual income of about $ 18,000 or less .
these seniors will pay little or no premium for full drug coverage .
their deductible will be no higher than $ 50 per year , and their co - payment on each prescription will be as little as $ 1 .
seniors in the greatest need will have the greatest help under the modernized medicare system .
i visited with seniors around the country and heard many of their stories .
i 'm proud that this legislation will give them practical and much needed help .
mary jane jones from midlothian , virginia , has a modest income .
her drug bills total nearly $ 500 a month .
things got so tight for a while she had to use needles twice or three times for her insulin shots .
with this law , mary jane wo n't have to go to such extremes .
in exchange for a monthly premium of about $ 35 , mary jane jones would save nearly $ 2,700 in annual prescription drug spending .
hugh iverson from west des moines , iowa , just got his medicare membership .
and that 's a good thing , because he has n't had health insurance for more than three years .
his drug bills total at least $ 400 a month .
within two years , with the $ 35 a month coverage , he will be able to cut those bills nearly in half , saving him about $ 2,400 a year .
neil legrow from culpepper , virginia , takes 15 medications , costing him at least $ 700 a month .
to afford all those medications , neil has to stay working .
and thanks to this law , once he is enrolled in the drug benefit , he will be able to cut back his work hours and enjoy his retirement more because he 'll have coverage that saves him about $ 4,700 a year .
i promised these seniors when i met with them that we would work hard to give them the help they need .
they are all here today .
so i am happy to report to them in person -- mary jane , hugh , and neil , we are keeping our promise .
in addition to providing coverage for prescription drugs , this legislation achieves a second great goal .
we 're giving our seniors more health care choices so they can get the coverage and care that meets their needs .
every senior needs to know if you do n't want to change your current coverage , you do n't have to change .
you 're the one in charge .
if you want to keep your medicare the way it is , along with the new prescription benefit , that is your right .
if you want to improve benefits -- maybe dental coverage , or eyeglass coverage , or managed care plans that reduce out - of - pocket costs -- you 'll be free to make those choices , as well .
and when seniors have the ability to make choices , health care plans within medicare will have to compete for their business by offering higher quality service .
for the seniors of america , more choices and more control will mean better health care .
these are the kinds of health care options we give to the members of congress and federal employees .
they have the ability to pick plans to -- that are right for their own needs .
what 's good for members of congress is also good for seniors .
our seniors are fully capable of making health care choices , and this bill allows them to do just that .
a third purpose achieved by this legislation is smarter medicine within the medicare system .
for years , our seniors have been denied medicare coverage -- have been denied medicare coverage for a basic physical exam .
beginning in 2005 , all newly - enrolled medicare beneficiaries will be covered for a complete physical .
the medicare system will now help seniors and their doctors diagnose health problems early , so they can treat them early and our seniors can have a better quality life .
for example , starting next year , all people on medicare will be covered for blood tests that can diagnose heart diseases .
those at high risk for diabetes will be covered for blood sugar screening tests .
modern health care is not complete without prevention -- so we are expanding preventive services under medicare .
fourth , the new law will help all americans pay for out - of - pocket health costs .
this legislation will create health savings accounts , effective january 1 , 2004 , so americans can set aside up to $ 4,500 every year , tax free , to save for medical expenses .
depending on your tax bracket , that means you 'll save between 10 to 35 percent on any costs covered by money in your account .
our laws encourage people to plan for retirement and to save for education .
now the law will make it easier for americans to save for their future health care , as well .
a health savings account is a good deal , and all americans should consider it .
every year , the money not spent would stay in the account and gain interest tax - free , just like an ira .
and people will have an incentive to live more healthy lifestyles because they want to see their health savings account grow .
these accounts will be good for small business owners , and employees .
more businesses can focus on covering workers for major medical problems , such as hospitalization for an injury or illness .
and at the same time , employees and their families will use these accounts to cover doctors visits or lab tests or other smaller costs .
some employers will contribute to employee health accounts .
this will help more american families get the health care they need at the price they can afford .
the legislation i 'm about to sign will set in motion a series of improvements in the care available to all america 's senior citizens .
and as we begin , it is important for seniors and those approaching retirement to understand their new benefits .
this coming spring , seniors will receive a letter to explain the drug discount card .
in june , these cards , including the $ 600 annual drug credit for low - income seniors , will be activated .
this drug card can be used until the end of 2005 .
in the fall of that year , seniors will receive an information booklet giving simple guidance on changes in the program and the new choices they will have .
then in january of 2006 , seniors will have their new coverage , including permanent coverage for prescription drugs .
these reforms are the act of a vibrant and compassionate government .
we show are concern for the dignity of our seniors by giving them quality health care .
we show our respect for seniors by giving them more choices and more control over their decision - making .
we 're putting individuals in charge of their health care decisions .
and as we move to modernize and reform other programs of this government , we will always trust individuals and their decisions , and put personal choice at the heart of our efforts .
the challenges facing seniors on medicare were apparent for many years .
and those years passed with much debate and a lot of politics , and little reform to show for it .
and that changed with the 108th congress .
this year we met our challenge with focus and perseverance .
we confronted problems , instead of passing them along to future administrations and future congresses .
we overcame old partisan differences .
we kept our promise , and found a way to get the job done .
this legislation is the achievement of members in both political parties .
and this legislation is a victory for all of america 's seniors .
now i 'm honored and pleased to sign this historic piece of legislation : the medicare prescription drug improvement and modernization act of 2003 .

mr. secretary general , mr. president , distinguished delegates , and ladies and gentlemen : we meet one year and one day after a terrorist attack brought grief to my country , and brought grief to many citizens of our world .
yesterday , we remembered the innocent lives taken that terrible morning .
today , we turn to the urgent duty of protecting other lives , without illusion and without fear .
we 've accomplished much in the last year -- in afghanistan and beyond .
we have much yet to do -- in afghanistan and beyond .
many nations represented here have joined in the fight against global terror , and the people of the united states are grateful .
the united nations was born in the hope that survived a world war -- the hope of a world moving toward justice , escaping old patterns of conflict and fear .
the founding members resolved that the peace of the world must never again be destroyed by the will and wickedness of any man .
we created the united nations security council , so that , unlike the league of nations , our deliberations would be more than talk , our resolutions would be more than wishes .
after generations of deceitful dictators and broken treaties and squandered lives , we dedicated ourselves to standards of human dignity shared by all , and to a system of security defended by all .
today , these standards , and this security , are challenged .
our commitment to human dignity is challenged by persistent poverty and raging disease .
the suffering is great , and our responsibilities are clear .
the united states is joining with the world to supply aid where it reaches people and lifts up lives , to extend trade and the prosperity it brings , and to bring medical care where it is desperately needed .
as a symbol of our commitment to human dignity , the united states will return to unesco .
this organization has been reformed and america will participate fully in its mission to advance human rights and tolerance and learning .
our common security is challenged by regional conflicts -- ethnic and religious strife that is ancient , but not inevitable .
in the middle east , there can be no peace for either side without freedom for both sides .
america stands committed to an independent and democratic palestine , living side by side with israel in peace and security .
like all other people , palestinians deserve a government that serves their interests and listens to their voices .
my nation will continue to encourage all parties to step up to their responsibilities as we seek a just and comprehensive settlement to the conflict .
above all , our principles and our security are challenged today by outlaw groups and regimes that accept no law of morality and have no limit to their violent ambitions .
in the attacks on america a year ago , we saw the destructive intentions of our enemies .
this threat hides within many nations , including my own .
in cells and camps , terrorists are plotting further destruction , and building new bases for their war against civilization .
and our greatest fear is that terrorists will find a shortcut to their mad ambitions when an outlaw regime supplies them with the technologies to kill on a massive scale .
in one place -- in one regime -- we find all these dangers , in their most lethal and aggressive forms , exactly the kind of aggressive threat the united nations was born to confront .
twelve years ago , iraq invaded kuwait without provocation .
and the regime 's forces were poised to continue their march to seize other countries and their resources .
had saddam hussein been appeased instead of stopped , he would have endangered the peace and stability of the world .
yet this aggression was stopped -- by the might of coalition forces and the will of the united nations .
to suspend hostilities , to spare himself , iraq 's dictator accepted a series of commitments .
the terms were clear , to him and to all .
and he agreed to prove he is complying with every one of those obligations .
he has proven instead only his contempt for the united nations , and for all his pledges .
by breaking every pledge -- by his deceptions , and by his cruelties -- saddam hussein has made the case against himself .
in 1991 , security council resolution 688 demanded that the iraqi regime cease at once the repression of its own people , including the systematic repression of minorities -- which the council said , threatened international peace and security in the region .
this demand goes ignored .
last year , the u. n. commission on human rights found that iraq continues to commit extremely grave violations of human rights , and that the regime 's repression is all pervasive .
tens of thousands of political opponents and ordinary citizens have been subjected to arbitrary arrest and imprisonment , summary execution , and torture by beating and burning , electric shock , starvation , mutilation , and rape .
wives are tortured in front of their husbands , children in the presence of their parents -- and all of these horrors concealed from the world by the apparatus of a totalitarian state .
in 1991 , the u. n. security council , through resolutions 686 and 687 , demanded that iraq return all prisoners from kuwait and other lands .
iraq 's regime agreed .
it broke its promise .
last year the secretary general 's high - level coordinator for this issue reported that kuwait , saudi , indian , syrian , lebanese , iranian , egyptian , bahraini , and omani nationals remain unaccounted for -- more than 600 people .
one american pilot is among them .
in 1991 , the u. n. security council , through resolution 687 , demanded that iraq renounce all involvement with terrorism , and permit no terrorist organizations to operate in iraq .
iraq 's regime agreed .
it broke this promise .
in violation of security council resolution 1373 , iraq continues to shelter and support terrorist organizations that direct violence against iran , israel , and western governments .
iraqi dissidents abroad are targeted for murder .
in 1993 , iraq attempted to assassinate the emir of kuwait and a former american president .
iraq 's government openly praised the attacks of september the 11th .
and al qaeda terrorists escaped from afghanistan and are known to be in iraq .
in 1991 , the iraqi regime agreed to destroy and stop developing all weapons of mass destruction and long - range missiles , and to prove to the world it has done so by complying with rigorous inspections .
iraq has broken every aspect of this fundamental pledge .
from 1991 to 1995 , the iraqi regime said it had no biological weapons .
after a senior official in its weapons program defected and exposed this lie , the regime admitted to producing tens of thousands of liters of anthrax and other deadly biological agents for use with scud warheads , aerial bombs , and aircraft spray tanks .
u. n. inspectors believe iraq has produced two to four times the amount of biological agents it declared , and has failed to account for more than three metric tons of material that could be used to produce biological weapons .
right now , iraq is expanding and improving facilities that were used for the production of biological weapons .
united nations ' inspections also revealed that iraq likely maintains stockpiles of vx , mustard and other chemical agents , and that the regime is rebuilding and expanding facilities capable of producing chemical weapons .
and in 1995 , after four years of deception , iraq finally admitted it had a crash nuclear weapons program prior to the gulf war .
we know now , were it not for that war , the regime in iraq would likely have possessed a nuclear weapon no later than 1993 .
today , iraq continues to withhold important information about its nuclear program -- weapons design , procurement logs , experiment data , an accounting of nuclear materials and documentation of foreign assistance .
iraq employs capable nuclear scientists and technicians .
it retains physical infrastructure needed to build a nuclear weapon .
iraq has made several attempts to buy high - strength aluminum tubes used to enrich uranium for a nuclear weapon .
should iraq acquire fissile material , it would be able to build a nuclear weapon within a year .
and iraq 's state - controlled media has reported numerous meetings between saddam hussein and his nuclear scientists , leaving little doubt about his continued appetite for these weapons .
iraq also possesses a force of scud - type missiles with ranges beyond the 150 kilometers permitted by the u. n. work at testing and production facilities shows that iraq is building more long - range missiles that it can inflict mass death throughout the region .
in 1990 , after iraq 's invasion of kuwait , the world imposed economic sanctions on iraq .
those sanctions were maintained after the war to compel the regime 's compliance with security council resolutions .
in time , iraq was allowed to use oil revenues to buy food .
saddam hussein has subverted this program , working around the sanctions to buy missile technology and military materials .
he blames the suffering of iraq 's people on the united nations , even as he uses his oil wealth to build lavish palaces for himself , and to buy arms for his country .
by refusing to comply with his own agreements , he bears full guilt for the hunger and misery of innocent iraqi citizens .
in 1991 , iraq promised u. n. inspectors immediate and unrestricted access to verify iraq 's commitment to rid itself of weapons of mass destruction and long - range missiles .
iraq broke this promise , spending seven years deceiving , evading , and harassing u. n. inspectors before ceasing cooperation entirely .
just months after the 1991 cease - fire , the security council twice renewed its demand that the iraqi regime cooperate fully with inspectors , condemning iraq 's serious violations of its obligations .
the security council again renewed that demand in 1994 , and twice more in 1996 , deploring iraq 's clear violations of its obligations .
the security council renewed its demand three more times in 1997 , citing flagrant violations ; and three more times in 1998 , calling iraq 's behavior totally unacceptable .
and in 1999 , the demand was renewed yet again .
as we meet today , it 's been almost four years since the last u. n. inspectors set foot in iraq , four years for the iraqi regime to plan , and to build , and to test behind the cloak of secrecy .
we know that saddam hussein pursued weapons of mass murder even when inspectors were in his country .
are we to assume that he stopped when they left ?
the history , the logic , and the facts lead to one conclusion : saddam hussein 's regime is a grave and gathering danger .
to suggest otherwise is to hope against the evidence .
to assume this regime 's good faith is to bet the lives of millions and the peace of the world in a reckless gamble .
and this is a risk we must not take .
delegates to the general assembly , we have been more than patient .
we 've tried sanctions .
we 've tried the carrot of oil for food , and the stick of coalition military strikes .
but saddam hussein has defied all these efforts and continues to develop weapons of mass destruction .
the first time we may be completely certain he has a -- nuclear weapons is when , god forbids , he uses one .
we owe it to all our citizens to do everything in our power to prevent that day from coming .
the conduct of the iraqi regime is a threat to the authority of the united nations , and a threat to peace .
iraq has answered a decade of u. n. demands with a decade of defiance .
all the world now faces a test , and the united nations a difficult and defining moment .
are security council resolutions to be honored and enforced , or cast aside without consequence ?
will the united nations serve the purpose of its founding , or will it be irrelevant ?
the united states helped found the united nations .
we want the united nations to be effective , and respectful , and successful .
we want the resolutions of the world 's most important multilateral body to be enforced .
and right now those resolutions are being unilaterally subverted by the iraqi regime .
our partnership of nations can meet the test before us , by making clear what we now expect of the iraqi regime .
if the iraqi regime wishes peace , it will immediately and unconditionally forswear , disclose , and remove or destroy all weapons of mass destruction , long - range missiles , and all related material .
if the iraqi regime wishes peace , it will immediately end all support for terrorism and act to suppress it , as all states are required to do by u. n. security council resolutions .
if the iraqi regime wishes peace , it will cease persecution of its civilian population , including shi'a , sunnis , kurds , turkomans , and others , again as required by security council resolutions .
if the iraqi regime wishes peace , it will release or account for all gulf war personnel whose fate is still unknown .
it will return the remains of any who are deceased , return stolen property , accept liability for losses resulting from the invasion of kuwait , and fully cooperate with international efforts to resolve these issues , as required by security council resolutions .
if the iraqi regime wishes peace , it will immediately end all illicit trade outside the oil - for - food program .
it will accept u. n. administration of funds from that program , to ensure that the money is used fairly and promptly for the benefit of the iraqi people .
if all these steps are taken , it will signal a new openness and accountability in iraq .
and it could open the prospect of the united nations helping to build a government that represents all iraqis -- a government based on respect for human rights , economic liberty , and internationally supervised elections .
the united states has no quarrel with the iraqi people ; they 've suffered too long in silent captivity .
liberty for the iraqi people is a great moral cause , and a great strategic goal .
the people of iraq deserve it ; the security of all nations requires it .
free societies do not intimidate through cruelty and conquest , and open societies do not threaten the world with mass murder .
the united states supports political and economic liberty in a unified iraq .
we can harbor no illusions -- and that 's important today to remember .
saddam hussein attacked iran in 1980 and kuwait in 1990 .
he 's fired ballistic missiles at iran and saudi arabia , bahrain , and israel .
his regime once ordered the killing of every person between the ages of 15 and 70 in certain kurdish villages in northern iraq .
he has gassed many iranians , and 40 iraqi villages .
my nation will work with the u. n. security council to meet our common challenge .
if iraq 's regime defies us again , the world must move deliberately , decisively to hold iraq to account .
we will work with the u. n. security council for the necessary resolutions .
but the purposes of the united states should not be doubted .
the security council resolutions will be enforced -- the just demands of peace and security will be met -- or action will be unavoidable .
and a regime that has lost its legitimacy will also lose its power .
events can turn in one of two ways : if we fail to act in the face of danger , the people of iraq will continue to live in brutal submission .
the regime will have new power to bully and dominate and conquer its neighbors , condemning the middle east to more years of bloodshed and fear .
the regime will remain unstable -- the region will remain unstable , with little hope of freedom , and isolated from the progress of our times .
with every step the iraqi regime takes toward gaining and deploying the most terrible weapons , our own options to confront that regime will narrow .
and if an emboldened regime were to supply these weapons to terrorist allies , then the attacks of september the 11th would be a prelude to far greater horrors .
if we meet our responsibilities , if we overcome this danger , we can arrive at a very different future .
the people of iraq can shake off their captivity .
they can one day join a democratic afghanistan and a democratic palestine , inspiring reforms throughout the muslim world .
these nations can show by their example that honest government , and respect for women , and the great islamic tradition of learning can triumph in the middle east and beyond .
and we will show that the promise of the united nations can be fulfilled in our time .
neither of these outcomes is certain .
both have been set before us .
we must choose between a world of fear and a world of progress .
we can not stand by and do nothing while dangers gather .
we must stand up for our security , and for the permanent rights and the hopes of mankind .
by heritage and by choice , the united states of america will make that stand .
and , delegates to the united nations , you have the power to make that stand , as well .
thank you very much .

thank you .
tapper .
we have been through a lot together .
as i look through the room , i see jake , mike , herman , ann compton .
just seemed like yesterday that -- that i was on the campaign trail and you were analyzing my speeches and my policies .
and i see a lot of faces that travel with me around the world and -- to places like afghanistan and iraq and africa .
i see some new faces , which goes to show there 's some turnover in this business .
through it all , it 's been -- i have respected you .
sometimes did n't like the stories that you wrote or reported on .
sometimes you misunderestimated me .
but always the relationship i have felt has been professional .
and i appreciate it .
i appreciate -- i do appreciate working with you .
my friends say , what is it like to deal with the press corps ?
i said , these are just people trying to do the best they possibly can .
and so here at the last press conference , i 'm interested in answering some of your questions .
but mostly i 'm interested in saying thank you for the job .
ben .
i have talked to the president - elect about this subject .
and i told him that if he felt that he needed the $ 350 billion , i would be willing to ask for it .
in other words , if he felt it needed to happen on my watch .
the best course of action , of course , is to convince enough members of the senate to vote positively for the -- for the request .
and , you know , that 's all i can share with you , because that 's all i know .
well , he has n't asked me to make the request yet .
and i do n't intend to make the request unless he specifically asks me to make it .
he 's -- you know , i 've had my third conversation with him , and i genuinely mean what i say .
i wish him all the very best .
i 've found him to be a very smart and engaging person .
and that lunch the other day was interesting , to have two guys who are nearly 85 , two 62-year - olders , and a 47-year - old -- kind of the classic generational statement .
and one common area , at least the four of us , we all had different circumstances and experiences , but one thing is we 've all experienced what it means to assume the responsibility of the presidency .
and president - elect obama is fixing to do that .
and he 'll get sworn in , and then they 'll have the lunch and all the -- you know , all the deal up there on capitol hill .
and then he 'll come back and go through the inauguration and then he 'll walk in the oval office , and there will be a moment when the responsibilities of the president land squarely on his shoulders .
toby .
yes , we 'll get everybody .
remind me of the three points , will you , because i 'm getting -- 



  -- i 'm getting a little older .
i hope so .
i 'm for a sustainable cease - fire .
and a definition of a sustainable cease - fire is that hamas stops firing rockets into israel .
and there will not be a sustainable cease - fire if they continue firing rockets .
i happen to believe the choice is hamas 's to make .
and we believe that the best way to ensure that there is a sustainable cease - fire is to work with egypt to stop the smuggling of arms into the gaza that enables hamas to continue to fire rockets .
and so countries that supply weapons to hamas have got to stop .
and the international community needs to continue to pressure them to stop providing weapons .
hamas , obviously , if they 're interested in a sustainable cease - fire , needs to stop arming .
and then , of course , countries contingent to the gaza need to work to stop the smuggling .
and it 's a difficult -- difficult task .
i mean , there 's tunnels and , you know , great opportunities for people who want to continue to try to disrupt democracy to provide the weapons to do so .
second part of your question , please , ma'am ?
i think israel has a right to defend herself .
obviously in any of these kinds of situations , i would hope that she would continue to be mindful of innocent folks , and that they help , you know , expedite the delivery of humanitarian aid .
and third , why have n't we achieved peace ?
that 's a good question .
it 's been a long time since they 've had peace in the middle east .
step one is to have a vision for what peace would look like .
and in 2002 , on the steps of the rose garden , i gave a speech about a two - state solution -- two states , two democracies living side by side in peace .
and we have worked hard to advance that idea .
first thing is to convince all parties that the two states were necessary for peace .
and one thing that 's happened is , is that most people in the middle east now accept the two - state solution as the best way for peace .
most palestinians want their own state , and most israelis understand there needs to be a democracy on their border in order for there to be long - lasting peace .
the challenge , of course , has been to lay out the conditions so that a peaceful state can emerge -- in other words , helping the palestinians in the west bank develop security forces , which we have worked hard to do over the past years .
and those security forces are now becoming more efficient , and prime minister fayyad is using them effectively .
the challenge is to develop -- help the palestinians develop a democracy -- i mean , and a vibrant economy in their -- that will help lead to democracy .
and the challenge , of course , is always complicated by the fact that people are willing to murder to stop the advance of freedom .
and so the -- hamas , or for that matter al qaeda , or other extremist groups , are willing to use violence to prevent free states from emerging .
and that 's the big challenge .
and so the answer is -- will this ever happen ?
i think it will .
and i know we have advanced the process .
yes , suzanne .
finally got your name right , after how many years ?
six years ?
> 

  eight years .
you used to be known as suzanne .
now you 're " suz - ahn . "
> 

  i 'm " gahge . "
the most urgent threat that he 'll have to deal with , and other presidents after him will have to deal with , is an attack on our homeland .
you know , i wish i could report that 's not the case , but there 's still an enemy out there that would like to inflict damage on america -- americans .
and that will be the major threat .
north korea is still a problem .
there is a debate in the intel community about how big a problem they are .
but one of my concerns is that there might be a highly enriched uranium program .
and therefore it is really important that out of the six - party talks comes a strong verification regime .
in other words , in order to advance our relations with north korea , the north korean government must honor the commitments it made to allow for strong verification measures to be in place , to ensure that they do n't develop a highly enriched uranium program , for example .
so they 're still dangerous , and iran is still dangerous .
yes .
this is the ultimate exit interview .
you see , i am concerned that , in the wake of the defeat , that the temptation will be to look inward and to say , well , here 's a litmus test you must adhere to .
this party will come back .
but the party 's message has got to be that different points of view are included in the party .
and -- take , for example , the immigration debate .
that 's obviously a highly contentious issue .
and the problem with the outcome of the initial round of the debate was that some people said , well , republicans do n't like immigrants .
now , that may be fair or unfair , but that 's what -- that 's the image that came out .
and , you know , if the image is we do n't like immigrants , then there 's probably somebody else out there saying , well , if they do n't like the immigrants , they probably do n't like me , as well .
and so my point was , is that our party has got to be compassionate and broad - minded .
i remember the 1964 elections .
my dad happened to be running for the united state senate then and , you know , got landslided with the johnson landslide in the state of texas .
but it was n't just george bush who got defeated ; the republican party was pretty well decimated at the time .
at least that 's what they -- i think that 's how the pundits viewed it .
and then ' 66 there was a resurgence .
and the same thing can happen this time , but we just got to make sure our message is broad - gauged and compassionate ; that we care about people 's lives , and we 've got a plan to help them improve their lives .
jake , yes .
how you doing ?
so what have you been doing since 2000 -- never mind .
so are you going to be here for president obama ?
that 's a pretty cool job .
yes .
yes -- what , retirement ?
well , first of all , hard things do n't happen overnight , jake .
and when the history of iraq is written , historians will analyze , for example , the decision on the surge .
the situation was -- looked like it was going fine and then violence for a period of time began to throw -- throw the progress of iraq into doubt .
and rather than accepting the status quo and saying , oh , it 's not worth it or the politics makes it difficult or , you know , the party may end up being -- you know , not doing well in the elections because of the violence in iraq , i decided to do something about it -- and sent 30,000 troops in as opposed to withdrawing .
and so that part of history is certain , and the situation did change .
now the question is , in the long run , will this democracy survive ?
and that 's going to be the challenge for future presidents .
in terms of the economy , look , i inherited a recession , i am ending on a recession .
in the meantime there were 52 months of uninterrupted job growth .
and i defended tax cuts when i campaigned , i helped implement tax cuts when i was president , and i will defend them after my presidency as the right course of action .
and there 's a fundamental philosophical debate about tax cuts .
who best can spend your money , the government or you ?
and i have always sided with the people on that issue .
now , obviously these are very difficult economic times .
when people analyze the situation , there will be -- this problem started before my presidency , it obviously took place during my presidency .
the question facing a president is not when the problem started , but what did you do about it when you recognized the problem .
and i readily concede i chunked aside some of my free market principles when i was told by chief economic advisors that the situation we were facing could be worse than the great depression .
so i 've told some of my friends who said -- you know , who have taken an ideological position on this issue -- why did you do what you did ?
i said , well , if you were sitting there and heard that the depression could be greater than the great depression , i hope you would act too , which i did .
and we 've taken extraordinary measures to deal with the frozen credit markets , which have affected the economy .
credit spreads are beginning to shrink ; lending is just beginning to pick up .
the actions we have taken , i believe , have helped thaw the credit markets , which is the first step toward recovery .
and so , yes , look , there 's plenty of critics in this business ; i understand that .
and i thank you for giving me a chance to defend a record that i am going to continue to defend , because i think it 's a good , strong record .
jim .
sure .
you know any ?
you know , most people i see , you know , when i 'm moving around the country , for example , they 're not angry .
and they 're not hostile people .
and they -- we never meet people who disagree , that 's just not true .
i 've met a lot of people who do n't agree with the decisions i make .
but they have been civil in their discourse .
and so , i view those who get angry and yell and say bad things and , you know , all that kind of stuff , it 's just a very few people in the country .
i do n't know why they get angry .
i do n't know why they get hostile .
it 's not the first time , however , in history that people have expressed themselves in sometimes undignified ways .
i 've been reading , you know , a lot about abraham lincoln during my presidency , and there was some pretty harsh discord when it came to the 16th president , just like there 's been harsh discord for the 43rd president .
you know , presidents can try to avoid hard decisions and therefore avoid controversy .
that 's just not my nature .
i 'm the kind of person that , you know , is willing to take on hard tasks , and in times of war people get emotional ; i understand that .
never really , you know , spent that much time , frankly , worrying about the loud voices .
i of course hear them , but they did n't affect my policy , nor did they affect -- affect how i made decisions .
you know , the -- president - elect obama will find this , too .
he 'll get in the oval office and there will be a lot of people that are real critical and harsh , and he 'll be disappointed at times by the tone of the rhetoric .
and he 's going to have to do what he thinks is right , jim .
and if you do n't , then i do n't see how you can live with yourself .
i do n't see how i can get back home in texas and look in the mirror and be proud of what i see if i allowed the loud voices , the loud critics , to prevent me from doing what i thought was necessary to protect this country .
mike .
you know , michael , i 'm not going to speculate about what he 's going to do .
it 's going to be -- you know , he 's going to get in the oval office , he 's going to analyze each situation , and he 's going to make the decisions that he think is necessary .
and the other thing is , when i get out of here , i 'm getting off the stage .
i believe there ought to be , you know , one person in the klieg lights at a time , and i 've had my time in the klieg lights .
you know , i 'm confident , you know , you 'll catch me opining on occasion , but i wish him all the best .
and people say , oh , you just -- that 's just a throwaway line .
no , it 's not a throwaway line .
the stakes are high .
there is an enemy that still is out there .
you know , people can maybe try to write that off as , you know , he 's trying to set something up .
i 'm telling you there 's an enemy that would like to attack america , americans , again .
there just is .
that 's the reality of the world .
and i wish him all the very best .
and of course , he 's going to have his hands full with the economy .
i understand .
it 's tough for a lot of working people out there .
the people are concerned about their economic future .
you know , one of the very difficult parts of the decision i made on the financial crisis was to use hardworking people 's money to help prevent there to be a crisis , and in so doing , some of that money went into wall street firms that caused the crisis in the first place .
i was n't kidding when i said wall street got drunk and we got the hangover .
and -- but nevertheless , president - elect obama will find the problems and the situations surrounding problems sometimes cause people to have to make decisions that they , you know , were n't initially comfortable with .
and there was such a decision when it came to wall street .
i mean , i had a lot of people -- when i went out to midland that time -- say , what the heck are you doing ?
those people up east caused the problem .
i said , i know , but if we had n't worked to fix the problem , your situation would be worse .
and -- anyway , i really do wish him all the best .
sheryl .
i wo n't be discussing pardons here at this press conference .
would you like to ask another question ?
that 's the spirit , is n't it ?
thank you .
yes .
gotcha .
i have often said that history will look back and determine that which could have been done better , or , you know , mistakes i made .
clearly putting a " mission accomplished " on a aircraft carrier was a mistake .
it sent the wrong message .
we were trying to say something differently , but nevertheless , it conveyed a different message .
obviously , some of my rhetoric has been a mistake .
i 've thought long and hard about katrina -- you know , could i have done something differently , like land air force one either in new orleans or baton rouge .
the problem with that and -- is that law enforcement would have been pulled away from the mission .
and then your questions , i suspect , would have been , how could you possibly have flown air force one into baton rouge , and police officers that were needed to expedite traffic out of new orleans were taken off the task to look after you ?
i believe that running the social security idea right after the ' 04 elections was a mistake .
i should have argued for immigration reform .
and the reason why is , is that -- you know , one of the lessons i learned as governor of texas , by the way , is legislative branches tend to be risk - adverse .
in other words , sometimes legislatures have the tendency to ask , why should i take on a hard task when a crisis is not imminent ?
and the crisis was not imminent for social security as far as many members of congress was concerned .
as an aside , one thing i proved is that you can actually campaign on the issue and get elected .
in other words , i do n't believe talking about social security is the third rail of american politics .
i , matter of fact , think that in the future , not talking about how you intend to fix social security is going to be the third rail of american politics .
one thing about the presidency is that you can make -- only make decisions , you know , on the information at hand .
you do n't get to have information after you 've made the decision .
that 's not the way it works .
and you stand by your decisions , and you do your best to explain why you made the decisions you made .
there have been disappointments .
abu ghraib obviously was a huge disappointment during the presidency .
not having weapons of mass destruction was a significant disappointment .
i do n't know if you want to call those mistakes or not , but they were -- things did n't go according to plan , let 's put it that way .
anyway , i think historians will look back and they 'll be able to have a better look at mistakes after some time has passed .
along jake 's question , there is no such thing as short - term history .
i do n't think you can possibly get the full breadth of an administration until time has passed : where does a president 's -- did a president 's decisions have the impact that he thought they would , or he thought they would , over time ?
or how did this president compare to future presidents , given a set of circumstances that may be similar or not similar ?
i mean , there 's -- it 's just impossible to do .
and i 'm comfortable with that .
yes , mike .
i strongly disagree with the assessment that our moral standing has been damaged .
it may be damaged amongst some of the elite , but people still understand america stands for freedom , that america is a country that provides such great hope .
you go to africa , you ask africans about america 's generosity and compassion ; go to india , and ask about , you know , america 's -- their view of america .
go to china and ask .
now , no question parts of europe have said that we should n't have gone to war in iraq without a mandate , but those are a few countries .
most countries in europe listened to what 1441 said , which is disclose , disarm or face serious consequences .
most people take those words seriously .
now , some countries did n't -- even though they might have voted for the resolution .
i disagree with this assessment that , you know , people view america in a dim light .
i just do n't agree with that .
and i understand that gitmo has created controversies .
but when it came time for those countries that were criticizing america to take some of those -- some of those detainees , they were n't willing to help out .
and so , you know , i just disagree with the assessment , mike .
i 'll remind -- listen , i tell people , yes , you can try to be popular .
in certain quarters in europe , you can be popular by blaming every middle eastern problem on israel .
or you can be popular by joining the international criminal court .
i guess i could have been popular by accepting kyoto , which i felt was a flawed treaty , and proposed something different and more constructive .
and in terms of the decisions that i had made to protect the homeland , i would n't worry about popularity .
what i would worry about is the constitution of the united states , and putting plans in place that makes it easier to find out what the enemy is thinking , because all these debates will matter not if there 's another attack on the homeland .
the question wo n't be , you know , were you critical of this plan or not ; the question is going to be , why did n't you do something ?
do you remember what it was like right after september the 11th around here ?
in press conferences and opinion pieces and in stories -- that sometimes were news stories and sometimes opinion pieces -- people were saying , how come they did n't see it , how come they did n't connect the dots ?
do you remember what the environment was like in washington ?
i do .
when people were hauled up in front of congress and members of congress were asking questions about , how come you did n't know this , that , or the other ?
and then we start putting policy in place -- legal policy in place to connect the dots , and all of a sudden people were saying , how come you 're connecting the dots ?
and so , mike , i 've heard all that .
i 've heard all that .
my view is , is that most people around the world , they respect america .
and some of them does n't like me , i understand that -- some of the writers and the , you know , opiners and all that .
that 's fine , that 's part of the deal .
but i 'm more concerned about the country and our -- how people view the united states .
they view us as strong , compassionate people who care deeply about the universality of freedom .
roger .
yes , i did .
i 'm supportive of the president - elect working out a plan with congress that best suits him -- and congress .
that 's what he 's going to have to do .
he 's going to have to go up there and he 's going to have to make his case as to why the $ 350   is necessary .
and he knows that .
this is nothing new .
and in terms of the first $ 350   i am pleased with this aspect of the expenditure , and that is that the financial markets are beginning to thaw .
in the fall , i was concerned that the credit freeze would cause us to be headed toward a depression greater than the great depression .
that 's what i was told , if we did n't move .
and so , therefore , we have moved aggressively .
and by the way , it just was n't with the tarp .
if you think about aig , fannie and freddie -- a lot of the decisions that were made in this administration are very aggressive decisions , all aiming at preventing the financial system from cratering .
yes , that 's a great question .
he 'll -- he will feel the effects the minute he walks in the oval office .
at least , that 's when i felt .
i do n't know when he 's going -- he may feel it the minute he 's -- gets sworn in .
and the minute i got sworn in , i started thinking about the speech .
and so -- but he 's a better speech - maker than me , so he 'll be able to -- he 'll be able to -- i do n't know how he 's going to feel .
all i know is he 's going to feel it .
there will be a moment when he feels it .
i have never felt isolated and i do n't think he will .
one reason he wo n't feel isolated is because he 's got a fabulous family and he cares a lot about his family .
that 's evident from my discussions with him .
he 'll be -- he 's a 45-second commute away from a great wife and two little girls that love him dearly .
i believe this -- the phrase " burdens of the office " is overstated .
you know , it 's kind of like , why me ?
oh , the burdens , you know .
why did the financial collapse have to happen on my watch ?
it 's just -- it 's pathetic , is n't it , self - pity .
and i do n't believe that president - elect obama will be full of self - pity .
he will find -- you know , your -- the people that do n't like you , the critics , they 're pretty predictable .
sometimes the biggest disappointments will come from your so - called friends .
and there will be disappointments , i promise you .
he 'll be disappointed .
on the other hand , the job is so exciting and so profound that the disappointments will be clearly , you know , a minor irritant compared to the -- 



  no , not for me .
we had a -- people -- we -- i had a fabulous team around me of highly dedicated , smart , capable people , and we had fun .
i tell people that , you know , some days happy , some days not so happy , every day has been joyous .
and people , they say , i just do n't believe it to be the case .
well , it is the case .
even in the darkest moments of iraq , you know , there was -- and every day when i was reading the reports about soldiers losing their lives , no question there was a lot of emotion , but also there was times where we could be light - hearted and support each other .
and i built a team of really capable people who were there not to serve me , or there to serve the republicans , they were there to serve the country .
and president - elect obama will find , as he makes these tough calls and tough decisions , that he 'll be supported by a lot of really good people that care -- care about the country , as well .
john .
yes .
i hope the trend is bad against protectionism .
a disappointment -- not a mistake , but a disappointment -- was not getting the three trade bills out of congress on colombia , panama and south korea .
that was a disappointment .
i actually thought we had a shot at one time , and then i was disappointed that they did n't move out of the house .
and i am concerned about protectionism .
in tough economic times , the temptation is to say , well , let 's just throw up barriers and protect our own and not compete .
that was the sentiment , by the way , that was in place during decent economic times .
after all , we got cafta out of the congress by one vote .
and it would be a huge mistake if we become a protectionist nation .
and that might be a good thing for the bush center to do at smu , is to remind people about the benefits of free and fair trade -- benefits for our own workers , benefits for workers overseas , and benefits when it comes to promoting development and helping lift people out of poverty , in particularly , third world countries .
the best way to enhance economic growth in a third world country and to give people a chance to realize a better future is through trade .
it 's been proven , it 's a fact .
and i 'm hopeful that the country does n't slip into protectionist policy .
april , yes , ma'am .
yes .
you were sound asleep back there , so i decided -- 



 mr. president , on new orleans , you basically talked about a moment ago about the photo opportunity .
but let 's talk about what you could have done to change the situation for the city of new orleans to be further along in reconstruction than where it is now .
and also , when you came -- or began to run for the oval office about nine years ago or so , the james byrd dragging death was residue on your campaign .
and now at this time , 2009 , we have the first black president .
could you tell us what you have seen on the issues of race , as you see it from the oval office ?
sure , thanks .
first of all , we did get the $ 121 billion , more or less , passed , and it 's now being spent .
secondly , the school system is improving dramatically .
thirdly , people are beginning to move back into homes .
this storm was a devastating storm , april , that required a lot of energy , a lot of focus and a lot of resources to get new orleans up and running .
and has the reconstruction been perfect ?
no .
have things happened fairly quickly ?
absolutely .
and is there more to be done ?
you bet there is .
well , more people need to get in their houses .
more people need to have their own home there .
but the systems are in place to continue the reconstruction of new orleans .
people said , well , the federal response was slow .
do n't tell me the federal response was slow when there was 30,000 people pulled off roofs right after the storm passed .
i remember going to see those helicopter drivers , coast guard drivers , to thank them for their courageous efforts to rescue people off roofs .
thirty thousand people were pulled off roofs right after the storm moved through .
it 's a pretty quick response .
could things have been done better ?
absolutely .
absolutely .
but when i hear people say , the federal response was slow , then what are they going to say to those chopper drivers , or the 30,000 that got pulled off the roofs ?
the other part of the -- look , i was affected by the tv after the elections -- when i saw people saying , i never thought i would see the day that a black person would be elected president , and a lot of the people had tears streaming down their cheeks when they said it .
and so i am -- i am -- consider myself fortunate to have a front - row seat on what is going to be an historic moment for the country .
president - elect obama 's election does speak volumes about how far this country has come when it comes to racial relations .
but there 's still work to do .
there 's always going to be work to do to deal with people 's hearts .
and so i 'm looking forward to it , really am .
i think it 's going to be -- it 's going to be an amazing -- amazing moment .
michael allen -- yes , michael allen .
who would be you .
you know , mike , i do n't know .
probably the next day .
i 'm a type a personality , you know , i just -- i just ca n't envision myself , you know , the big straw hat and hawaiian shirt sitting on some beach .
so --   particularly since i quit drinking .
anyway , so i predict to you that -- first of all , i 'm not sure what to expect .
for the last eight years i 've had a national security briefing every day but sunday .
and when you get a national security briefing , it is a reminder of the responsibilities of the job .
it 's just a daily reminder about what may or may not happen .
the interesting thing about this job , by the way , is it 's one thing to deal with the expected , what you anticipate ; the real challenge is to be in a position to deal with the unexpected .
and that 's why those intel briefings are so important , because there is -- there 's an awareness in the briefings by the analyst to try to help anticipate problems .
and of course you hope they do n't arise , but you better be prepared when they do .
and that in itself creates a -- you know , gets your attention , when you start thinking about what could happen .
and the key there , of course , is that -- to take these different analyses seriously , and then have a structure so that your team will be in a position to analyze and then lay out potential avenues for the president -- from which the president can choose .
i say all that because that 's -- this has been -- this notion about being briefed and thinking about this issue or that issue has been just a part of my life for eight years .
people say , well , there you are in crawford on vacation .
you never escape the presidency .
it travels with you everywhere you go .
and there 's not a moment where you do n't think about being president -- unless you 're riding mountain bikes as hard as you possibly can , trying to forget for the moment .
and so i wake up in crawford tuesday morning -- i mean , wednesday morning , and i suspect i 'll make laura coffee and go get it for her .
and it 's going to be a different feeling .
and i ca n't -- it 's kind of like -- i 'll report back after i feel it .
last question .
ann -- since you 've been there from day one .
i hope the tone is different for him than it has been for me .
i am disappointed by the tone in washington , d. c. i tried to do my part by not engaging in the name - calling and -- and by the way , needless name - calling .
i have worked to be respectful of my opponents on different issues .
there -- we did find some good common ground on a variety of issues -- no child left behind , medicare / prescription drugs , pepfar , in the end , the funding for troops in iraq .
tax cuts , to a certain extent , got some bipartisan votes on them .
there had been areas where we were able to work together .
it 's just the rhetoric got out of control at times -- 



  i do n't know why .
you need to ask those who -- those who used the words they used .
as i say , it 's not the first time it 's ever happened -- as i think i answered that to jim , there .
it 's happened throughout our history .
and i would hope that , frankly , for the sake of the system itself , that if people disagree with president - elect obama , they treat him with respect .
i worry about people looking at our system and saying , why would i want to go up there and work in that kind of environment ?
and so i wish him all the best .
and no question he 'll be -- there will be critics .
and there should be .
we all should welcome criticism on different policy -- it 's the great thing about our democracy ; people have a chance to express themselves .
i just hope the tone is respectful .
he deserves it -- and so does the country .
it has been a honor to work with you .
i meant what i said when i first got up here .
i wish you all the very best .
i wish you and your families all the best .
god bless you .

thank you all .
thank you all very much , please be seated .
thanks for the warm welcome .
thanks for the warm weather .
yes , 28 degrees in washington , that 's right .
i appreciate you sharing that with me .
sometimes it 's a little hotter than that in washington .
but i 'm glad to be back here in yuma .
thank you so very much for your hospitality .
thanks for your service to the country .
i appreciate so very much the work you 're doing day and night to protect these borders .
and the american people owe you a great debt of gratitude .
the border patrol is really an important agency .
i know some people are wondering whether or not it makes sense to join the border patrol .
my answer is , i 've gotten to know the border patrol , i know the people serving in this fine agency -- i would strongly urge our fellow citizens to take a look at this profession .
you 're outdoors , you 're working with good people , and you 're making a solid contribution to the united states of america .
and i want to thank you all for wearing the uniform and doing the tough work necessary , the work that the american people expect you to do .
last may , i visited this section of the border , and it was then that i talked about the need for our government to give you the manpower and resources you need to do your job .
we were understaffed here .
we were n't using enough technology to enable those who work here to be able to do the job the american people expect .
i returned to check on the progress , to make sure that the check was n't in the mail -- it , in fact , had been delivered .
i went to a neighborhood that abuts up against the border when i was here in may. it 's the place where a lot of people came charging across .
one or two agents would be trying to do their job and stopping a flood of folks charging into arizona , and they could n't do the job -- just physically impossible .
back at this site , there 's now infrastructure , there 's fencing .
and the amount of people trying to cross the border at that spot is down significantly .
i appreciate very much ron colburn and ulay littleton .
they gave me the tour .
colburn , as you know , is heading up north .
he 's going to miss the weather .
more importantly , he 's going to miss the folks he worked with down here .
i appreciate both of their service , i appreciate the tour .
the efforts are working -- this border is more secure , and america is safer as a result .
securing the border is a critical part of a strategy for comprehensive immigration reform .
it is an important part of a reform that is necessary so that the border patrol agents down here can do their job more effectively .
congress is going to take up the legislation on immigration .
it is a matter of national interest and it 's a matter of deep conviction for me .
i 've been working to bring republicans and democrats together to resolve outstanding issues so that congress can pass a comprehensive bill and i can sign it into law this year .
i appreciate the hard work of secretary michael chertoff , the secretary of the department of homeland security .
i appreciate commissioner ralph basham , he 's the main man in charge of u. s. customs and border protection .
david aguilar , chief of the border patrol is with us .
david , thank you for the job you 're doing .
lieutenant general steven blum , chief of the national guard bureau .
i want to thank the governor of the state of arizona , janet napolitano .
i appreciate you being here , governor , thank you for taking time from the session to be down here .
it means a lot when the governors take an active interest in what 's going on in the borders of their respective states .
i appreciate so very much senator jon kyl .
kyl is one of the most respected united states senators and i 'm proud to be with him today -- and glad to give him a ride back to washington , i might add .
i appreciate members of the congressional delegation who have joined us : john shadegg ; jeff flake -- from snowflake , arizona , i want you to know -- and i appreciate you working on this immigration issue ; congressman trent franks , and congressman harry mitchell .
i appreciate you all taking time for being with me here today , it means a lot that you 'd come .
i want to thank senator tim bee , he 's the president of the arizona state senate , for being here .
mr. mayor , thank you for coming .
larry nelson , the mayor of yuma , arizona .
i appreciate you being here , mr. mayor .
i do want to thank major general david ratacheck , the adjutant general of the state of arizona ; thank all the local and state officials ; and , most importantly , i want to thank the border patrol agents and i want to thank the national guard folks for wearing the uniform .
i am proud to be the commander - in - chief of all these units here today and i appreciate your service to the united states of america .
i hope by now the american people understand the need for comprehensive immigration reform is a clear need .
illegal immigration is a serious problem -- you know it better than anybody .
it puts pressure on the public schools and the hospitals , not only here in our border states , but states around the country .
it drains the state and local budgets .
i was talking to the governor about how it strained the budgets .
incarceration of criminals who are here illegally strains the arizona budget .
but there 's a lot of other ways it strains the local and state budgets .
it brings crime to our communities .
it 's a problem and we need to address it aggressively .
this problem has been growing for decades , and past efforts to address it have failed .
these failures helped create a perception that america was not serious about enforcing our immigration laws and that they could be broken without consequence .
past efforts at reform did not do enough to secure our nation 's borders .
as a result , many people have been able to sneak into this country .
if you do n't man your borders and do n't protect your borders , people are going to sneak in , and that 's what 's been happening for a long time .
past efforts at reform failed to address the underlying economic reasons behind illegal immigration .
people will make great sacrifices to get into this country the find jobs and provide for their families .
when i was the governor of texas i used to say family values did not stop at the rio grande river .
people are coming here to put food on the table , and they 're doing jobs americans are not doing .
and the farmers in this part of the world understand exactly what i 'm saying .
but so do a lot of other folks around the country .
people are coming to work , and many of them have no lawful way to come to america , and so they 're sneaking in .
past efforts at reform also failed to provide sensible ways for employers to verify the legal status of the workers they hire .
it 's against the law to knowingly hire an illegal alien .
and as a result , because they could n't verify the legal status , it was difficult for employers to comply .
it was difficult for the government to enforce the law at the work site .
and , yet , it is a necessary part of a comprehensive plan .
you see , the lessons of all these experiences -- the lesson of these experiences is clear : all elements of the issue must be addressed together .
you ca n't address just one aspect and not be able to say to the american people that we 're securing our borders .
we need a comprehensive bill , and that 's what i 'm working with members of congress on , a comprehensive immigration bill .
and now is the year to get it done .
the first element , of course , is to secure this border .
that 's what i 'm down here for , to remind the american people that we 're spending their taxpayer -- their money , taxpayers ' money , on securing the border .
and we 're making progress .
this border should be open to trade and lawful immigration , and shut down to criminals and drug dealers and terrorists and coyotes and smugglers , people who prey on innocent life .
we more than doubled the funding for border security since i 've been the president .
in other words , it 's one thing to hear people come down here and talk ; it 's another thing for people to come down and do what they say they 're going to do .
and i want to thank congress for working on this issue .
the funding is increasing manpower .
the additional funding is increasing infrastructure , and it 's increasing technology .
when i landed here at the airport , the first thing i saw was an unmanned aerial vehicle .
it 's a sophisticated piece of equipment .
you can fly it from inside a truck , and you can look at people moving at night .
it 's the most sophisticated technology we have , and it 's down here on the border to help the border patrol agents do their job .
we 've expanded the number of border patrol agents from about 9,000 to 13,000 , and by the end of 2008 , we 're going to have a total of more than 18,000 agents .
i had the privilege of going to artesia , new mexico , to the training center .
it was a fantastic experience to see the young cadets getting ready to come and wear the green of the border patrol .
by the time we 're through , we will have doubled the size of the border patrol .
in other words , you ca n't do the job the american people expect unless you got enough manpower , and we 're increasing the manpower down here .
this new technology is really important to basically leverage the manpower .
whether it be the technology of surveillance and communication , we 're going to make sure the agents have got what is necessary to be able to establish a common picture and get information out to the field as quickly as possible so that those 18,000 agents , when they 're finally on station , can do the job the american people expect .
but manpower ca n't do it alone .
in other words , there has to be some infrastructure along the border to be able to let these agents do their job .
and so i appreciate the fact that we 've got double fencing , all - weather roads , new lighting , mobile cameras .
the american people have no earthly idea what 's going on down here .
one of the reasons i 've come is to let you know , let the taxpayers know , the good folks down here are making progress .
we 've worked with our nation 's governors to deploy 6,000 national guard members to provide the border patrol with immediate reinforcements .
in other words , it takes time to train the border patrol , and until they 're fully trained , we 've asked the guard to come down .
it 's called operation jump start , and the guard down here is serving nobly .
i had the chance to visit with some of the guard , and mr. mayor , you 'll be pleased to hear they like being down here in yuma , arizona .
they like the people , and they like the mission .
more than 600 members of the guard are serving here in the yuma sector .
and i thank the guard , and , equally importantly , i thank their families for standing by the men and women who wear the uniform during this particular mission .
you email them back home and tell them how much i appreciate the fact they 're standing by you .
i appreciate very much the fact that illegal border crossings in this area are down .
in the months before operation jump start , an average of more than 400 people a day were apprehended trying to cross here .
the number has dropped to fewer than 140 a day .
in other words , one way that the border patrol can tell whether or not we 're making progress is the number of apprehensions .
when you 're apprehending fewer people , it means fewer are trying to come across .
and fewer are trying to come across because we 're deterring people from attempting illegal border crossings in the first place .
i appreciate what colburn said -- he puts it this way , they 're watching -- " they see us watching them , " that 's what he said , " and they have decided they just ca n't get across . "
and that 's part of the effort we 're doing .
we 're saying we 're going to make it harder for you , so do n't try in the first place .
we 're seeing similar results all across the southern border .
the number of people apprehended for illegally crossing our southern border is down by nearly 30 percent this year .
we 're making progress .
and thanks for your hard work .
it 's hard work , but necessary work .
another important deterrent to illegal immigration is to end what was called catch and release .
i know how this discouraged some of our border patrol agents .
i talked to them personally .
they worked hard to find somebody sneaking in the country , they apprehended them ; the next thing they know , they 're back in society on our side of the border .
there 's nothing more discouraging than have somebody risk their life or work hard and have the fruits of their labor undermined .
and that 's what was happening with catch and release .
in other words , we 'd catch people , and we 'd say , show up for your court date , and they would n't show up for their court date .
that should n't surprise anybody .
but that 's what was happening .
and the reason why that was happening is because we did n't have enough beds to detain people .
now , most of the people we apprehend down here are from mexico .
about 85 percent of the illegal immigrants caught crossing into -- crossing this border are mexicans -- crossing the southern border are mexicans .
and they 're sent home within 24 hours .
it 's the illegal immigrants from other countries that are not that easy to send home .
for many years , the government did n't have enough space , and so michael and i worked with congress to increase the number of beds available .
so that excuse was eliminated .
the practice has been effectively ended .
catch and release for every non - mexican has been effectively ended .
and i want to thank the border patrol and the leaders of the border patrol for allowing me to stand up and say that 's the case .
the reason why is not only do we have beds , we 've expedited the legal process to cut the average deportation time .
now , these are non - mexican illegal aliens that we 've caught trying to sneak into our country .
we 're making it clear to foreign governments that they must accept back their citizens who violate our immigration laws .
i said we 're going to effectively end catch and release , and we have .
and i appreciate your hard work in doing that .
the second element of a comprehensive immigration reform is a temporary worker program .
you can not fully secure the border until we take pressure off the border .
and that requires a temporary worker program .
it seems to make sense to me that if you 've got people coming here to do jobs americans are n't doing , we need to figure out a way that they can do so in a legal basis for a temporary period of time .
and that way our border patrol can chase the criminals and the drug runners , potential terrorists , and not have to try to chase people who are coming here to do work americans are not doing .
if you want to take the pressure off your border , have a temporary worker program .
it will help not only reduce the number of people coming across the border , but it will do something about the inhumane treatment that these people are subjected to .
there 's a whole smuggling operation .
you know this better than i do .
there 's a bunch of smugglers that use the individual as a piece of -- as a commodity .
and they make money off these poor people .
and they stuff them in the back of 18-wheelers .
and they find hovels for them to hide in .
and there 's a whole industry that has sprung up .
and it seems like to me that since this country respects human rights and the human condition , that it be a great contribution to eliminate this thuggery , to free these people from this kind of extortion that they go through .
and one way to do so is to say you can come and work in our country for jobs americans are n't doing for a temporary period of time .
the third element of a comprehensive reform is to hold employers accountable for the workers they hire .
in other words , if you want to make sure that we 've got a system in which people are not violating the law , then you 've got to make sure we hold people to account , like employers .
enforcing immigration is a vital part of any successful reform .
and so chertoff and his department are cracking down on employers who knowingly violate the law .
but not only are there coyotes smuggling people in , there are document forgers that are making a living off these people .
so , in other words , people may want to comply with the law , but it 's very difficult at times to verify the legal status of their employees .
and so to make the work site enforcement practical on a larger scale , we have got to issue a tamper - proof identification card for legal foreign workers .
we must create a better system for employers to verify the he legality of the workers .
in other words , we got work to do .
and part of a comprehensive bill is to make sure work site enforcement is effective .
fourth , we 've got to resolve the status of millions of illegal immigrants already here in the country .
people who entered our country illegally should not be given amnesty .
amnesty is the forgiveness of an offense without penalty .
i oppose amnesty , and i think most people in the united states congress oppose amnesty .
people say , why not have amnesty ?
well , the reason why is because 10 years from now you do n't want to have a president having to address the next 11 million people who might be here illegally .
that 's why you do n't want amnesty .
and , secondly , we 're a nation of law , and we expect people to uphold the law .
so we 're working closely with republicans and democrats to find a practical answer that lies between granting automatic citizenship to every illegal immigrant and deporting every illegal immigrant .
it is impractical to take the position that , oh , we 'll just find the 11 million or 12 million people and send them home .
it 's just an impractical position ; it 's not going to work .
it may sound good .
it may make nice sound bite news .
it wo n't happen .
and , therefore , we need to work together to come up with a practical solution to this problem , and i know people in congress are working hard on this issue .
illegal immigrants who have roots in our country and want to stay should have to pay a meaningful penalty for breaking the law , and pay their taxes , and learn the english language , and show work -- show that they 've worked in a job for a number of years .
people who meet a reasonable number of conditions and pay a penalty of time and money should be able to apply for citizenship .
but approval would not be automatic , and they would have to wait in line behind those who played by the rules and followed the law .
what i 've described is a way for those who 've broken the law to pay their debt to society and demonstrate the character that makes a good citizen .
finally , we have got to honor the tradition of the melting pot , and help people assimilate into our society by learning our history , our values and our language .
last june i created a new task force to look for ways to help newcomers assimilate and succeed in our country .
many organizations , from churches to businesses to civic associations , are working to answer this call , and i 'm grateful for their service .
and so here are the outlines for a comprehensive immigration reform bill .
it 's an emotional issue , as i 'm sure you can imagine .
people have got deep convictions .
and my hope is that we can have a serious and civil and conclusive debate .
and so we 'll continue to work with members of both political parties .
i think the atmosphere up there is good right now .
i think people generally want to come together and put a good bill together -- one , by the way , that will make your job a lot easier .
it 's important that we address this issue in good faith .
and it 's important for people to listen to everybody 's positions .
it 's important for people not to give up , no matter how hard it looks from a legislative perspective .
it 's important that we get a bill done .
we deserve a system that secures our borders , and honors our proud history as a nation of immigrants .
and so i ca n't think of a better place to come and to talk about the good work that 's being done and the important work that needs to be done in washington , d. c. , and that 's right here in yuma , arizona , a place full of decent , hardworking , honorable people .
may god bless you all .

thank you very much , general lennox .
mr. secretary , governor pataki , members of the united states congress , academy staff and faculty , distinguished guests , proud family members , and graduates : i want to thank you for your welcome .
laura and i are especially honored to visit this great institution in your bicentennial year .
in every corner of america , the words " west point " command immediate respect .
this place where the hudson river bends is more than a fine institution of learning .
the united states military academy is the guardian of values that have shaped the soldiers who have shaped the history of the world .
a few of you have followed in the path of the perfect west point graduate , robert e. lee , who never received a single demerit in four years .
some of you followed in the path of the imperfect graduate , ulysses s. grant , who had his fair share of demerits , and said the happiest day of his life was " the day i left west point . "
during my college years i guess you could say i was --   during my college years i guess you could say i was a grant man .
you walk in the tradition of eisenhower and macarthur , patton and bradley - the commanders who saved a civilization .
and you walk in the tradition of second lieutenants who did the same , by fighting and dying on distant battlefields .
graduates of this academy have brought creativity and courage to every field of endeavor .
west point produced the chief engineer of the panama canal , the mind behind the manhattan project , the first american to walk in space .
this fine institution gave us the man they say invented baseball , and other young men over the years who perfected the game of football .
you know this , but many in america do n't -- george c. marshall , a vmi graduate , is said to have given this order : " i want an officer for a secret and dangerous mission .
i want a west point football player . "
as you leave here today , i know there 's one thing you 'll never miss about this place : being a plebe .
but even a plebe at west point is made to feel he or she has some standing in the world .
i 'm told that plebes , when asked whom they outrank , are required to answer this : " sir , the superintendent 's dog --   -- the commandant 's cat , and all the admirals in the whole damn navy . "
i probably wo n't be sharing that with the secretary of the navy .
west point is guided by tradition , and in honor of the " golden children of the corps , " --   -- i will observe one of the traditions you cherish most .
as the commander - in - chief , i hereby grant amnesty to all cadets who are on restriction for minor conduct offenses .
those of you in the end zone might have cheered a little early .
because , you see , i 'm going to let general lennox define exactly what " minor " means .
every west point class is commissioned to the armed forces .
some west point classes are also commissioned by history , to take part in a great new calling for their country .
speaking here to the class of 1942 -- six months after pearl harbor -- general marshall said , " we 're determined that before the sun sets on this terrible struggle , our flag will be recognized throughout the world as a symbol of freedom on the one hand , and of overwhelming power on the other . "
officers graduating that year helped fulfill that mission , defeating japan and germany , and then reconstructing those nations as allies .
west point graduates of the 1940s saw the rise of a deadly new challenge -- the challenge of imperial communism -- and opposed it from korea to berlin , to vietnam , and in the cold war , from beginning to end .
and as the sun set on their struggle , many of those west point officers lived to see a world transformed .
history has also issued its call to your generation .
in your last year , america was attacked by a ruthless and resourceful enemy .
you graduate from this academy in a time of war , taking your place in an american military that is powerful and is honorable .
our war on terror is only begun , but in afghanistan it was begun well .
i am proud of the men and women who have fought on my orders .
america is profoundly grateful for all who serve the cause of freedom , and for all who have given their lives in its defense .
this nation respects and trusts our military , and we are confident in your victories to come .
this war will take many turns we can not predict .
yet i am certain of this : wherever we carry it , the american flag will stand not only for our power , but for freedom .
our nation 's cause has always been larger than our nation 's defense .
we fight , as we always fight , for a just peace -- a peace that favors human liberty .
we will defend the peace against threats from terrorists and tyrants .
we will preserve the peace by building good relations among the great powers .
and we will extend the peace by encouraging free and open societies on every continent .
building this just peace is america 's opportunity , and america 's duty .
from this day forward , it is your challenge , as well , and we will meet this challenge together .
you will wear the uniform of a great and unique country .
america has no empire to extend or utopia to establish .
we wish for others only what we wish for ourselves -- safety from violence , the rewards of liberty , and the hope for a better life .
in defending the peace , we face a threat with no precedent .
enemies in the past needed great armies and great industrial capabilities to endanger the american people and our nation .
the attacks of september the 11th required a few hundred thousand dollars in the hands of a few dozen evil and deluded men .
all of the chaos and suffering they caused came at much less than the cost of a single tank .
the dangers have not passed .
this government and the american people are on watch , we are ready , because we know the terrorists have more money and more men and more plans .
the gravest danger to freedom lies at the perilous crossroads of radicalism and technology .
when the spread of chemical and biological and nuclear weapons , along with ballistic missile technology -- when that occurs , even weak states and small groups could attain a catastrophic power to strike great nations .
our enemies have declared this very intention , and have been caught seeking these terrible weapons .
they want the capability to blackmail us , or to harm us , or to harm our friends -- and we will oppose them with all our power .
for much of the last century , america 's defense relied on the cold war doctrines of deterrence and containment .
in some cases , those strategies still apply .
but new threats also require new thinking .
deterrence -- the promise of massive retaliation against nations -- means nothing against shadowy terrorist networks with no nation or citizens to defend .
containment is not possible when unbalanced dictators with weapons of mass destruction can deliver those weapons on missiles or secretly provide them to terrorist allies .
we can not defend america and our friends by hoping for the best .
we can not put our faith in the word of tyrants , who solemnly sign non - proliferation treaties , and then systemically break them .
if we wait for threats to fully materialize , we will have waited too long .
homeland defense and missile defense are part of stronger security , and they 're essential priorities for america .
yet the war on terror will not be won on the defensive .
we must take the battle to the enemy , disrupt his plans , and confront the worst threats before they emerge .
in the world we have entered , the only path to safety is the path of action .
and this nation will act .
our security will require the best intelligence , to reveal threats hidden in caves and growing in laboratories .
our security will require modernizing domestic agencies such as the fbi , so they 're prepared to act , and act quickly , against danger .
our security will require transforming the military you will lead -- a military that must be ready to strike at a moment 's notice in any dark corner of the world .
and our security will require all americans to be forward - looking and resolute , to be ready for preemptive action when necessary to defend our liberty and to defend our lives .
the work ahead is difficult .
the choices we will face are complex .
we must uncover terror cells in 60 or more countries , using every tool of finance , intelligence and law enforcement .
along with our friends and allies , we must oppose proliferation and confront regimes that sponsor terror , as each case requires .
some nations need military training to fight terror , and we 'll provide it .
other nations oppose terror , but tolerate the hatred that leads to terror -- and that must change .
we will send diplomats where they are needed , and we will send you , our soldiers , where you 're needed .
all nations that decide for aggression and terror will pay a price .
we will not leave the safety of america and the peace of the planet at the mercy of a few mad terrorists and tyrants .
we will lift this dark threat from our country and from the world .
because the war on terror will require resolve and patience , it will also require firm moral purpose .
in this way our struggle is similar to the cold war .
now , as then , our enemies are totalitarians , holding a creed of power with no place for human dignity .
now , as then , they seek to impose a joyless conformity , to control every life and all of life .
america confronted imperial communism in many different ways -- diplomatic , economic , and military .
yet moral clarity was essential to our victory in the cold war .
when leaders like john f. kennedy and ronald reagan refused to gloss over the brutality of tyrants , they gave hope to prisoners and dissidents and exiles , and rallied free nations to a great cause .
some worry that it is somehow undiplomatic or impolite to speak the language of right and wrong .
i disagree .
different circumstances require different methods , but not different moralities .
moral truth is the same in every culture , in every time , and in every place .
targeting innocent civilians for murder is always and everywhere wrong .
brutality against women is always and everywhere wrong .
there can be no neutrality between justice and cruelty , between the innocent and the guilty .
we are in a conflict between good and evil , and america will call evil by its name .
by confronting evil and lawless regimes , we do not create a problem , we reveal a problem .
and we will lead the world in opposing it .
as we defend the peace , we also have an historic opportunity to preserve the peace .
we have our best chance since the rise of the nation state in the 17th century to build a world where the great powers compete in peace instead of prepare for war .
the history of the last century , in particular , was dominated by a series of destructive national rivalries that left battlefields and graveyards across the earth .
germany fought france , the axis fought the allies , and then the east fought the west , in proxy wars and tense standoffs , against a backdrop of nuclear armageddon .
competition between great nations is inevitable , but armed conflict in our world is not .
more and more , civilized nations find ourselves on the same side -- united by common dangers of terrorist violence and chaos .
america has , and intends to keep , military strengths beyond challenge --   -- thereby , making the destabilizing arms races of other eras pointless , and limiting rivalries to trade and other pursuits of peace .
today the great powers are also increasingly united by common values , instead of divided by conflicting ideologies .
the united states , japan and our pacific friends , and now all of europe , share a deep commitment to human freedom , embodied in strong alliances such as nato .
and the tide of liberty is rising in many other nations .
generations of west point officers planned and practiced for battles with soviet russia .
i 've just returned from a new russia , now a country reaching toward democracy , and our partner in the war against terror .
even in china , leaders are discovering that economic freedom is the only lasting source of national wealth .
in time , they will find that social and political freedom is the only true source of national greatness .
when the great powers share common values , we are better able to confront serious regional conflicts together , better able to cooperate in preventing the spread of violence or economic chaos .
in the past , great power rivals took sides in difficult regional problems , making divisions deeper and more complicated .
today , from the middle east to south asia , we are gathering broad international coalitions to increase the pressure for peace .
we must build strong and great power relations when times are good ; to help manage crisis when times are bad .
america needs partners to preserve the peace , and we will work with every nation that shares this noble goal .
and finally , america stands for more than the absence of war .
we have a great opportunity to extend a just peace , by replacing poverty , repression , and resentment around the world with hope of a better day .
through most of history , poverty was persistent , inescapable , and almost universal .
in the last few decades , we 've seen nations from chile to south korea build modern economies and freer societies , lifting millions of people out of despair and want .
and there 's no mystery to this achievement .
the 20th century ended with a single surviving model of human progress , based on non - negotiable demands of human dignity , the rule of law , limits on the power of the state , respect for women and private property and free speech and equal justice and religious tolerance .
america can not impose this vision -- yet we can support and reward governments that make the right choices for their own people .
in our development aid , in our diplomatic efforts , in our international broadcasting , and in our educational assistance , the united states will promote moderation and tolerance and human rights .
and we will defend the peace that makes all progress possible .
when it comes to the common rights and needs of men and women , there is no clash of civilizations .
the requirements of freedom apply fully to africa and latin america and the entire islamic world .
the peoples of the islamic nations want and deserve the same freedoms and opportunities as people in every nation .
and their governments should listen to their hopes .
a truly strong nation will permit legal avenues of dissent for all groups that pursue their aspirations without violence .
an advancing nation will pursue economic reform , to unleash the great entrepreneurial energy of its people .
a thriving nation will respect the rights of women , because no society can prosper while denying opportunity to half its citizens .
mothers and fathers and children across the islamic world , and all the world , share the same fears and aspirations .
in poverty , they struggle .
in tyranny , they suffer .
and as we saw in afghanistan , in liberation they celebrate .
america has a greater objective than controlling threats and containing resentment .
we will work for a just and peaceful world beyond the war on terror .
the bicentennial class of west point now enters this drama .
with all in the united states army , you will stand between your fellow citizens and grave danger .
you will help establish a peace that allows millions around the world to live in liberty and to grow in prosperity .
you will face times of calm , and times of crisis .
and every test will find you prepared -- because you 're the men and women of west point .
you leave here marked by the character of this academy , carrying with you the highest ideals of our nation .
toward the end of his life , dwight eisenhower recalled the first day he stood on the plain at west point . "
the feeling came over me , " he said , " that the expression ' the united states of america ' would now and henceforth mean something different than it had ever before .
from here on , it would be the nation i would be serving , not myself . "
today , your last day at west point , you begin a life of service in a career unlike any other .
you 've answered a calling to hardship and purpose , to risk and honor .
at the end of every day you will know that you have faithfully done your duty .
may you always bring to that duty the high standards of this great american institution .
may you always be worthy of the long gray line that stretches two centuries behind you .
on behalf of the nation , i congratulate each one of you for the commission you 've earned and for the credit you bring to the united states of america .
may god bless you all .

a short time ago , the house of representatives passed a bill that is essential to helping america 's economy weather the financial crisis .
the senate passed the same legislation on wednesday night .
and when congress sends me the final bill , i 'm going to sign it into law .
there were moments this week when some thought the federal government could not rise to the challenge .
but thanks to the hard work of members of both parties in both houses -- and a spirit of cooperation between capitol hill and my administration -- we completed this bill in a timely manner .
i 'm especially grateful for the contributions of speaker nancy pelosi , minority leader john boehner , majority leader steny hoyer , minority whip roy blunt , chairman barney frank , ranking member spencer bachus .
by coming together on this legislation , we have acted boldly to help prevent the crisis on wall street from becoming a crisis in communities across our country .
we have shown the world that the united states of america will stabilize our financial markets and maintain a leading role in the global economy .
a major problem in our financial system is that banks have restricted the flow of credit to businesses and consumers ; many of the assets these banks are holding have lost value .
the legislation congress passed today addresses this problem head on by providing a variety of new tools to the government -- such as allowing us to purchase some of the troubled assets , and creating a new government insurance program that will guarantee the value of others .
the bill also ensures that these new programs are carried out in a way that protects taxpayers .
it prevents failed executives from receiving windfalls from taxpayers ' dollars .
it establishes a bipartisan board to oversee the plan 's implementation .
taken together , these steps represent decisive action to ease the credit crunch that is now threatening our economy .
with a smoother flow of credit , more businesses will be able to stock their shelves and meet their payrolls .
more families will be able to get loans for cars and homes and college education .
more state and local governments will be able to fund basic services .
the bill includes other provisions to help american consumers and businesses .
it includes tax incentives for businesses to invest and create jobs .
it temporarily expands federal insurance for bank and credit union deposits from $ 100,000 to $ 250,000 -- a vital safeguard for consumers and small businesses .
it provides families with relief from the alternative minimum tax , which would otherwise increase taxes for 26 million taxpayers by an average of $ 2,200 .
i know some americans have concerns about this legislation , especially about the government 's role and the bill 's cost .
as a strong supporter of free enterprise , i believe government intervention should occur only when necessary .
in this situation , action is clearly necessary .
and ultimately , the cost -- ultimately , the cost to taxpayers will be far less than the initial outlay .
see , the government will purchase troubled assets and once the market recovers , it is likely that many of the assets will go up in value .
and over time , americans should expect that much -- if not all -- of the tax dollars we invest will be paid back .
americans should also expect that it will take some time for this legislation to have its full impact on our economy .
exercising the authorities in this bill in a responsible way will require a careful analysis and deliberation .
this will be done as expeditiously as possible , but it can not be accomplished overnight .
we 'll take the time necessary to design an effective program that achieves its objectives -- and does not waste taxpayer dollars .
our economy continues to face serious challenges .
this morning , we learned that america lost jobs again in september -- disappointing news that underscores the urgency of the bill that congress passed today .
it will take more time and determined effort to get through this difficult period .
but with confidence and leadership and bipartisan cooperation , we 'll overcome the challenges we face , return our nation to a path of growth , and job creation , and long - term economic prosperity .
thank you .

my fellow citizens , at this hour , american and coalition forces are in the early stages of military operations to disarm iraq , to free its people and to defend the world from grave danger .
on my orders , coalition forces have begun striking selected targets of military importance to undermine saddam hussein 's ability to wage war .
these are opening stages of what will be a broad and concerted campaign .
more than 35 countries are giving crucial support -- from the use of naval and air bases , to help with intelligence and logistics , to the deployment of combat units .
every nation in this coalition has chosen to bear the duty and share the honor of serving in our common defense .
to all the men and women of the united states armed forces now in the middle east , the peace of a troubled world and the hopes of an oppressed people now depend on you .
that trust is well placed .
the enemies you confront will come to know your skill and bravery .
the people you liberate will witness the honorable and decent spirit of the american military .
in this conflict , america faces an enemy who has no regard for conventions of war or rules of morality .
saddam hussein has placed iraqi troops and equipment in civilian areas , attempting to use innocent men , women and children as shields for his own military -- a final atrocity against his people .
i want americans and all the world to know that coalition forces will make every effort to spare innocent civilians from harm .
a campaign on the harsh terrain of a nation as large as california could be longer and more difficult than some predict .
and helping iraqis achieve a united , stable and free country will require our sustained commitment .
we come to iraq with respect for its citizens , for their great civilization and for the religious faiths they practice .
we have no ambition in iraq , except to remove a threat and restore control of that country to its own people .
i know that the families of our military are praying that all those who serve will return safely and soon .
millions of americans are praying with you for the safety of your loved ones and for the protection of the innocent .
for your sacrifice , you have the gratitude and respect of the american people .
and you can know that our forces will be coming home as soon as their work is done .
our nation enters this conflict reluctantly -- yet , our purpose is sure .
the people of the united states and our friends and allies will not live at the mercy of an outlaw regime that threatens the peace with weapons of mass murder .
we will meet that threat now , with our army , air force , navy , coast guard and marines , so that we do not have to meet it later with armies of fire fighters and police and doctors on the streets of our cities .
now that conflict has come , the only way to limit its duration is to apply decisive force .
and i assure you , this will not be a campaign of half measures , and we will accept no outcome but victory .
my fellow citizens , the dangers to our country and the world will be overcome .
we will pass through this time of peril and carry on the work of peace .
we will defend our freedom .
we will bring freedom to others and we will prevail .
may god bless our country and all who defend her .

thank you all .
mr. speaker , vice president cheney , members of congress , members of the supreme court and diplomatic corps , distinguished guests , and fellow citizens : 
 today our nation lost a beloved , graceful , courageous woman who called america to its founding ideals and carried on a noble dream .
tonight we are comforted by the hope of a glad reunion with the husband who was taken so long ago , and we are grateful for the good life of coretta scott king .
every time i 'm invited to this rostrum , i 'm humbled by the privilege and mindful of the history we 've seen together .
we have gathered under this capitol dome in moments of national mourning and national achievement .
we have served america through one of the most consequential periods of our history , and it has been my honor to serve with you .
in a system of two parties , two chambers , and two elected branches , there will always be differences and debate .
but even tough debates can be conducted in a civil tone , and our differences can not be allowed to harden into anger .
to confront the great issues before us , we must act in a spirit of goodwill and respect for one another -- and i will do my part .
tonight the state of our union is strong , and together we will make it stronger .
in this decisive year , you and i will make choices that determine both the future and the character of our country .
we will choose to act confidently in pursuing the enemies of freedom , or retreat from our duties in the hope of an easier life .
we will choose to build our prosperity by leading the world economy , or shut ourselves off from trade and opportunity .
in a complex and challenging time , the road of isolationism and protectionism may seem broad and inviting , yet it ends in danger and decline .
the only way to protect our people , the only way to secure the peace , the only way to control our destiny is by our leadership .
so the united states of america will continue to lead .
abroad , our nation is committed to an historic , long - term goal : we seek the end of tyranny in our world .
some dismiss that goal as misguided idealism .
in reality , the future security of america depends on it .
on september 11 , 2001 , we found that problems originating in a failed and oppressive state 7,000 miles away could bring murder and destruction to our country .
dictatorships shelter terrorists , and feed resentment and radicalism , and seek weapons of mass destruction .
democracies replace resentment with hope , respect the rights of their citizens and their neighbors , and join the fight against terror .
every step toward freedom in the world makes our country safer , so we will act boldly in freedom 's cause .
far from being a hopeless dream , the advance of freedom is the great story of our time .
in 1945 , there were about two dozen lonely democracies in the world .
today , there are 122 .
and we 're writing a new chapter in the story of self - government -- with women lining up to vote in afghanistan , and millions of iraqis marking their liberty with purple ink , and men and women from lebanon to egypt debating the rights of individuals and the necessity of freedom .
at the start of 2006 , more than half the people of our world live in democratic nations .
and we do not forget the other half -- in places like syria and burma , zimbabwe , north korea , and iran -- because the demands of justice and the peace of this world require their freedom as well .
no one can deny the success of freedom , but some men rage and fight against it .
and one of the main sources of reaction and opposition is radical islam -- the perversion by a few of a noble faith into an ideology of terror and death .
terrorists like bin laden are serious about mass murder , and all of us must take their declared intentions seriously .
they seek to impose a heartless system of totalitarian control throughout the middle east and arm themselves with weapons of mass murder .
their aim is to seize power in iraq and use it as a safe haven to launch attacks against america and the world .
lacking the military strength to challenge us directly , the terrorists have chosen the weapon of fear .
when they murder children at a school in beslan or blow up commuters in london or behead a bound captive , the terrorists hope these horrors will break our will , allowing the violent to inherit the earth .
but they have miscalculated : we love our freedom , and we will fight to keep it .
in a time of testing , we can not find security by abandoning our commitments and retreating within our borders .
if we were to leave these vicious attackers alone , they would not leave us alone .
they would simply move the battlefield to our own shores .
there is no peace in retreat , and there is no honor in retreat .
by allowing radical islam to work its will , by leaving an assaulted world to fend for itself , we would signal to all that we no longer believe in our own ideals or even in our own courage .
but our enemies and our friends can be certain : the united states will not retreat from the world , and we will never surrender to evil .
america rejects the false comfort of isolationism .
we are the nation that saved liberty in europe and liberated death camps and helped raise up democracies and faced down an evil empire .
once again , we accept the call of history to deliver the oppressed and move this world toward peace .
we remain on the offensive against terror networks .
we have killed or captured many of their leaders -- and for the others , their day will come .
we remain on the offensive in afghanistan , where a fine president and a national assembly are fighting terror while building the institutions of a new democracy .
we 're on the offensive in iraq with a clear plan for victory .
first , we 're helping iraqis build an inclusive government , so that old resentments will be eased and the insurgency will be marginalized .
second , we 're continuing reconstruction efforts and helping the iraqi government to fight corruption and build a modern economy , so all iraqis can experience the benefits of freedom .
and third , we 're striking terrorist targets while we train iraqi forces that are increasingly capable of defeating the enemy .
iraqis are showing their courage every day , and we are proud to be their allies in the cause of freedom .
our work in iraq is difficult because our enemy is brutal .
but that brutality has not stopped the dramatic progress of a new democracy .
in less than three years , the nation has gone from dictatorship to liberation , to sovereignty , to a constitution , to national elections .
at the same time , our coalition has been relentless in shutting off terrorist infiltration , clearing out insurgent strongholds , and turning over territory to iraqi security forces .
i am confident in our plan for victory ; i am confident in the will of the iraqi people ; i am confident in the skill and spirit of our military .
fellow citizens , we are in this fight to win , and we are winning .
the road of victory is the road that will take our troops home .
as we make progress on the ground and iraqi forces increasingly take the lead , we should be able to further decrease our troop levels .
but those decisions will be made by our military commanders , not by politicians in washington , d. c. 
 our coalition has learned from our experience in iraq .
we 've adjusted our military tactics and changed our approach to reconstruction .
along the way , we have benefitted from responsible criticism and counsel offered by members of congress of both parties .
in the coming year , i will continue to reach out and seek your good advice .
yet there is a difference between responsible criticism that aims for success and defeatism that refuses to acknowledge anything but failure .
hindsight alone is not wisdom , and second - guessing is not a strategy .
with so much in the balance , those of us in public office have a duty to speak with candor .
a sudden withdrawal of our forces from iraq would abandon our iraqi allies to death and prison , would put men like bin laden and zarqawi in charge of a strategic country , and show that a pledge from america means little .
members of congress , however we feel about the decisions and debates of the past , our nation has only one option : we must keep our word , defeat our enemies , and stand behind the american military in this vital mission .
our men and women in uniform are making sacrifices and showing a sense of duty stronger than all fear .
they know what it 's like to fight house to house in a maze of streets , to wear heavy gear in the desert heat , to see a comrade killed by a roadside bomb .
and those who know the costs also know the stakes .
marine staff sergeant dan clay was killed last month fighting in fallujah .
he left behind a letter to his family , but his words could just as well be addressed to every american .
here is what dan wrote : " i know what honor is -- it has been an honor to protect and serve all of you .
i faced death with the secure knowledge that you would not have to .
never falter .
do n't hesitate to honor and support those of us who have the honor of protecting that which is worth protecting . "
staff sergeant dan clay 's wife , lisa , and his mom and dad , sara jo and bud , are with us this evening .
welcome .
our nation is grateful to the fallen , who live in the memory of our country .
we 're grateful to all who volunteer to wear our nation 's uniform .
and as we honor our brave troops , let us never forget the sacrifices of america 's military families .
our offensive against terror involves more than military action .
ultimately , the only way to defeat the terrorists is to defeat their dark vision of hatred and fear by offering the hopeful alternative of political freedom and peaceful change .
so the united states of america supports democratic reform across the broader middle east .
elections are vital , but they are only the beginning .
raising up a democracy requires the rule of law and protection of minorities and strong , accountable institutions that last longer than a single vote .
the great people of egypt have voted in a multiparty presidential election , and now their government should open paths of peaceful opposition that will reduce the appeal of radicalism .
the palestinian people have voted in elections , and now the leaders of hamas must recognize israel , disarm , reject terrorism , and work for lasting peace .
saudi arabia has taken the first steps of reform ; now it can offer its people a better future by pressing forward with those efforts .
democracies in the middle east will not look like our own because they will reflect the traditions of their own citizens .
yet liberty is the future of every nation in the middle east because liberty is the right and hope of all humanity .
the same is true of iran , a nation now held hostage by a small clerical elite that is isolating and repressing its people .
the regime in that country sponsors terrorists in the palestinian territories and in lebanon , and that must come to an end .
the iranian government is defying the world with its nuclear ambitions , and the nations of the world must not permit the iranian regime to gain nuclear weapons .
america will continue to rally the world to confront these threats .
tonight let me speak directly to the citizens of iran : america respects you , and we respect your country .
we respect your right to choose your own future and win your own freedom .
and our nation hopes one day to be the closest of friends with a free and democratic iran .
to overcome dangers in our world , we must also take the offensive by encouraging economic progress and fighting disease and spreading hope in hopeless lands .
isolationism would not only tie our hands in fighting enemies , it would keep us from helping our friends in desperate need .
we show compassion abroad because americans believe in the god - given dignity and worth of a villager with hiv / aids or an infant with malaria or a refugee fleeing genocide or a young girl sold into slavery .
we also show compassion abroad because regions overwhelmed by poverty , corruption , and despair are sources of terrorism and organized crime and human trafficking and the drug trade .
in recent years , you and i have taken unprecedented action to fight aids and malaria , expand the education of girls , and reward developing nations that are moving forward with economic and political reform .
for people everywhere , the united states is a partner for a better life .
shortchanging these efforts would increase the suffering and chaos of our world , undercut our long - term security , and dull the conscience of our country .
i urge members of congress to serve the interests of america by showing the compassion of america .
our country must also remain on the offensive against terrorism here at home .
the enemy has not lost the desire or capability to attack us .
fortunately , this nation has superb professionals in law enforcement , intelligence , the military , and homeland security .
these men and women are dedicating their lives , protecting us all , and they deserve our support and our thanks .
they also deserve the same tools they already use to fight drug trafficking and organized crime , so i ask you to reauthorize the patriot act .
it is said that prior to the attacks of september 11 , our government failed to connect the dots of the conspiracy .
we now know that two of the hijackers in the united states placed telephone calls to al qaeda operatives overseas .
but we did not know about their plans until it was too late .
so to prevent another attack -- based on authority given to me by the constitution and by statute -- i have authorized a terrorist surveillance program to aggressively pursue the international communications of suspected al qaeda operatives and affiliates to and from america .
previous presidents have used the same constitutional authority i have , and federal courts have approved the use of that authority .
appropriate members of congress have been kept informed .
the terrorist surveillance program has helped prevent terrorist attacks .
it remains essential to the security of america .
if there are people inside our country who are talking with al qaeda , we want to know about it , because we will not sit back and wait to be hit again .
in all these areas -- from the disruption of terror networks , to victory in iraq , to the spread of freedom and hope in troubled regions -- we need the support of our friends and allies .
to draw that support , we must always be clear in our principles and willing to act .
the only alternative to american leadership is a dramatically more dangerous and anxious world .
yet we also choose to lead because it is a privilege to serve the values that gave us birth .
american leaders -- from roosevelt to truman to kennedy to reagan -- rejected isolation and retreat , because they knew that america is always more secure when freedom is on the march .
our own generation is in a long war against a determined enemy , a war that will be fought by presidents of both parties , who will need steady bipartisan support from the congress .
and tonight i ask for yours .
together , let us protect our country , support the men and women who defend us , and lead this world toward freedom .
here at home , america also has a great opportunity : we will build the prosperity of our country by strengthening our economic leadership in the world .
our economy is healthy and vigorous and growing faster than other major industrialized nations .
in the last two and a half years , america has created 4.6 million new jobs -- more than japan and the european union combined .
even in the face of higher energy prices and natural disasters , the american people have turned in an economic performance that is the envy of the world .
the american economy is preeminent , but we can not afford to be complacent .
in a dynamic world economy , we are seeing new competitors like china and india , and this creates uncertainty , which makes it easier to feed people 's fears .
so we 're seeing some old temptations return .
protectionists want to escape competition , pretending that we can keep our high standard of living while walling off our economy .
others say that the government needs to take a larger role in directing the economy , centralizing more power in washington and increasing taxes .
we hear claims that immigrants are somehow bad for the economy -- even though this economy could not function without them .
all these are forms of economic retreat , and they lead in the same direction , toward a stagnant and second - rate economy .
tonight i will set out a better path : an agenda for a nation that competes with confidence ; an agenda that will raise standards of living and generate new jobs .
americans should not fear our economic future because we intend to shape it .
keeping america competitive begins with keeping our economy growing .
and our economy grows when americans have more of their own money to spend , save , and invest .
in the last five years , the tax relief you passed has left $ 880 billion in the hands of american workers , investors , small businesses , and families .
and they have used it to help produce more than four years of uninterrupted economic growth .
yet the tax relief is set to expire in the next few years .
if we do nothing , american families will face a massive tax increase they do not expect and will not welcome .
because america needs more than a temporary expansion , we need more than temporary tax relief .
i urge the congress to act responsibly and make the tax cuts permanent .
keeping america competitive requires us to be good stewards of tax dollars .
every year of my presidency , we 've reduced the growth of nonsecurity discretionary spending , and last year you passed bills that cut this spending .
this year my budget will cut it again , and reduce or eliminate more than 140 programs that are performing poorly or not fulfilling essential priorities .
by passing these reforms , we will save the american taxpayer another $ 14 billion next year and stay on track to cut the deficit in half by 2009 .
i am pleased that members of congress are working on earmark reform , because the federal budget has too many special interest projects .
and we can tackle this problem together , if you pass the line - item veto .
we must also confront the larger challenge of mandatory spending , or entitlements .
this year , the first of about 78 million baby boomers turn 60 , including two of my dad 's favorite people -- me and president clinton .
this milestone is more than a personal crisis --   -- it is a national challenge .
the retirement of the baby boom generation will put unprecedented strains on the federal government .
by 2030 , spending for social security , medicare , and medicaid alone will be almost 60 percent of the entire federal budget .
and that will present future congresses with impossible choices -- staggering tax increases , immense deficits , or deep cuts in every category of spending .
congress did not act last year on my proposal to save social security , yet the rising cost of entitlements is a problem that is not going away .
and every year we fail to act , the situation gets worse .
so tonight i ask you to join me in creating a commission to examine the full impact of baby boom retirements on social security , medicare , and medicaid .
this commission should include members of congress of both parties , and offer bipartisan solutions .
we need to put aside partisan politics and work together and get this problem solved .
keeping america competitive requires us to open more markets for all that americans make and grow .
one out of every five factory jobs in america is related to global trade , and we want people everywhere to buy american .
with open markets and a level playing field , no one can outproduce or outcompete the american worker .
keeping america competitive requires an immigration system that upholds our laws , reflects our values , and serves the interests of our economy .
our nation needs orderly and secure borders .
to meet this goal , we must have stronger immigration enforcement and border protection .
and we must have a rational , humane guest worker program that rejects amnesty , allows temporary jobs for people who seek them legally , and reduces smuggling and crime at the border .
keeping america competitive requires affordable health care .
our government has a responsibility to provide health care for the poor and the elderly , and we are meeting that responsibility .
for all americans , we must confront the rising cost of care , strengthen the doctor - patient relationship , and help people afford the insurance coverage they need .
we will make wider use of electronic records and other health information technology , to help control costs and reduce dangerous medical errors .
we will strengthen health savings accounts , making sure individuals and small - business employees can buy insurance with the same advantages that people working for big businesses now get .
we will do more to make this coverage portable , so workers can switch jobs without having to worry about losing their health insurance .
and because lawsuits are driving many good doctors out of practice , leaving women in nearly 1,500 american counties without a single ob - gyn , i ask the congress to pass medical liability reform this year .
keeping america competitive requires affordable energy .
and here we have a serious problem : america is addicted to oil , which is often imported from unstable parts of the world .
the best way to break this addiction is through technology .
since 2001 , we have spent nearly $ 10 billion to develop cleaner , cheaper , and more reliable alternative energy sources .
and we are on the threshold of incredible advances .
so tonight i announce the advanced energy initiative -- a 22-percent increase in clean - energy research -- at the department of energy , to push for breakthroughs in two vital areas .
to change how we power our homes and offices , we will invest more in zero - emission coal - fired plants , revolutionary solar and wind technologies , and clean , safe nuclear energy .
we must also change how we power our automobiles .
we will increase our research in better batteries for hybrid and electric cars and in pollution - free cars that run on hydrogen .
we 'll also fund additional research in cutting - edge methods of producing ethanol , not just from corn but from wood chips and stalks or switch grass .
our goal is to make this new kind of ethanol practical and competitive within six years .
breakthroughs on this and other new technologies will help us reach another great goal : to replace more than 75 percent of our oil imports from the middle east by 2025 .
by applying the talent and technology of america , this country can dramatically improve our environment , move beyond a petroleum - based economy , and make our dependence on middle eastern oil a thing of the past .
and to keep america competitive , one commitment is necessary above all : we must continue to lead the world in human talent and creativity .
our greatest advantage in the world has always been our educated , hard - working , ambitious people .
and we 're going to keep that edge .
tonight i announce an american competitiveness initiative , to encourage innovation throughout our economy and to give our nation 's children a firm grounding in math and science .
first , i propose to double the federal commitment to the most critical basic research programs in the physical sciences over the next 10 years .
this funding will support the work of america 's most creative minds as they explore promising areas such as nanotechnology , supercomputing , and alternative energy sources .
second , i propose to make permanent the research and development tax credit to encourage bolder private - sector initiatives in technology .
with more research in both the public and private sectors , we will improve our quality of life and ensure that america will lead the world in opportunity and innovation for decades to come .
third , we need to encourage children to take more math and science , and to make sure those courses are rigorous enough to compete with other nations .
we 've made a good start in the early grades with the no child left behind act , which is raising standards and lifting test scores across our country .
tonight i propose to train 70,000 high school teachers to lead advanced - placement courses in math and science , bring 30,000 math and science professionals to teach in classrooms , and give early help to students who struggle with math , so they have a better chance at good , high - wage jobs .
if we ensure that america 's children succeed in life , they will ensure that america succeeds in the world .
preparing our nation to compete in the world is a goal that all of us can share .
i urge you to support the american competitiveness initiative , and together we will show the world what the american people can achieve .
america is a great force for freedom and prosperity .
yet our greatness is not measured in power or luxuries but by who we are and how we treat one another .
so we strive to be a compassionate , decent , hopeful society .
in recent years , america has become a more hopeful nation .
violent crime rates have fallen to their lowest levels since the 1970s .
welfare cases have dropped by more than half over the past decade .
drug use among youth is down 19 percent since 2001 .
there are fewer abortions in america than at any point in the last three decades , and the number of children born to teenage mothers has been falling for a dozen years in a row .
these gains are evidence of a quiet transformation , a revolution of conscience , in which a rising generation is finding that a life of personal responsibility is a life of fulfillment .
government has played a role .
wise policies , such as welfare reform and drug education and support for abstinence and adoption have made a difference in the character of our country .
and everyone here tonight , democrat and republican , has a right to be proud of this record .
yet many americans , especially parents , still have deep concerns about the direction of our culture and the health of our most basic institutions .
they 're concerned about unethical conduct by public officials and discouraged by activist courts that try to redefine marriage .
they worry about children in our society who need direction and love , and about fellow citizens still displaced by natural disaster , and about suffering caused by treatable diseases .
as we look at these challenges , we must never give in to the belief that america is in decline or that our culture is doomed to unravel .
the american people know better than that .
we have proven the pessimists wrong before , and we will do it again .
a hopeful society depends on courts that deliver equal justice under the law .
the supreme court now has two superb new members on its bench , chief justice john roberts and justice sam alito .
i thank the senate for confirming both of them .
i will continue to nominate men and women who understand that judges must be servants of the law and not legislate from the bench .
today marks the official retirement of a very special american .
for 24 years of faithful service to our nation , the united states is grateful to justice sandra day o'connor .
a hopeful society has institutions of science and medicine that do not cut ethical corners and that recognize the matchless value of every life .
tonight i ask you to pass legislation to prohibit the most egregious abuses of medical research : human cloning in all its forms ; creating or implanting embryos for experiments ; creating human - animal hybrids ; and buying , selling , or patenting human embryos .
human life is a gift from our creator , and that gift should never be discarded , devalued , or put up for sale .
a hopeful society expects elected officials to uphold the public trust .
honorable people in both parties are working on reforms to strengthen the ethical standards of washington .
i support your efforts .
each of us has made a pledge to be worthy of public responsibility , and that is a pledge we must never forget , never dismiss , and never betray .
as we renew the promise of our institutions , let us also show the character of america in our compassion and care for one another .
a hopeful society gives special attention to children who lack direction and love .
through the helping america 's youth initiative , we are encouraging caring adults to get involved in the life of a child .
and this good work is being led by our first lady , laura bush .
this year we will add resources to encourage young people to stay in school , so more of america 's youth can raise their sights and achieve their dreams .
a hopeful society comes to the aid of fellow citizens in times of suffering and emergency , and stays at it until they 're back on their feet .
so far the federal government has committed $ 85 billion to the people of the gulf coast and new orleans .
we 're removing debris and repairing highways and rebuilding stronger levees .
we 're providing business loans and housing assistance .
yet as we meet these immediate needs , we must also address deeper challenges that existed before the storm arrived .
in new orleans and in other places , many of our fellow citizens have felt excluded from the promise of our country .
the answer is not only temporary relief but schools that teach every child and job skills that bring upward mobility and more opportunities to own a home and start a business .
as we recover from a disaster , let us also work for the day when all americans are protected by justice , equal in hope , and rich in opportunity .
a hopeful society acts boldly to fight diseases like hiv / aids , which can be prevented and treated and defeated .
more than a million americans live with hiv , and half of all aids cases occur among african americans .
i ask congress to reform and reauthorize the ryan white act and provide new funding to states , so we end the waiting lists for aids medicines in america .
we will also lead a nationwide effort , working closely with african american churches and faith - based groups , to deliver rapid hiv tests to millions , end the stigma of aids , and come closer to the day when there are no new infections in america .
fellow citizens , we 've been called to leadership in a period of consequence .
we 've entered a great ideological conflict we did nothing to invite .
we see great changes in science and commerce that will influence all our lives .
sometimes it can seem that history is turning in a wide arc toward an unknown shore .
yet the destination of history is determined by human action , and every great movement of history comes to a point of choosing .
lincoln could have accepted peace at the cost of disunity and continued slavery .
martin luther king could have stopped at birmingham or at selma and achieved only half a victory over segregation .
the united states could have accepted the permanent division of europe and been complicit in the oppression of others .
today , having come far in our own historical journey , we must decide : will we turn back or finish well ?
before history is written down in books , it is written in courage .
like americans before us , we will show that courage , and we will finish well .
we will lead freedom 's advance .
we will compete and excel in the global economy .
we will renew the defining moral commitments of this land .
and so we move forward -- optimistic about our country , faithful to its cause , and confident of the victories to come .
may god bless america .

it is my honor to welcome our friend , the president of nigeria , to the rose garden .
mr. president , welcome to washington , the rose garden .
and of course , kofi annan , the secretary general of the united nations , mr. secretary general , thank you for coming .
as well , we are joined by two members of my cabinet , secretary of state powell , secretary of health and human services , tommy thompson .
i want to thank them both for being here .
scott evertz , who is the director of the national aids policy office is with us .
scott , thank you for being here .
and , of course , condoleezza rice , the national security advisor .
i am looking forward to meeting with the president on a range of issues that are important to our nations .
this morning , we 've spoken about another matter that involves countless lives .
together , we 've been discussing a strategy to halt the spread of aids and other infectious diseases across the african continent and across the world .
the devastation across the globe left by aids , malaria , tuberculosis , the sheer number of those infected and dying is almost beyond comprehension .
suffering on the african continent has been especially great .
aids alone has left at least 11 million orphans in sub - sahara africa .
in several african countries , as many as half of today 's 15-year - olds could die of aids .
in a part of the world where so many have suffered from war and want and famine , these latest tribulations are the cruelest of fates .
we have the power to help .
the united states is committed to working with other nations to reduce suffering and to spare lives .
and working together is the key .
only through sustained and focused international cooperation can we address problems so grave and suffering so great .
my guests today have been doing their part and more , and i thank them for their leadership .
president obasanjo last month led the nations of africa in drafting the abuja declaration which lays out crucial guidelines for the international effort we all envision .
secretary general annan too has made this issue an urgent priority .
he has been an eloquent voice in rallying the resources and conviction needed in this cause .
when he visited the white house in march , we talked about the aids pandemic .
we agreed on a goal of creating a global fund to fight hiv / aids , malaria and tuberculosis .
the g-8 has been discussing the potential fund .
our high - level task force chaired by secretaries powell and thompson has developed a proposal that we have shared with u. n. officials , developing nations and our g-8 partners .
we will need ideas from all sources .
we must all show leadership and all share responsibility .
for our part , i am today committing the united states of america to support a new worldwide fund with a founding contribution of $ 200 million .
this is in addition to the billions we spend on research and to the $ 760 million we 're spending this year to help the international effort to fight aids .
this $ 200 million will go exclusively to a global fund , with more to follow as we learn where our support can be most effective .
based on this morning 's meetings , i believe a consensus is forming on the basic elements that must shape the global fund and its use .
first , we agree on the need for partnerships across borders and among both the public and private sectors .
we must call upon the compassion , energy and generosity of people everywhere .
this means that not only governments can help but also private corporations , foundations , faith - based groups and nongovernmental organizations as well .
second , we agree on an integrated approach that emphasizes prevention and training of medical personnel as well as treatment and care .
prevention is indispensable to any strategy of controlling a pandemic such as we now face .
third , we must concentrate our efforts on programs that work , proven best practices .
whenever the global fund supports any health program , we must know that it meets certain essential criteria .
we must know that the money is well spent , victims are well cared for and local populations are well served .
that leads to the fourth criterion , namely that all proposals must be reviewed for effectiveness by medical and public health experts .
addressing a plague of this magnitude requires scientific accountability to ensure results .
and , finally , we understand the importance of innovation in creating lifesaving medicines that combat diseases .
that 's why we believe the fund must respect intellectual property rights , as an incentive for vital research and development .
this morning , we have made a good beginning .
i expect the upcoming u. n. special session and this summer 's g-8 summit in italy to turn these ideas into reality .
this is one of those moments that reminds us all in public service why we 're here .
it challenges us to act wisely and act together and to act quickly .
across the world at this moment , there are people in true desperation , and we must help .
it is now my honor to bring to the podium , the president of nigeria .
mr. president .
it has been my honor to host this very important announcement .
it 's also my honor to recognize two members of the united states congress who are going to work with this administration to make sure that our commitment becomes reality , senator frist and senator leahy .
we 're so thrilled you 're here .
we appreciate your vision and we appreciate your leadership .
thank you all for coming .

good evening .
i appreciate you giving me a few minutes of your time tonight so i can discuss with you a complex and difficult issue , an issue that is one of the most profound of our time .
the issue of research involving stem cells derived from human embryos is increasingly the subject of a national debate and dinner table discussions .
the issue is confronted every day in laboratories as scientists ponder the ethical ramifications of their work .
it is agonized over by parents and many couples as they try to have children , or to save children already born .
the issue is debated within the church , with people of different faiths , even many of the same faith coming to different conclusions .
many people are finding that the more they know about stem cell research , the less certain they are about the right ethical and moral conclusions .
my administration must decide whether to allow federal funds , your tax dollars , to be used for scientific research on stem cells derived from human embryos .
a large number of these embryos already exist .
they are the product of a process called in vitro fertilization , which helps so many couples conceive children .
when doctors match sperm and egg to create life outside the womb , they usually produce more embryos than are planted in the mother .
once a couple successfully has children , or if they are unsuccessful , the additional embryos remain frozen in laboratories .
some will not survive during long storage ; others are destroyed .
a number have been donated to science and used to create privately funded stem cell lines .
and a few have been implanted in an adoptive mother and born , and are today healthy children .
based on preliminary work that has been privately funded , scientists believe further research using stem cells offers great promise that could help improve the lives of those who suffer from many terrible diseases -- from juvenile diabetes to alzheimer 's , from parkinson 's to spinal cord injuries .
and while scientists admit they are not yet certain , they believe stem cells derived from embryos have unique potential .
you should also know that stem cells can be derived from sources other than embryos -- from adult cells , from umbilical cords that are discarded after babies are born , from human placenta .
and many scientists feel research on these type of stem cells is also promising .
many patients suffering from a range of diseases are already being helped with treatments developed from adult stem cells .
however , most scientists , at least today , believe that research on embryonic stem cells offer the most promise because these cells have the potential to develop in all of the tissues in the body .
scientists further believe that rapid progress in this research will come only with federal funds .
federal dollars help attract the best and brightest scientists .
they ensure new discoveries are widely shared at the largest number of research facilities and that the research is directed toward the greatest public good .
the united states has a long and proud record of leading the world toward advances in science and medicine that improve human life .
and the united states has a long and proud record of upholding the highest standards of ethics as we expand the limits of science and knowledge .
research on embryonic stem cells raises profound ethical questions , because extracting the stem cell destroys the embryo , and thus destroys its potential for life .
like a snowflake , each of these embryos is unique , with the unique genetic potential of an individual human being .
as i thought through this issue , i kept returning to two fundamental questions : first , are these frozen embryos human life , and therefore , something precious to be protected?and second , if they 're going to be destroyed anyway , should n't they be used for a greater good , for research that has the potential to save and improve other lives ?
i 've asked those questions and others of scientists , scholars , bioethicists , religious leaders , doctors , researchers , members of congress , my cabinet , and my friends .
i have read heartfelt letters from many americans .
i have given this issue a great deal of thought , prayer and considerable reflection .
and i have found widespread disagreement .
on the first issue , are these embryos human life -- well , one researcher told me he believes this five - day - old cluster of cells is not an embryo , not yet an individual , but a pre - embryo .
he argued that it has the potential for life , but it is not a life because it can not develop on its own .
an ethicist dismissed that as a callous attempt at rationalization .
make no mistake , he told me , that cluster of cells is the same way you and i , and all the rest of us , started our lives .
one goes with a heavy heart if we use these , he said , because we are dealing with the seeds of the next generation .
and to the other crucial question , if these are going to be destroyed anyway , why not use them for good purpose -- i also found different answers .
many argue these embryos are byproducts of a process that helps create life , and we should allow couples to donate them to science so they can be used for good purpose instead of wasting their potential .
others will argue there 's no such thing as excess life , and the fact that a living being is going to die does not justify experimenting on it or exploiting it as a natural resource .
at its core , this issue forces us to confront fundamental questions about the beginnings of life and the ends of science .
it lies at a difficult moral intersection , juxtaposing the need to protect life in all its phases with the prospect of saving and improving life in all its stages .
as the discoveries of modern science create tremendous hope , they also lay vast ethical mine fields .
as the genius of science extends the horizons of what we can do , we increasingly confront complex questions about what we should do .
we have arrived at that brave new world that seemed so distant in 1932 , when aldous huxley wrote about human beings created in test tubes in what he called a " hatchery . "
in recent weeks , we learned that scientists have created human embryos in test tubes solely to experiment on them .
this is deeply troubling , and a warning sign that should prompt all of us to think through these issues very carefully .
embryonic stem cell research is at the leading edge of a series of moral hazards .
the initial stem cell researcher was at first reluctant to begin his research , fearing it might be used for human cloning .
scientists have already cloned a sheep .
researchers are telling us the next step could be to clone human beings to create individual designer stem cells , essentially to grow another you , to be available in case you need another heart or lung or liver .
i strongly oppose human cloning , as do most americans .
we recoil at the idea of growing human beings for spare body parts , or creating life for our convenience .
and while we must devote enormous energy to conquering disease , it is equally important that we pay attention to the moral concerns raised by the new frontier of human embryo stem cell research .
even the most noble ends do not justify any means .
my position on these issues is shaped by deeply held beliefs .
i 'm a strong supporter of science and technology , and believe they have the potential for incredible good -- to improve lives , to save life , to conquer disease .
research offers hope that millions of our loved ones may be cured of a disease and rid of their suffering .
i have friends whose children suffer from juvenile diabetes .
nancy reagan has written me about president reagan 's struggle with alzheimer 's .
my own family has confronted the tragedy of childhood leukemia .
and , like all americans , i have great hope for cures .
i also believe human life is a sacred gift from our creator .
i worry about a culture that devalues life , and believe as your president i have an important obligation to foster and encourage respect for life in america and throughout the world .
and while we 're all hopeful about the potential of this research , no one can be certain that the science will live up to the hope it has generated .
eight years ago , scientists believed fetal tissue research offered great hope for cures and treatments -- yet , the progress to date has not lived up to its initial expectations .
embryonic stem cell research offers both great promise and great peril .
so i have decided we must proceed with great care .
as a result of private research , more than 60 genetically diverse stem cell lines already exist .
they were created from embryos that have already been destroyed , and they have the ability to regenerate themselves indefinitely , creating ongoing opportunities for research .
i have concluded that we should allow federal funds to be used for research on these existing stem cell lines , where the life and death decision has already been made .
leading scientists tell me research on these 60 lines has great promise that could lead to breakthrough therapies and cures .
this allows us to explore the promise and potential of stem cell research without crossing a fundamental moral line , by providing taxpayer funding that would sanction or encourage further destruction of human embryos that have at least the potential for life .
i also believe that great scientific progress can be made through aggressive federal funding of research on umbilical cord placenta , adult and animal stem cells which do not involve the same moral dilemma .
this year , your government will spend $ 250 million on this important research .
i will also name a president 's council to monitor stem cell research , to recommend appropriate guidelines and regulations , and to consider all of the medical and ethical ramifications of biomedical innovation .
this council will consist of leading scientists , doctors , ethicists , lawyers , theologians and others , and will be chaired by dr. leon kass , a leading biomedical ethicist from the university of chicago .
this council will keep us apprised of new developments and give our nation a forum to continue to discuss and evaluate these important issues .
as we go forward , i hope we will always be guided by both intellect and heart , by both our capabilities and our conscience .
i have made this decision with great care , and i pray it is the right one .
thank you for listening .
good night , and god bless america .

i 've just received an update from secretary chertoff and other cabinet secretaries involved on the latest developments in louisiana , mississippi , and alabama .
as we flew here today , i also asked the pilot to fly over the gulf coast region so i could see firsthand the scope and magnitude of the devastation .
the vast majority of new orleans , louisiana is under water .
tens of thousands of homes and businesses are beyond repair .
a lot of the mississippi gulf coast has been completely destroyed .
mobile is flooded .
we are dealing with one of the worst natural disasters in our nation 's history .
and that 's why i 've called the cabinet together .
the people in the affected regions expect the federal government to work with the state government and local government with an effective response .
i have directed secretary of homeland security mike chertoff to chair a cabinet - level task force to coordinate all our assistance from washington .
fema director mike brown is in charge of all federal response and recovery efforts in the field .
i 've instructed them to work closely with state and local officials , as well as with the private sector , to ensure that we 're helping , not hindering , recovery efforts .
this recovery will take a long time .
this recovery will take years .
our efforts are now focused on three priorities : our first priority is to save lives .
we 're assisting local officials in new orleans in evacuating any remaining citizens from the affected area .
i want to thank the state of texas , and particularly harris county and the city of houston and officials with the houston astrodome , for providing shelter to those citizens who found refuge in the super dome in louisiana .
buses are on the way to take those people from new orleans to houston .
fema has deployed more than 50 disaster medical assistance teams from all across the country to help the affected -- to help those in the affected areas .
fema has deployed more than 25 urban search and rescue teams with more than a thousand personnel to help save as many lives as possible .
the united states coast guard is conducting search and rescue missions .
they 're working alongside local officials , local assets .
the coast guard has rescued nearly 2,000 people to date .
the department of defense is deploying major assets to the region .
these include the uss bataan to conduct search and rescue missions ; eight swift water rescue teams ; the iwo jima amphibious readiness group to help with disaster response equipment ; and the hospital ship usns comfort to help provide medical care .
the national guard has nearly 11,000 guardsmen on state active duty to assist governors and local officials with security and disaster response efforts .
fema and the army corps of engineers are working around the clock with louisiana officials to repair the breaches in the levees so we can stop the flooding in new orleans .
our second priority is to sustain lives by ensuring adequate food , water , shelter and medical supplies for survivors and dedicated citizens -- dislocated citizens .
fema is moving supplies and equipment into the hardest hit areas .
the department of transportation has provided more than 400 trucks to move 1,000 truckloads containing 5.4 million meals ready to eat -- or mres , 13.4 million liters of water , 10,400 tarps , 3.4 million pounds of ice , 144 generators , 20 containers of pre - positioned disaster supplies , 135,000 blankets and 11,000 cots .
and we 're just starting .
there are more than 78,000 people now in shelters .
hhs and cdc are working with local officials to identify operating hospital facilities so we can help them , help the nurses and doctors provide necessary medical care .
they 're distributing medical supplies , and they 're executing a public health plan to control disease and other health - related issues that might arise .
our third priority is executing a comprehensive recovery effort .
we 're focusing on restoring power and lines of communication that have been knocked out during the storm .
we 'll be repairing major roads and bridges and other essential means of transportation as quickly as possible .
there 's a lot of work we 're going to have to do .
in my flyover , i saw a lot of destruction on major infrastructure .
repairing the infrastructure , of course , is going to be a key priority .
the department of energy is approving loans from the strategic petroleum reserve to limit disruptions in crude supplies for refineries .
a lot of crude production has been shut down because of the storm .
i instructed secretary bodman to work with refiners , people who need crude oil , to alleviate any shortage through loans .
the environmental protection agency has granted a nationwide waiver for fuel blends to make more gasoline and diesel fuel available throughout the country .
this will help take some pressure off of gas price .
but our citizens must understand this storm has disrupted the capacity to make gasoline and distribute gasoline .
we 're also developing a comprehensive plan to immediately help displaced citizens .
this will include housing and education and health care and other essential needs .
i 've directed the folks in my cabinet to work with local folks , local officials , to develop a comprehensive strategy to rebuild the communities affected .
and there 's going to be a lot of rebuilding done .
i ca n't tell you how devastating the sights were .
i want to thank the communities in surrounding states that have welcomed their neighbors during an hour of need .
a lot of folks left the affected areas and found refuge with a relative or a friend , and i appreciate you doing that .
i also want to thank the american red cross and the salvation army and the catholic charities , and all other members of the armies of compassion .
i think the folks in the affected areas are going to be overwhelmed when they realize how many americans want to help them .
at this stage in the recovery efforts , it 's important for those who want to contribute , to contribute cash .
you can contribute cash to a charity of your choice , but make sure you designate that gift for hurricane relief .
you can call 1 - 800-helpnow , or you can get on the red cross web page , redcross .
org .
the red cross needs our help .
i urge our fellow citizens to contribute .
the folks on the gulf coast are going to need the help of this country for a long time .
this is going to be a difficult road .
the challenges that we face on the ground are unprecedented .
but there 's no doubt in my mind we 're going to succeed .
right now the days seem awfully dark for those affected -- i understand that .
but i 'm confident that , with time , you can get your life back in order , new communities will flourish , the great city of new orleans will be back on its feet , and america will be a stronger place for it .
the country stands with you .
we 'll do all in our power to help you .
may god bless you .
thank you .

mr. speaker , mr. president pro tempore , members of congress , and fellow americans : 
 in the normal course of events , presidents come to this chamber to report on the state of the union .
tonight , no such report is needed .
it has already been delivered by the american people .
we have seen it in the courage of passengers , who rushed terrorists to save others on the ground -- passengers like an exceptional man named todd beamer .
and would you please help me to welcome his wife , lisa beamer , here tonight .
we have seen the state of our union in the endurance of rescuers , working past exhaustion .
we have seen the unfurling of flags , the lighting of candles , the giving of blood , the saying of prayers -- in english , hebrew , and arabic .
we have seen the decency of a loving and giving people who have made the grief of strangers their own .
my fellow citizens , for the last nine days , the entire world has seen for itself the state of our union -- and it is strong .
tonight we are a country awakened to danger and called to defend freedom .
our grief has turned to anger , and anger to resolution .
whether we bring our enemies to justice , or bring justice to our enemies , justice will be done .
i thank the congress for its leadership at such an important time .
all of america was touched on the evening of the tragedy to see republicans and democrats joined together on the steps of this capitol , singing " god bless america."and you did more than sing ; you acted , by delivering $ 40 billion to rebuild our communities and meet the needs of our military .
speaker hastert , minority leader gephardt , majority leader daschle and senator lott , i thank you for your friendship , for your leadership and for your service to our country .
and on behalf of the american people , i thank the world for its outpouring of support .
america will never forget the sounds of our national anthem playing at buckingham palace , on the streets of paris , and at berlin 's brandenburg gate .
we will not forget south korean children gathering to pray outside our embassy in seoul , or the prayers of sympathy offered at a mosque in cairo .
we will not forget moments of silence and days of mourning in australia and africa and latin america .
mrs. laura bush attends a joint session of congress in which president bush praised the efforts of new york mayor rudolph giuliani   and named pennsylvania governor tom ridge   to a newly created cabinet - level position in which he will oversee the homeland defense initiatives .
white house photo by paul morse .
> 
 nor will we forget the citizens of 80 other nations who died with our own : dozens of pakistanis ; more than 130 israelis ; more than 250 citizens of india ; men and women from el salvador , iran , mexico and japan ; and hundreds of british citizens .
america has no truer friend than great britain .
once again , we are joined together in a great cause -- so honored the british prime minister has crossed an ocean to show his unity of purpose with america .
thank you for coming , friend .
on september the 11th , enemies of freedom committed an act of war against our country .
americans have known wars -- but for the past 136 years , they have been wars on foreign soil , except for one sunday in 1941.americans have known the casualties of war -- but not at the center of a great city on a peaceful morning .
americans have known surprise attacks -- but never before on thousands of civilians .
all of this was brought upon us in a single day -- and night fell on a different world , a world where freedom itself is under attack .
americans have many questions tonight .
americans are asking : who attacked our country?the evidence we have gathered all points to a collection of loosely affiliated terrorist organizations known as al qaeda .
they are the same murderers indicted for bombing american embassies in tanzania and kenya , and responsible for bombing the uss cole .
al qaeda is to terror what the mafia is to crime .
but its goal is not making money ; its goal is remaking the world -- and imposing its radical beliefs on people everywhere .
the terrorists practice a fringe form of islamic extremism that has been rejected by muslim scholars and the vast majority of muslim clerics -- a fringe movement that perverts the peaceful teachings of islam .
the terrorists ' directive commands them to kill christians and jews , to kill all americans , and make no distinction among military and civilians , including women and children .
this group and its leader -- a person named osama bin laden -- are linked to many other organizations in different countries , including the egyptian islamic jihad and the islamic movement of uzbekistan .
there are thousands of these terrorists in more than 60 countries .
they are recruited from their own nations and neighborhoods and brought to camps in places like afghanistan , where they are trained in the tactics of terror .
they are sent back to their homes or sent to hide in countries around the world to plot evil and destruction .
the leadership of al qaeda has great influence in afghanistan and supports the taliban regime in controlling most of that country .
in afghanistan , we see al qaeda 's vision for the world .
afghanistan 's people have been brutalized -- many are starving and many have fled .
women are not allowed to attend school .
you can be jailed for owning a television .
religion can be practiced only as their leaders dictate .
a man can be jailed in afghanistan if his beard is not long enough .
the united states respects the people of afghanistan -- after all , we are currently its largest source of humanitarian aid -- but we condemn the taliban regime .
it is not only repressing its own people , it is threatening people everywhere by sponsoring and sheltering and supplying terrorists .
by aiding and abetting murder , the taliban regime is committing murder .
and tonight , the united states of america makes the following demands on the taliban : deliver to united states authorities all the leaders of al qaeda who hide in your land .
release all foreign nationals , including american citizens , you have unjustly imprisoned .
protect foreign journalists , diplomats and aid workers in your country .
close immediately and permanently every terrorist training camp in afghanistan , and hand over every terrorist , and every person in their support structure , to appropriate authorities .
give the united states full access to terrorist training camps , so we can make sure they are no longer operating .
these demands are not open to negotiation or discussion .
the taliban must act , and act immediately .
they will hand over the terrorists , or they will share in their fate .
i also want to speak tonight directly to muslims throughout the world .
we respect your faith .
it 's practiced freely by many millions of americans , and by millions more in countries that america counts as friends .
its teachings are good and peaceful , and those who commit evil in the name of allah blaspheme the name of allah .
the terrorists are traitors to their own faith , trying , in effect , to hijack islam itself .
the enemy of america is not our many muslim friends ; it is not our many arab friends .
our enemy is a radical network of terrorists , and every government that supports them .
our war on terror begins with al qaeda , but it does not end there .
it will not end until every terrorist group of global reach has been found , stopped and defeated .
americans are asking , why do they hate us?they hate what we see right here in this chamber -- a democratically elected government .
their leaders are self - appointed .
they hate our freedoms -- our freedom of religion , our freedom of speech , our freedom to vote and assemble and disagree with each other .
they want to overthrow existing governments in many muslim countries , such as egypt , saudi arabia , and jordan .
they want to drive israel out of the middle east .
they want to drive christians and jews out of vast regions of asia and africa .
these terrorists kill not merely to end lives , but to disrupt and end a way of life .
with every atrocity , they hope that america grows fearful , retreating from the world and forsaking our friends .
they stand against us , because we stand in their way .
we are not deceived by their pretenses to piety .
we have seen their kind before .
they are the heirs of all the murderous ideologies of the 20th century .
by sacrificing human life to serve their radical visions -- by abandoning every value except the will to power -- they follow in the path of fascism , and nazism , and totalitarianism .
and they will follow that path all the way , to where it ends : in history 's unmarked grave of discarded lies .
americans are asking : how will we fight and win this war ?
we will direct every resource at our command -- every means of diplomacy , every tool of intelligence , every instrument of law enforcement , every financial influence , and every necessary weapon of war -- to the disruption and to the defeat of the global terror network .
this war will not be like the war against iraq a decade ago , with a decisive liberation of territory and a swift conclusion .
it will not look like the air war above kosovo two years ago , where no ground troops were used and not a single american was lost in combat .
our response involves far more than instant retaliation and isolated strikes .
americans should not expect one battle , but a lengthy campaign , unlike any other we have ever seen .
it may include dramatic strikes , visible on tv , and covert operations , secret even in success .
we will starve terrorists of funding , turn them one against another , drive them from place to place , until there is no refuge or no rest .
and we will pursue nations that provide aid or safe haven to terrorism .
every nation , in every region , now has a decision to make .
either you are with us , or you are with the terrorists .
from this day forward , any nation that continues to harbor or support terrorism will be regarded by the united states as a hostile regime .
our nation has been put on notice : we are not immune from attack .
we will take defensive measures against terrorism to protect americans .
today , dozens of federal departments and agencies , as well as state and local governments , have responsibilities affecting homeland security .
these efforts must be coordinated at the highest level .
so tonight i announce the creation of a cabinet - level position reporting directly to me -- the office of homeland security .
and tonight i also announce a distinguished american to lead this effort , to strengthen american security : a military veteran , an effective governor , a true patriot , a trusted friend -- pennsylvania 's tom ridge .
he will lead , oversee and coordinate a comprehensive national strategy to safeguard our country against terrorism , and respond to any attacks that may come .
these measures are essential .
but the only way to defeat terrorism as a threat to our way of life is to stop it , eliminate it , and destroy it where it grows .
many will be involved in this effort , from fbi agents to intelligence operatives to the reservists we have called to active duty .
all deserve our thanks , and all have our prayers .
and tonight , a few miles from the damaged pentagon , i have a message for our military : be ready .
i 've called the armed forces to alert , and there is a reason .
the hour is coming when america will act , and you will make us proud .
this is not , however , just america 's fight .
and what is at stake is not just america 's freedom .
this is the world 's fight .
this is civilization 's fight .
this is the fight of all who believe in progress and pluralism , tolerance and freedom .
we ask every nation to join us .
we will ask , and we will need , the help of police forces , intelligence services , and banking systems around the world .
the united states is grateful that many nations and many international organizations have already responded -- with sympathy and with support .
nations from latin america , to asia , to africa , to europe , to the islamic world .
perhaps the nato charter reflects best the attitude of the world : an attack on one is an attack on all .
the civilized world is rallying to america 's side .
they understand that if this terror goes unpunished , their own cities , their own citizens may be next .
terror , unanswered , can not only bring down buildings , it can threaten the stability of legitimate governments .
and you know what -- we 're not going to allow it .
americans are asking : what is expected of us?i ask you to live your lives , and hug your children .
i know many citizens have fears tonight , and i ask you to be calm and resolute , even in the face of a continuing threat .
i ask you to uphold the values of america , and remember why so many have come here .
we are in a fight for our principles , and our first responsibility is to live by them .
no one should be singled out for unfair treatment or unkind words because of their ethnic background or religious faith .
i ask you to continue to support the victims of this tragedy with your contributions .
those who want to give can go to a central source of information , libertyunites .
org , to find the names of groups providing direct help in new york , pennsylvania , and virginia .
the thousands of fbi agents who are now at work in this investigation may need your cooperation , and i ask you to give it .
i ask for your patience , with the delays and inconveniences that may accompany tighter security ; and for your patience in what will be a long struggle .
i ask your continued participation and confidence in the american economy .
terrorists attacked a symbol of american prosperity .
they did not touch its source .
america is successful because of the hard work , and creativity , and enterprise of our people .
these were the true strengths of our economy before september 11th , and they are our strengths today .
and , finally , please continue praying for the victims of terror and their families , for those in uniform , and for our great country .
prayer has comforted us in sorrow , and will help strengthen us for the journey ahead .
tonight i thank my fellow americans for what you have already done and for what you will do .
and ladies and gentlemen of the congress , i thank you , their representatives , for what you have already done and for what we will do together .
tonight , we face new and sudden national challenges .
we will come together to improve air safety , to dramatically expand the number of air marshals on domestic flights , and take new measures to prevent hijacking .
we will come together to promote stability and keep our airlines flying , with direct assistance during this emergency .
we will come together to give law enforcement the additional tools it needs to track down terror here at home .
we will come together to strengthen our intelligence capabilities to know the plans of terrorists before they act , and find them before they strike .
we will come together to take active steps that strengthen america 's economy , and put our people back to work .
tonight we welcome two leaders who embody the extraordinary spirit of all new yorkers : governor george pataki , and mayor rudolph giuliani .
as a symbol of america 's resolve , my administration will work with congress , and these two leaders , to show the world that we will rebuild new york city .
after all that has just passed -- all the lives taken , and all the possibilities and hopes that died with them -- it is natural to wonder if america 's future is one of fear .
some speak of an age of terror .
i know there are struggles ahead , and dangers to face .
but this country will define our times , not be defined by them .
as long as the united states of america is determined and strong , this will not be an age of terror ; this will be an age of liberty , here and across the world .
great harm has been done to us .
we have suffered great loss .
and in our grief and anger we have found our mission and our moment .
freedom and fear are at war .
the advance of human freedom -- the great achievement of our time , and the great hope of every time -- now depends on us .
our nation -- this generation -- will lift a dark threat of violence from our people and our future .
we will rally the world to this cause by our efforts , by our courage .
we will not tire , we will not falter , and we will not fail .
it is my hope that in the months and years ahead , life will return almost to normal .
we 'll go back to our lives and routines , and that is good .
even grief recedes with time and grace .
but our resolve must not pass .
each of us will remember what happened that day , and to whom it happened .
we 'll remember the moment the news came -- where we were and what we were doing .
some will remember an image of a fire , or a story of rescue .
some will carry memories of a face and a voice gone forever .
and i will carry this : it is the police shield of a man named george howard , who died at the world trade center trying to save others .
it was given to me by his mom , arlene , as a proud memorial to her son .
this is my reminder of lives that ended , and a task that does not end .
i will not forget this wound to our country or those who inflicted it .
i will not yield ; i will not rest ; i will not relent in waging this struggle for freedom and security for the american people .
the course of this conflict is not known , yet its outcome is certain .
freedom and fear , justice and cruelty , have always been at war , and we know that god is not neutral between them .
fellow citizens , we 'll meet violence with patient justice -- assured of the rightness of our cause , and confident of the victories to come .
in all that lies before us , may god grant us wisdom , and may he watch over the united states of america .
thank you .

good evening .
today , our fellow citizens , our way of life , our very freedom came under attack in a series of deliberate and deadly terrorist acts .
the victims were in airplanes , or in their offices ; secretaries , businessmen and women , military and federal workers ; moms and dads , friends and neighbors .
thousands of lives were suddenly ended by evil , despicable acts of terror .
the pictures of airplanes flying into buildings , fires burning , huge structures collapsing , have filled us with disbelief , terrible sadness , and a quiet , unyielding anger .
these acts of mass murder were intended to frighten our nation into chaos and retreat .
but they have failed ; our country is strong .
a great people has been moved to defend a great nation .
terrorist attacks can shake the foundations of our biggest buildings , but they can not touch the foundation of america .
these acts shattered steel , but they can not dent the steel of american resolve .
america was targeted for attack because we 're the brightest beacon for freedom and opportunity in the world .
and no one will keep that light from shining .
today , our nation saw evil , the very worst of human nature .
and we responded with the best of america -- with the daring of our rescue workers , with the caring for strangers and neighbors who came to give blood and help in any way they could .
immediately following the first attack , i implemented our government 's emergency response plans .
our military is powerful , and it 's prepared .
our emergency teams are working in new york city and washington , d. c. to help with local rescue efforts .
our first priority is to get help to those who have been injured , and to take every precaution to protect our citizens at home and around the world from further attacks .
the functions of our government continue without interruption .
federal agencies in washington which had to be evacuated today are reopening for essential personnel tonight , and will be open for business tomorrow .
our financial institutions remain strong , and the american economy will be open for business , as well .
the search is underway for those who are behind these evil acts .
i 've directed the full resources of our intelligence and law enforcement communities to find those responsible and to bring them to justice .
we will make no distinction between the terrorists who committed these acts and those who harbor them .
i appreciate so very much the members of congress who have joined me in strongly condemning these attacks .
and on behalf of the american people , i thank the many world leaders who have called to offer their condolences and assistance .
america and our friends and allies join with all those who want peace and security in the world , and we stand together to win the war against terrorism .
tonight , i ask for your prayers for all those who grieve , for the children whose worlds have been shattered , for all whose sense of safety and security has been threatened .
and i pray they will be comforted by a power greater than any of us , spoken through the ages in psalm 23 : " even though i walk through the valley of the shadow of death , i fear no evil , for you are with me . "
this is a day when all americans from every walk of life unite in our resolve for justice and peace .
america has stood down enemies before , and we will do so this time .
none of us will ever forget this day .
yet , we go forward to defend freedom and all that is good and just in our world .
thank you .
good night , and god bless america .

good evening .
during the next few minutes , i want to update you on the progress we are making in our war against terror , and to propose sweeping changes that will strengthen our homeland against the ongoing threat of terrorist attacks .
nearly nine months have passed since the day that forever changed our country .
debris from what was once the world trade center has been cleared away in a hundred thousand truckloads .
the west side of the pentagon looks almost as it did on september the 10th .
and as children finish school and families prepare for summer vacations , for many , life seems almost normal .
yet we are a different nation today -- sadder and stronger , less innocent and more courageous , more appreciative of life , and for many who serve our country , more willing to risk life in a great cause .
for those who have lost family and friends , the pain will never go away -- and neither will the responsibilities that day thrust upon all of us .
america is leading the civilized world in a titanic struggle against terror .
freedom and fear are at war -- and freedom is winning .
tonight over 60,000 american troops are deployed around the world in the war against terror -- more than 7,000 in afghanistan ; others in the philippines , yemen , and the republic of georgia , to train local forces .
next week afghanistan will begin selecting a representative government , even as american troops , along with our allies , still continuously raid remote al qaeda hiding places .
among those we have captured is a man named abu zabedah , al qaeda 's chief of operations .
from him , and from hundreds of others , we are learning more about how the terrorists plan and operate ; information crucial in anticipating and preventing future attacks .
our coalition is strong .
more than 90 nations have arrested or detained over 2,400 terrorists and their supporters .
more than 180 countries have offered or are providing assistance in the war on terrorism .
and our military is strong and prepared to oppose any emerging threat to the american people .
every day in this war will not bring the drama of liberating a country .
yet every day brings new information , a tip or arrest , another step , or two , or three in a relentless march to bring security to our nation and justice to our enemies .
every day i review a document called the threat assessment .
it summarizes what our intelligence services and key law enforcement agencies have picked up about terrorist activity .
sometimes the information is very general -- vague talk , bragging about future attacks .
sometimes the information is more specific , as in a recent case when an al qaeda detainee said attacks were planned against financial institutions .
when credible intelligence warrants , appropriate law enforcement and local officials are alerted .
these warnings are , unfortunately , a new reality in american life -- and we have recently seen an increase in the volume of general threats .
americans should continue to do what you 're doing -- go about your lives , but pay attention to your surroundings .
add your eyes and ears to the protection of our homeland .
in protecting our country , we depend on the skill of our people -- the troops we send to battle , intelligence operatives who risk their lives for bits of information , law enforcement officers who sift for clues and search for suspects .
we are now learning that before september the 11th , the suspicions and insights of some of our front - line agents did not get enough attention .
my administration supports the important work of the intelligence committees in congress to review the activities of law enforcement and intelligence agencies .
we need to know when warnings were missed or signs unheeded -- not to point the finger of blame , but to make sure we correct any problems , and prevent them from happening again .
based on everything i 've seen , i do not believe anyone could have prevented the horror of september the 11th .
yet we now know that thousands of trained killers are plotting to attack us , and this terrible knowledge requires us to act differently .
if you 're a front - line worker for the fbi , the cia , some other law enforcement or intelligence agency , and you see something that raises suspicions , i want you to report it immediately .
i expect your supervisors to treat it with the seriousness it deserves .
information must be fully shared , so we can follow every lead to find the one that may prevent tragedy .
i applaud the leaders and employees at the fbi and cia for beginning essential reforms .
they must continue to think and act differently to defeat the enemy .
the first and best way to secure america 's homeland is to attack the enemy where he hides and plans , and we 're doing just that .
we 're also taking significant steps to strengthen our homeland protections -- securing cockpits , tightening our borders , stockpiling vaccines , increasing security at water treatment and nuclear power plants .
after september the 11th , we needed to move quickly , and so i appointed tom ridge as my homeland security advisor .
as governor ridge has worked with all levels of government to prepare a national strategy , and as we have learned more about the plans and capabilities of the terrorist network , we have concluded that our government must be reorganized to deal more effectively with the new threats of the 21st century .
so tonight , i ask the congress to join me in creating a single , permanent department with an overriding and urgent mission : securing the homeland of america , and protecting the american people .
right now , as many as a hundred different government agencies have some responsibilities for homeland security , and no one has final accountability .
for example , the coast guard has several missions , from search and rescue to maritime treaty enforcement .
it reports to the transportation department , whose primary responsibilities are roads , rails , bridges and the airways .
the customs service , among other duties , collects tariffs and prevents smuggling -- and it is part of the treasury department , whose primary responsibility is fiscal policy , not security .
tonight , i propose a permanent cabinet - level department of homeland security to unite essential agencies that must work more closely together : among them , the coast guard , the border patrol , the customs service , immigration officials , the transportation security administration , and the federal emergency management agency .
employees of this new agency will come to work every morning knowing their most important job is to protect their fellow citizens .
the department of homeland security will be charged with -- 
 the department of homeland security will be charged with four primary tasks .
this new agency will control our borders and prevent terrorists and explosives from entering our country .
it will work with state and local authorities to respond quickly and effectively to emergencies .
it will bring together our best scientists to develop technologies that detect biological , chemical , and nuclear weapons , and to discover the drugs and treatments to best protect our citizens .
and this new department will review intelligence and law enforcement information from all agencies of government , and produce a single daily picture of threats against our homeland .
analysts will be responsible for imagining the worst , and planning to counter it .
the reason to create this department is not to create the size of government , but to increase its focus and effectiveness .
the staff of this new department will be largely drawn from the agencies we are combining .
by ending duplication and overlap , we will spend less on overhead , and more on protecting america .
this reorganization will give the good people of our government their best opportunity to succeed by organizing our resources in a way that is thorough and unified .
what i am proposing tonight is the most extensive reorganization of the federal government since the 1940s .
during his presidency , harry truman recognized that our nation 's fragmented defenses had to be reorganized to win the cold war .
he proposed uniting our military forces under a single department of defense , and creating the national security council to bring together defense , intelligence , and diplomacy .
truman 's reforms are still helping us to fight terror abroad , and now we need similar dramatic reforms to secure our people at home .
only the united states congress can create a new department of government .
so tonight , i ask for your help in encouraging your representatives to support my plan .
we face an urgent need , and we must move quickly , this year , before the end of the congressional session .
all in our government have learned a great deal since september the 11th , and we must act on every lesson .
we are stronger and better prepared tonight than we were on that terrible morning -- and with your help , and the support of congress , we will be stronger still .
history has called our nation into action .
history has placed a great challenge before us : will america -- with our unique position and power -- blink in the face of terror , or will we lead to a freer , more civilized world ?
there 's only one answer : this great country will lead the world to safety , security , peace and freedom .
thank you for listening .
good night , and may god bless america .

fellow citizens : 
 for eight years , it has been my honor to serve as your president .
the first decade of this new century has been a period of consequence -- a time set apart .
tonight , with a thankful heart , i have asked for a final opportunity to share some thoughts on the journey that we have traveled together , and the future of our nation .
five days from now , the world will witness the vitality of american democracy .
in a tradition dating back to our founding , the presidency will pass to a successor chosen by you , the american people .
standing on the steps of the capitol will be a man whose history reflects the enduring promise of our land .
this is a moment of hope and pride for our whole nation .
and i join all americans in offering best wishes to president - elect obama , his wife michelle , and their two beautiful girls .
tonight i am filled with gratitude -- to vice president cheney and members of my administration ; to laura , who brought joy to this house and love to my life ; to our wonderful daughters , barbara and jenna ; to my parents , whose examples have provided strength for a lifetime .
and above all , i thank the american people for the trust you have given me .
i thank you for the prayers that have lifted my spirits .
and i thank you for the countless acts of courage , generosity , and grace that i have witnessed these past eight years .
this evening , my thoughts return to the first night i addressed you from this house -- september the 11th , 2001 .
that morning , terrorists took nearly 3,000 lives in the worst attack on america since pearl harbor .
i remember standing in the rubble of the world trade center three days later , surrounded by rescuers who had been working around the clock .
i remember talking to brave souls who charged through smoke - filled corridors at the pentagon , and to husbands and wives whose loved ones became heroes aboard flight 93 .
i remember arlene howard , who gave me her fallen son 's police shield as a reminder of all that was lost .
and i still carry his badge .
as the years passed , most americans were able to return to life much as it had been before 9/11 .
but i never did .
every morning , i received a briefing on the threats to our nation .
i vowed to do everything in my power to keep us safe .
over the past seven years , a new department of homeland security has been created .
the military , the intelligence community , and the fbi have been transformed .
our nation is equipped with new tools to monitor the terrorists ' movements , freeze their finances , and break up their plots .
and with strong allies at our side , we have taken the fight to the terrorists and those who support them .
afghanistan has gone from a nation where the taliban harbored al - qaeda and stoned women in the streets to a young democracy that is fighting terror and encouraging girls to go to school .
iraq has gone from a brutal dictatorship and a sworn enemy of america to an arab democracy at the heart of the middle east and a friend of the united states .
there is legitimate debate about many of these decisions .
but there can be little debate about the results .
america has gone more than seven years without another terrorist attack on our soil .
this is a tribute to those who toil night and day to keep us safe -- law enforcement officers , intelligence analysts , homeland security and diplomatic personnel , and the men and women of the united states armed forces .
our nation is blessed to have citizens who volunteer to defend us in this time of danger .
i have cherished meeting these selfless patriots and their families .
and america owes you a debt of gratitude .
and to all our men and women in uniform listening tonight : there has been no higher honor than serving as your commander - in - chief .
the battles waged by our troops are part of a broader struggle between two dramatically different systems .
under one , a small band of fanatics demands total obedience to an oppressive ideology , condemns women to subservience , and marks unbelievers for murder .
the other system is based on the conviction that freedom is the universal gift of almighty god , and that liberty and justice light the path to peace .
this is the belief that gave birth to our nation .
and in the long run , advancing this belief is the only practical way to protect our citizens .
when people live in freedom , they do not willingly choose leaders who pursue campaigns of terror .
when people have hope in the future , they will not cede their lives to violence and extremism .
so around the world , america is promoting human liberty , human rights , and human dignity .
we 're standing with dissidents and young democracies , providing aids medicine to dying patients -- to bring dying patients back to life , and sparing mothers and babies from malaria .
and this great republic born alone in liberty is leading the world toward a new age when freedom belongs to all nations .
for eight years , we 've also strived to expand opportunity and hope here at home .
across our country , students are rising to meet higher standards in public schools .
a new medicare prescription drug benefit is bringing peace of mind to seniors and the disabled .
every taxpayer pays lower income taxes .
the addicted and suffering are finding new hope through faith - based programs .
vulnerable human life is better protected .
funding for our veterans has nearly doubled .
america 's air and water and lands are measurably cleaner .
and the federal bench includes wise new members like justice sam alito and chief justice john roberts .
when challenges to our prosperity emerged , we rose to meet them .
facing the prospect of a financial collapse , we took decisive measures to safeguard our economy .
these are very tough times for hardworking families , but the toll would be far worse if we had not acted .
all americans are in this together .
and together , with determination and hard work , we will restore our economy to the path of growth .
we will show the world once again the resilience of america 's free enterprise system .
like all who have held this office before me , i have experienced setbacks .
there are things i would do differently if given the chance .
yet i 've always acted with the best interests of our country in mind .
i have followed my conscience and done what i thought was right .
you may not agree with some of the tough decisions i have made .
but i hope you can agree that i was willing to make the tough decisions .
the decades ahead will bring more hard choices for our country , and there are some guiding principles that should shape our course .
while our nation is safer than it was seven years ago , the gravest threat to our people remains another terrorist attack .
our enemies are patient , and determined to strike again .
america did nothing to seek or deserve this conflict .
but we have been given solemn responsibilities , and we must meet them .
we must resist complacency .
we must keep our resolve .
and we must never let down our guard .
at the same time , we must continue to engage the world with confidence and clear purpose .
in the face of threats from abroad , it can be tempting to seek comfort by turning inward .
but we must reject isolationism and its companion , protectionism .
retreating behind our borders would only invite danger .
in the 21st century , security and prosperity at home depend on the expansion of liberty abroad .
if america does not lead the cause of freedom , that cause will not be led .
as we address these challenges -- and others we can not foresee tonight -- america must maintain our moral clarity .
i 've often spoken to you about good and evil , and this has made some uncomfortable .
but good and evil are present in this world , and between the two of them there can be no compromise .
murdering the innocent to advance an ideology is wrong every time , everywhere .
freeing people from oppression and despair is eternally right .
this nation must continue to speak out for justice and truth .
we must always be willing to act in their defense -- and to advance the cause of peace .
president thomas jefferson once wrote , " i like the dreams of the future better than the history of the past . "
as i leave the house he occupied two centuries ago , i share that optimism .
america is a young country , full of vitality , constantly growing and renewing itself .
and even in the toughest times , we lift our eyes to the broad horizon ahead .
i have confidence in the promise of america because i know the character of our people .
this is a nation that inspires immigrants to risk everything for the dream of freedom .
this is a nation where citizens show calm in times of danger , and compassion in the face of suffering .
we see examples of america 's character all around us .
and laura and i have invited some of them to join us in the white house this evening .
we see america 's character in dr. tony recasner , a principal who opened a new charter school from the ruins of hurricane katrina .
we see it in julio medina , a former inmate who leads a faith - based program to help prisoners returning to society .
we 've seen it in staff sergeant aubrey mcdade , who charged into an ambush in iraq and rescued three of his fellow marines .
we see america 's character in bill krissoff -- a surgeon from california .
his son , nathan -- a marine -- gave his life in iraq .
when i met dr. krissoff and his family , he delivered some surprising news : he told me he wanted to join the navy medical corps in honor of his son .
this good man was 60 years old -- 18 years above the age limit .
but his petition for a waiver was granted , and for the past year he has trained in battlefield medicine .
lieutenant commander krissoff could not be here tonight , because he will soon deploy to iraq , where he will help save america 's wounded warriors -- and uphold the legacy of his fallen son .
in citizens like these , we see the best of our country -- resilient and hopeful , caring and strong .
these virtues give me an unshakable faith in america .
we have faced danger and trial , and there 's more ahead .
but with the courage of our people and confidence in our ideals , this great nation will never tire , never falter , and never fail .
it has been the privilege of a lifetime to serve as your president .
there have been good days and tough days .
but every day i have been inspired by the greatness of our country , and uplifted by the goodness of our people .
i have been blessed to represent this nation we love .
and i will always be honored to carry a title that means more to me than any other -- citizen of the united states of america .
and so , my fellow americans , for the final time : good night .
may god bless this house and our next president .
and may god bless you and our wonderful country .
thank you .

thank you .
sit down .
behave yourself .
you 're at the white house .
laura , thank you very much for being here on this historic moment .
mr. vice president , secretary o'neill , director daniels , secretary evans and chao are here , as well .
secretary abraham , administrator christine todd whitman , members of the united states senate , members of the house of representatives , fellow americans , welcome .
some months ago , in my speech to the joint session of congress , i had the honor of introducing steven ramos to the nation .
steven is the network administrator for a school district .
his wife , josefina , teaches at a charter school .
they have a little girl named lianna , and they 're trying to save for lianna 's college education .
high taxes made saving difficult .
last year they paid nearly $ 8,000 in federal income taxes .
well , today we 're beginning to make life for the ramos ' a lot easier .
today we start to return some of the ramos ' money and not only their money but the money of everybody who paid taxes in the united states of america .
across the board tax relief does not happen often in washington , dc .
in fact , since world war ii , it has happened only twice : president kennedy 's tax cut in the sixties and president reagan 's tax cuts in the 1980s .
and now it 's happening for the third time , and it 's about time .
a year ago tax relief was said to be a political impossibility .
six months ago it was supposed to be a political liability .
today it becomes reality .
it becomes reality because of the bipartisan leadership of the members of the united states congress , members like bill thomas of california , ralph hall of texas , charles grassley of iowa , max baucus of montana , zell miller of georgia , john breaux of louisiana , trent lott of mississippi and the entire leadership team in the senate , and denny hastert of illinois and the leadership team in the house of representatives -- some democrats , many republicans -- who worked tirelessly and effectively to produce this important result .
i also want to pay tribute to the members of my administration who worked with congress to bring about this day : vice president cheney , secretary o'neill , director daniels , and the team inside the white house of andy card and larry lindsey , nick calio , and their staffs .
with us today are 15 of the many families i met as i toured our country making the case for tax relief -- hard - working americans .
i was able to talk about their stories and their struggles and their hopes , which made the case for tax relief much stronger than my words could possible convey .
and i want to thank you all for coming .
and here at the white house today are representatives of millions of americans , including labor union members , small - busi - ness owners , and family farmers .
your persistence and determination helped bring us to this day .
the american people should be proud of your efforts on their behalf , and i personally thank you all for coming .
tax relief is a great achievement for the american people .
tax relief is the first achievement produced by the new tone in washington , and it was produced in record time .
tax relief is an achievement for families struggling to enter the middle class .
for hard - working lower income families , we have cut the bottom rate of federal income tax from 15 percent to 10 percent .
we doubled the per - child tax credit to $ 1,000 and made it refundable .
tax relief is compassionate , and it is now on the way .
tax relief is an achievement for middle class families squeezed by high energy prices and credit card debt .
most families can look forward to a $ 600 tax rebate before they have to pay the september back - to - school bills .
and in the years ahead , taxpayers can look forward to steadily declining income tax rates .
tax relief is an achievement for families that want the government tax policy to be fair and not penalize them for making good choices , good choices such as marriage and raising a family .
so we cut the marriage penalty .
tax relief makes the code more fair for small businesses and farmers and individuals by eliminating the death tax .
over the long haul , tax relief will encourage work and innovation .
it will allow american workers to save more on their pension plan or individual retirement accounts .
tax relief expands individual freedom .
the money we return , or do n't take in the first place , can be saved for a child 's education , spent on family needs , invested in a home or in a business or a mutual fund or used to reduce personal debt .
the message we send today : it 's up to the american people ; it 's the american people 's choice .
we recognize , loud and clear , the surplus is not the government 's money .
the surplus is the people 's money , and we ought to trust them with their own money .
this tax relief plan is principled .
we cut taxes for every income - tax payer .
we target nobody in ; we target nobody out .
and tax relief is now on the way .
today is a great day for america .
it is the first major achievement of a new era , an era of steady cooperation .
and more achievements are ahead .
i thank the members of congress in both parties who made today possible .
together , we will lead our country to new progress and new possibilities .
it is now my honor to sign the first broad tax relief in a generation .

my fellow citizens , events in iraq have now reached the final days of decision .
for more than a decade , the united states and other nations have pursued patient and honorable efforts to disarm the iraqi regime without war .
that regime pledged to reveal and destroy all its weapons of mass destruction as a condition for ending the persian gulf war in 1991 .
since then , the world has engaged in 12 years of diplomacy .
we have passed more than a dozen resolutions in the united nations security council .
we have sent hundreds of weapons inspectors to oversee the disarmament of iraq .
our good faith has not been returned .
the iraqi regime has used diplomacy as a ploy to gain time and advantage .
it has uniformly defied security council resolutions demanding full disarmament .
over the years , u. n. weapon inspectors have been threatened by iraqi officials , electronically bugged , and systematically deceived .
peaceful efforts to disarm the iraqi regime have failed again and again -- because we are not dealing with peaceful men .
intelligence gathered by this and other governments leaves no doubt that the iraq regime continues to possess and conceal some of the most lethal weapons ever devised .
this regime has already used weapons of mass destruction against iraq 's neighbors and against iraq 's people .
the regime has a history of reckless aggression in the middle east .
it has a deep hatred of america and our friends .
and it has aided , trained and harbored terrorists , including operatives of al qaeda .
the danger is clear : using chemical , biological or , one day , nuclear weapons , obtained with the help of iraq , the terrorists could fulfill their stated ambitions and kill thousands or hundreds of thousands of innocent people in our country , or any other .
the united states and other nations did nothing to deserve or invite this threat .
but we will do everything to defeat it .
instead of drifting along toward tragedy , we will set a course toward safety .
before the day of horror can come , before it is too late to act , this danger will be removed .
the united states of america has the sovereign authority to use force in assuring its own national security .
that duty falls to me , as commander - in - chief , by the oath i have sworn , by the oath i will keep .
recognizing the threat to our country , the united states congress voted overwhelmingly last year to support the use of force against iraq .
america tried to work with the united nations to address this threat because we wanted to resolve the issue peacefully .
we believe in the mission of the united nations .
one reason the u. n. was founded after the second world war was to confront aggressive dictators , actively and early , before they can attack the innocent and destroy the peace .
in the case of iraq , the security council did act , in the early 1990s .
under resolutions 678 and 687 -- both still in effect -- the united states and our allies are authorized to use force in ridding iraq of weapons of mass destruction .
this is not a question of authority , it is a question of will .
last september , i went to the u. n. general assembly and urged the nations of the world to unite and bring an end to this danger .
on november 8th , the security council unanimously passed resolution 1441 , finding iraq in material breach of its obligations , and vowing serious consequences if iraq did not fully and immediately disarm .
today , no nation can possibly claim that iraq has disarmed .
and it will not disarm so long as saddam hussein holds power .
for the last four - and - a - half months , the united states and our allies have worked within the security council to enforce that council 's long - standing demands .
yet , some permanent members of the security council have publicly announced they will veto any resolution that compels the disarmament of iraq .
these governments share our assessment of the danger , but not our resolve to meet it .
many nations , however , do have the resolve and fortitude to act against this threat to peace , and a broad coalition is now gathering to enforce the just demands of the world .
the united nations security council has not lived up to its responsibilities , so we will rise to ours .
in recent days , some governments in the middle east have been doing their part .
they have delivered public and private messages urging the dictator to leave iraq , so that disarmament can proceed peacefully .
he has thus far refused .
all the decades of deceit and cruelty have now reached an end .
saddam hussein and his sons must leave iraq within 48 hours .
their refusal to do so will result in military conflict , commenced at a time of our choosing .
for their own safety , all foreign nationals -- including journalists and inspectors -- should leave iraq immediately .
many iraqis can hear me tonight in a translated radio broadcast , and i have a message for them .
if we must begin a military campaign , it will be directed against the lawless men who rule your country and not against you .
as our coalition takes away their power , we will deliver the food and medicine you need .
we will tear down the apparatus of terror and we will help you to build a new iraq that is prosperous and free .
in a free iraq , there will be no more wars of aggression against your neighbors , no more poison factories , no more executions of dissidents , no more torture chambers and rape rooms .
the tyrant will soon be gone .
the day of your liberation is near .
it is too late for saddam hussein to remain in power .
it is not too late for the iraqi military to act with honor and protect your country by permitting the peaceful entry of coalition forces to eliminate weapons of mass destruction .
our forces will give iraqi military units clear instructions on actions they can take to avoid being attacked and destroyed .
i urge every member of the iraqi military and intelligence services , if war comes , do not fight for a dying regime that is not worth your own life .
and all iraqi military and civilian personnel should listen carefully to this warning .
in any conflict , your fate will depend on your action .
do not destroy oil wells , a source of wealth that belongs to the iraqi people .
do not obey any command to use weapons of mass destruction against anyone , including the iraqi people .
war crimes will be prosecuted .
war criminals will be punished .
and it will be no defense to say , " i was just following orders . "
should saddam hussein choose confrontation , the american people can know that every measure has been taken to avoid war , and every measure will be taken to win it .
americans understand the costs of conflict because we have paid them in the past .
war has no certainty , except the certainty of sacrifice .
yet , the only way to reduce the harm and duration of war is to apply the full force and might of our military , and we are prepared to do so .
if saddam hussein attempts to cling to power , he will remain a deadly foe until the end .
in desperation , he and terrorists groups might try to conduct terrorist operations against the american people and our friends .
these attacks are not inevitable .
they are , however , possible .
and this very fact underscores the reason we can not live under the threat of blackmail .
the terrorist threat to america and the world will be diminished the moment that saddam hussein is disarmed .
our government is on heightened watch against these dangers .
just as we are preparing to ensure victory in iraq , we are taking further actions to protect our homeland .
in recent days , american authorities have expelled from the country certain individuals with ties to iraqi intelligence services .
among other measures , i have directed additional security of our airports , and increased coast guard patrols of major seaports .
the department of homeland security is working closely with the nation 's governors to increase armed security at critical facilities across america .
should enemies strike our country , they would be attempting to shift our attention with panic and weaken our morale with fear .
in this , they would fail .
no act of theirs can alter the course or shake the resolve of this country .
we are a peaceful people -- yet we 're not a fragile people , and we will not be intimidated by thugs and killers .
if our enemies dare to strike us , they and all who have aided them , will face fearful consequences .
we are now acting because the risks of inaction would be far greater .
in one year , or five years , the power of iraq to inflict harm on all free nations would be multiplied many times over .
with these capabilities , saddam hussein and his terrorist allies could choose the moment of deadly conflict when they are strongest .
we choose to meet that threat now , where it arises , before it can appear suddenly in our skies and cities .
the cause of peace requires all free nations to recognize new and undeniable realities .
in the 20th century , some chose to appease murderous dictators , whose threats were allowed to grow into genocide and global war .
in this century , when evil men plot chemical , biological and nuclear terror , a policy of appeasement could bring destruction of a kind never before seen on this earth .
terrorists and terror states do not reveal these threats with fair notice , in formal declarations -- and responding to such enemies only after they have struck first is not self - defense , it is suicide .
the security of the world requires disarming saddam hussein now .
as we enforce the just demands of the world , we will also honor the deepest commitments of our country .
unlike saddam hussein , we believe the iraqi people are deserving and capable of human liberty .
and when the dictator has departed , they can set an example to all the middle east of a vital and peaceful and self - governing nation .
the united states , with other countries , will work to advance liberty and peace in that region .
our goal will not be achieved overnight , but it can come over time .
the power and appeal of human liberty is felt in every life and every land .
and the greatest power of freedom is to overcome hatred and violence , and turn the creative gifts of men and women to the pursuits of peace .
that is the future we choose .
free nations have a duty to defend our people by uniting against the violent .
and tonight , as we have done before , america and our allies accept that responsibility .
good night , and may god continue to bless america .

good morning .
for years , america 's automakers have faced serious challenges -- burdensome costs , a shrinking share of the market , and declining profits .
in recent months , the global financial crisis has made these challenges even more severe .
now some u. s. auto executives say that their companies are nearing collapse -- and that the only way they can buy time to restructure is with help from the federal government .
this is a difficult situation that involves fundamental questions about the proper role of government .
on the one hand , government has a responsibility not to undermine the private enterprise system .
on the other hand , government has a responsibility to safeguard the broader health and stability of our economy .
addressing the challenges in the auto industry requires us to balance these two responsibilities .
if we were to allow the free market to take its course now , it would almost certainly lead to disorderly bankruptcy and liquidation for the automakers .
under ordinary economic circumstances , i would say this is the price that failed companies must pay -- and i would not favor intervening to prevent the automakers from going out of business .
but these are not ordinary circumstances .
in the midst of a financial crisis and a recession , allowing the u. s. auto industry to collapse is not a responsible course of action .
the question is how we can best give it a chance to succeed .
some argue the wisest path is to allow the auto companies to reorganize through chapter 11 provisions of our bankruptcy laws -- and provide federal loans to keep them operating while they try to restructure under the supervision of a bankruptcy court .
but given the current state of the auto industry and the economy , chapter 11 is unlikely to work for american automakers at this time .
american consumers understand why : if you hear that a car company is suddenly going into bankruptcy , you worry that parts and servicing will not be available , and you question the value of your warranty .
and with consumers hesitant to buy new cars from struggling automakers , it would be more difficult for auto companies to recover .
additionally , the financial crisis brought the auto companies to the brink of bankruptcy much faster than they could have anticipated -- and they have not made the legal and financial preparations necessary to carry out an orderly bankruptcy proceeding that could lead to a successful restructuring .
the convergence of these factors means there 's too great a risk that bankruptcy now would lead to a disorderly liquidation of american auto companies .
my economic advisors believe that such a collapse would deal an unacceptably painful blow to hardworking americans far beyond the auto industry .
it would worsen a weak job market and exacerbate the financial crisis .
it could send our suffering economy into a deeper and longer recession .
and it would leave the next president to confront the demise of a major american industry in his first days of office .
a more responsible option is to give the auto companies an incentive to restructure outside of bankruptcy -- and a brief window in which to do it .
and that is why my administration worked with congress on a bill to provide automakers with loans to stave off bankruptcy while they develop plans for viability .
this legislation earned bipartisan support from majorities in both houses of congress .
unfortunately , despite extensive debate and agreement that we should prevent disorderly bankruptcies in the american auto industry , congress was unable to get a bill to my desk before adjourning this year .
this means the only way to avoid a collapse of the u. s. auto industry is for the executive branch to step in .
the american people want the auto companies to succeed , and so do i. so today , i 'm announcing that the federal government will grant loans to auto companies under conditions similar to those congress considered last week .
these loans will provide help in two ways .
first , they will give automakers three months to put in place plans to restructure into viable companies -- which we believe they are capable of doing .
second , if restructuring can not be accomplished outside of bankruptcy , the loans will provide time for companies to make the legal and financial preparations necessary for an orderly chapter 11 process that offers a better prospect of long - term success -- and gives consumers confidence that they can continue to buy american cars .
because congress failed to make funds available for these loans , the plan i 'm announcing today will be drawn from the financial rescue package congress approved earlier this fall .
the terms of the loans will require auto companies to demonstrate how they would become viable .
they must pay back all their loans to the government , and show that their firms can earn a profit and achieve a positive net worth .
this restructuring will require meaningful concessions from all involved in the auto industry -- management , labor unions , creditors , bondholders , dealers , and suppliers .
in particular , automakers must meet conditions that experts agree are necessary for long - term viability -- including putting their retirement plans on a sustainable footing , persuading bondholders to convert their debt into capital the companies need to address immediate financial shortfalls , and making their compensation competitive with foreign automakers who have major operations in the united states .
if a company fails to come up with a viable plan by march 31st , it will be required to repay its federal loans .
the automakers and unions must understand what is at stake , and make hard decisions necessary to reform , these conditions send a clear message to everyone involved in the future of american automakers : the time to make the hard decisions to become viable is now -- or the only option will be bankruptcy .
the actions i 'm announcing today represent a step that we wish were not necessary .
but given the situation , it is the most effective and responsible way to address this challenge facing our nation .
by giving the auto companies a chance to restructure , we will shield the american people from a harsh economic blow at a vulnerable time .
and we will give american workers an opportunity to show the world once again they can meet challenges with ingenuity and determination , and bounce back from tough times , and emerge stronger than before .
thank you .

mr. speaker , vice president cheney , members of congress , fellow citizens : 
 as a new congress gathers , all of us in the elected branches of government share a great privilege : we have been placed in office by the votes of the people we serve .
and tonight that is a privilege we share with newly elected leaders of afghanistan , the palestinian territories , ukraine , and a free and sovereign iraq .
two weeks ago , i stood on the steps of this capitol and renewed the commitment of our nation to the guiding ideal of liberty for all .
this evening i will set forth policies to advance that ideal at home and around the world .
tonight , with a healthy , growing economy , with more americans going back to work , with our nation an active force for good in the world -- the state of our union is confident and strong .
our generation has been blessed -- by the expansion of opportunity , by advances in medicine , and by the security purchased by our parents ' sacrifice .
now , as we see a little gray in the mirror -- or a lot of gray -- and we watch our children moving into adulthood , we ask the question : what will be the state of their union ?
members of congress , the choices we make together will answer that question .
over the next several months , on issue after issue , let us do what americans have always done , and build a better world for our children and grandchildren .
first , we must be good stewards of this economy , and renew the great institutions on which millions of our fellow citizens rely .
america 's economy is the fastest growing of any major industrialized nation .
in the past four years , we have provided tax relief to every person who pays income taxes , overcome a recession , opened up new markets abroad , prosecuted corporate criminals , raised homeownership to the highest level in history , and in the last year alone , the united states has added 2.3 million new jobs .
when action was needed , the congress delivered -- and the nation is grateful .
now we must add to these achievements .
by making our economy more flexible , more innovative , and more competitive , we will keep america the economic leader of the world .
america 's prosperity requires restraining the spending appetite of the federal government .
i welcome the bipartisan enthusiasm for spending discipline .
so next week i will send you a budget that holds the growth of discretionary spending below inflation , makes tax relief permanent , and stays on track to cut the deficit in half by 2009 .
my budget substantially reduces or eliminates more than 150 government programs that are not getting results , or duplicate current efforts , or do not fulfill essential priorities .
the principle here is clear : a taxpayer dollar must be spent wisely , or not at all .
to make our economy stronger and more dynamic , we must prepare a rising generation to fill the jobs of the 21st century .
under the no child left behind act , standards are higher , test scores are on the rise , and we are closing the achievement gap for minority students .
now we must demand better results from our high schools , so every high school diploma is a ticket to success .
we will help an additional 200,000 workers to get training for a better career , by reforming our job training system and strengthening america 's community colleges .
and we will make it easier for americans to afford a college education , by increasing the size of pell grants .
to make our economy stronger and more competitive , america must reward , not punish , the efforts and dreams of entrepreneurs .
small business is the path of advancement , especially for women and minorities , so we must free small businesses from needless regulation and protect honest job creators from junk lawsuits .
justice is distorted , and our economy is held back , by irresponsible class actions and frivolous asbestos claims -- and i urge congress to pass legal reforms this year .
to make our economy stronger and more productive , we must make health care more affordable , and give families greater access to good coverage , and more control over their health decisions .
i ask congress to move forward on a comprehensive health care agenda -- with tax credits to help low - income workers buy insurance , a community health center in every poor county , improved information technology to prevent medical errors and needless costs , association health plans for small businesses and their employees , expanded health savings accounts , and medical liability reform that will reduce health care costs , and make sure patients have the doctors and care they need .
to keep our economy growing , we also need reliable supplies of affordable , environmentally responsible energy .
nearly four years ago , i submitted a comprehensive energy strategy that encourages conservation , alternative sources , a modernized electricity grid , and more production here at home , including safe , clean nuclear energy .
my clear skies legislation will cut power plant pollution and improve the health of our citizens .
and my budget provides strong funding for leading - edge technology -- from hydrogen - fueled cars , to clean coal , to renewable sources such as ethanol .
four years of debate is enough -- i urge congress to pass legislation that makes america more secure and less dependent on foreign energy .
all these proposals are essential to expand this economy and add new jobs -- but they are just the beginning of our duty .
to build the prosperity of future generations , we must update institutions that were created to meet the needs of an earlier time .
year after year , americans are burdened by an archaic , incoherent federal tax code .
i have appointed a bipartisan panel to examine the tax code from top to bottom .
and when their recommendations are delivered , you and i will work together to give this nation a tax code that is pro - growth , easy to understand , and fair to all .
america 's immigration system is also outdated -- unsuited to the needs of our economy and to the values of our country .
we should not be content with laws that punish hardworking people who want only to provide for their families , and deny businesses willing workers , and invite chaos at our border .
it is time for an immigration policy that permits temporary guest workers to fill jobs americans will not take , that rejects amnesty , that tells us who is entering and leaving our country , and that closes the border to drug dealers and terrorists .
one of america 's most important institutions -- a symbol of the trust between generations -- is also in need of wise and effective reform .
social security was a great moral success of the 20th century , and we must honor its great purposes in this new century .
the system , however , on its current path , is headed toward bankruptcy .
and so we must join together to strengthen and save social security .
today , more than 45 million americans receive social security benefits , and millions more are nearing retirement -- and for them the system is strong and fiscally sound .
i have a message for every american who is 55 or older : do not let anyone mislead you .
for you , the social security system will not change in any way .
for younger workers , the social security system has serious problems that will grow worse with time .
social security was created decades ago , for a very different era .
in those days people did n't live as long , benefits were much lower than they are today , and a half century ago , about 16 workers paid into the system for each person drawing benefits .
our society has changed in ways the founders of social security could not have foreseen .
in today 's world , people are living longer and therefore drawing benefits longer -- and those benefits are scheduled to rise dramatically over the next few decades .
and instead of 16 workers paying in for every beneficiary , right now it 's only about three workers -- and over the next few decades , that number will fall to just two workers per beneficiary .
with each passing year , fewer workers are paying ever - higher benefits to an ever - larger number of retirees .
so here is the result : thirteen years from now , in 2018 , social security will be paying out more than it takes in .
and every year afterward will bring a new shortfall , bigger than the year before .
for example , in the year 2027 , the government will somehow have to come up with an extra $ 200 billion to keep the system afloat -- and by 2033 , the annual shortfall would be more than $ 300 billion .
by the year 2042 , the entire system would be exhausted and bankrupt .
if steps are not taken to avert that outcome , the only solutions would be drastically higher taxes , massive new borrowing , or sudden and severe cuts in social security benefits or other government programs .
i recognize that 2018 and 2042 may seem like a long way off .
but those dates are not so distant , as any parent will tell you .
if you have a 5-year - old , you 're already concerned about how you 'll pay for college tuition 13 years down the road .
if you 've got children in their 20s , as some of us do , the idea of social security collapsing before they retire does not seem like a small matter .
and it should not be a small matter to the united states congress .
you and i share a responsibility .
we must pass reforms that solve the financial problems of social security once and for all .
fixing social security permanently will require an open , candid review of the options .
some have suggested limiting benefits for wealthy retirees .
former congressman tim penny has raised the possibility of indexing benefits to prices rather than wages .
during the 1990s , my predecessor , president clinton , spoke of increasing the retirement age .
former senator john breaux suggested discouraging early collection of social security benefits .
the late senator daniel patrick moynihan recommended changing the way benefits are calculated .
all these ideas are on the table .
i know that none of these reforms would be easy .
but we have to move ahead with courage and honesty , because our children 's retirement security is more important than partisan politics .
i will work with members of congress to find the most effective combination of reforms .
i will listen to anyone who has a good idea to offer .
we must , however , be guided by some basic principles .
we must make social security permanently sound , not leave that task for another day .
we must not jeopardize our economic strength by increasing payroll taxes .
we must ensure that lower income americans get the help they need to have dignity and peace of mind in their retirement .
we must guarantee that there is no change for those now retired or nearing retirement .
and we must take care that any changes in the system are gradual , so younger workers have years to prepare and plan for their future .
as we fix social security , we also have the responsibility to make the system a better deal for younger workers .
and the best way to reach that goal is through voluntary personal retirement accounts .
here is how the idea works .
right now , a set portion of the money you earn is taken out of your paycheck to pay for the social security benefits of today 's retirees .
if you are a younger worker , i believe you should be able to set aside part of that money in your own retirement account , so you can build a nest egg for your own future .
here is why personal accounts are a better deal .
your money will grow , over time , at a greater rate than anything the current system can deliver -- and your account will provide money for retirement over and above the check you will receive from social security .
in addition , you 'll be able to pass along the money that accumulates in your personal account , if you wish , to your children or grandchildren .
and best of all , the money in the account is yours , and the government can never take it away .
the goal here is greater security in retirement , so we will set careful guidelines for personal accounts .
we will make sure the money can only go into a conservative mix of bonds and stock funds .
we will make sure that your earnings are not eaten up by hidden wall street fees .
we will make sure there are good options to protect your investments from sudden market swings on the eve of your retirement .
we will make sure a personal account ca n't be emptied out all at once , but rather paid out over time , as an addition to traditional social security benefits .
and we will make sure this plan is fiscally responsible , by starting personal retirement accounts gradually , and raising the yearly limits on contributions over time , eventually permitting all workers to set aside four percentage points of their payroll taxes in their accounts .
personal retirement accounts should be familiar to federal employees , because you already have something similar , called the thrift savings plan , which lets workers deposit a portion of their paychecks into any of five different broadly based investment funds .
it is time to extend the same security , and choice , and ownership to young americans .
our second great responsibility to our children and grandchildren is to honor and to pass along the values that sustain a free society .
so many of my generation , after a long journey , have come home to family and faith , and are determined to bring up responsible , moral children .
government is not the source of these values , but government should never undermine them .
because marriage is a sacred institution and the foundation of society , it should not be re - defined by activist judges .
for the good of families , children , and society , i support a constitutional amendment to protect the institution of marriage .
because a society is measured by how it treats the weak and vulnerable , we must strive to build a culture of life .
medical research can help us reach that goal , by developing treatments and cures that save lives and help people overcome disabilities -- and i thank congress for doubling the funding of the national institutes of health .
to build a culture of life , we must also ensure that scientific advances always serve human dignity , not take advantage of some lives for the benefit of others .
we should all be able to agree on some clear standards .
i will work with congress to ensure that human embryos are not created for experimentation or grown for body parts , and that human life is never bought and sold as a commodity .
america will continue to lead the world in medical research that is ambitious , aggressive , and always ethical .
because courts must always deliver impartial justice , judges have a duty to faithfully interpret the law , not legislate from the bench .
as president , i have a constitutional responsibility to nominate men and women who understand the role of courts in our democracy , and are well qualified to serve on the bench -- and i have done so .
the constitution also gives the senate a responsibility : every judicial nominee deserves an up - or - down vote .
because one of the deepest values of our country is compassion , we must never turn away from any citizen who feels isolated from the opportunities of america .
our government will continue to support faith - based and community groups that bring hope to harsh places .
now we need to focus on giving young people , especially young men in our cities , better options than apathy , or gangs , or jail .
tonight i propose a three - year initiative to help organizations keep young people out of gangs , and show young men an ideal of manhood that respects women and rejects violence .
taking on gang life will be one part of a broader outreach to at - risk youth , which involves parents and pastors , coaches and community leaders , in programs ranging from literacy to sports .
and i am proud that the leader of this nationwide effort will be our first lady , laura bush .
because hiv / aids brings suffering and fear into so many lives , i ask you to reauthorize the ryan white act to encourage prevention , and provide care and treatment to the victims of that disease .
and as we update this important law , we must focus our efforts on fellow citizens with the highest rates of new cases , african - american men and women .
because one of the main sources of our national unity is our belief in equal justice , we need to make sure americans of all races and backgrounds have confidence in the system that provides justice .
in america we must make doubly sure no person is held to account for a crime he or she did not commit -- so we are dramatically expanding the use of dna evidence to prevent wrongful conviction .
soon i will send to congress a proposal to fund special training for defense counsel in capital cases , because people on trial for their lives must have competent lawyers by their side .
our third responsibility to future generations is to leave them an america that is safe from danger , and protected by peace .
we will pass along to our children all the freedoms we enjoy -- and chief among them is freedom from fear .
in the three and a half years since september 11 , 2001 , we have taken unprecedented actions to protect americans .
we have created a new department of government to defend our homeland , focused the fbi on preventing terrorism , begun to reform our intelligence agencies , broken up terror cells across the country , expanded research on defenses against biological and chemical attack , improved border security , and trained more than a half million first responders .
police and firefighters , air marshals , researchers , and so many others are working every day to make our homeland safer , and we thank them all .
our nation , working with allies and friends , has also confronted the enemy abroad , with measures that are determined , successful , and continuing .
the al qaeda terror network that attacked our country still has leaders -- but many of its top commanders have been removed .
there are still governments that sponsor and harbor terrorists -- but their number has declined .
there are still regimes seeking weapons of mass destruction -- but no longer without attention and without consequence .
our country is still the target of terrorists who want to kill many , and intimidate us all -- and we will stay on the offensive against them , until the fight is won .
pursuing our enemies is a vital commitment of the war on terror -- and i thank the congress for providing our servicemen and women with the resources they have needed .
during this time of war , we must continue to support our military and give them the tools for victory .
other nations around the globe have stood with us .
in afghanistan , an international force is helping provide security .
in iraq , 28 countries have troops on the ground , the united nations and the european union provided technical assistance for elections , and nato is leading a mission to help train iraqi officers .
we are cooperating with 60 governments in the proliferation security initiative , to detect and stop the transit of dangerous materials .
we are working closely with governments in asia to convince north korea to abandon its nuclear ambitions .
pakistan , saudi arabia , and nine other countries have captured or detained al qaeda terrorists .
in the next four years , my administration will continue to build the coalitions that will defeat the dangers of our time .
in the long term , the peace we seek will only be achieved by eliminating the conditions that feed radicalism and ideologies of murder .
if whole regions of the world remain in despair and grow in hatred , they will be the recruiting grounds for terror , and that terror will stalk america and other free nations for decades .
the only force powerful enough to stop the rise of tyranny and terror , and replace hatred with hope , is the force of human freedom .
our enemies know this , and that is why the terrorist zarqawi recently declared war on what he called the " evil principle " of democracy .
and we have declared our own intention : america will stand with the allies of freedom to support democratic movements in the middle east and beyond , with the ultimate goal of ending tyranny in our world .
the united states has no right , no desire , and no intention to impose our form of government on anyone else .
that is one of the main differences between us and our enemies .
they seek to impose and expand an empire of oppression , in which a tiny group of brutal , self - appointed rulers control every aspect of every life .
our aim is to build and preserve a community of free and independent nations , with governments that answer to their citizens , and reflect their own cultures .
and because democracies respect their own people and their neighbors , the advance of freedom will lead to peace .
that advance has great momentum in our time -- shown by women voting in afghanistan , and palestinians choosing a new direction , and the people of ukraine asserting their democratic rights and electing a president .
we are witnessing landmark events in the history of liberty .
and in the coming years , we will add to that story .
the beginnings of reform and democracy in the palestinian territories are showing the power of freedom to break old patterns of violence and failure .
tomorrow morning , secretary of state rice departs on a trip that will take her to israel and the west bank for meetings with prime minister sharon and president abbas .
she will discuss with them how we and our friends can help the palestinian people end terror and build the institutions of a peaceful , independent democratic state .
to promote this democracy , i will ask congress for $ 350 million to support palestinian political , economic , and security reforms .
the goal of two democratic states , israel and palestine , living side by side in peace is within reach -- and america will help them achieve that goal .
to promote peace and stability in the broader middle east , the united states will work with our friends in the region to fight the common threat of terror , while we encourage a higher standard of freedom .
hopeful reform is already taking hold in an arc from morocco to jordan to bahrain .
the government of saudi arabia can demonstrate its leadership in the region by expanding the role of its people in determining their future .
and the great and proud nation of egypt , which showed the way toward peace in the middle east , can now show the way toward democracy in the middle east .
to promote peace in the broader middle east , we must confront regimes that continue to harbor terrorists and pursue weapons of mass murder .
syria still allows its territory , and parts of lebanon , to be used by terrorists who seek to destroy every chance of peace in the region .
you have passed , and we are applying , the syrian accountability act -- and we expect the syrian government to end all support for terror and open the door to freedom .
today , iran remains the world 's primary state sponsor of terror -- pursuing nuclear weapons while depriving its people of the freedom they seek and deserve .
we are working with european allies to make clear to the iranian regime that it must give up its uranium enrichment program and any plutonium re - processing , and end its support for terror .
and to the iranian people , i say tonight : as you stand for your own liberty , america stands with you .
our generational commitment to the advance of freedom , especially in the middle east , is now being tested and honored in iraq .
that country is a vital front in the war on terror , which is why the terrorists have chosen to make a stand there .
our men and women in uniform are fighting terrorists in iraq , so we do not have to face them here at home .
and the victory of freedom in iraq will strengthen a new ally in the war on terror , inspire democratic reformers from damascus to tehran , bring more hope and progress to a troubled region , and thereby lift a terrible threat from the lives of our children and grandchildren .
we will succeed because the iraqi people value their own liberty -- as they showed the world last sunday .
across iraq , often at great risk , millions of citizens went to the polls and elected 275 men and women to represent them in a new transitional national assembly .
a young woman in baghdad told of waking to the sound of mortar fire on election day , and wondering if it might be too dangerous to vote .
she said , " hearing those explosions , it occurred to me -- the insurgents are weak , they are afraid of democracy , they are losing . ...
so i got my husband , and i got my parents , and we all came out and voted together . "
americans recognize that spirit of liberty , because we share it .
in any nation , casting your vote is an act of civic responsibility ; for millions of iraqis , it was also an act of personal courage , and they have earned the respect of us all .
one of iraq 's leading democracy and human rights advocates is safia taleb al - suhail .
she says of her country , " we were occupied for 35 years by saddam hussein .
that was the real occupation . ...
thank you to the american people who paid the cost ... but most of all to the soldiers . "
eleven years ago , safia 's father was assassinated by saddam 's intelligence service .
three days ago in baghdad , safia was finally able to vote for the leaders of her country -- and we are honored that she is with us tonight .
the terrorists and insurgents are violently opposed to democracy , and will continue to attack it .
yet the terrorists ' most powerful myth is being destroyed .
the whole world is seeing that the car bombers and assassins are not only fighting coalition forces , they are trying to destroy the hopes of iraqis , expressed in free elections .
and the whole world now knows that a small group of extremists will not overturn the will of the iraqi people .
we will succeed in iraq because iraqis are determined to fight for their own freedom , and to write their own history .
as prime minister allawi said in his speech to congress last september , " ordinary iraqis are anxious ... to shoulder all the security burdens of our country as quickly as possible . "
this is the natural desire of an independent nation , and it also is the stated mission of our coalition in iraq .
the new political situation in iraq opens a new phase of our work in that country .
at the recommendation of our commanders on the ground , and in consultation with the iraqi government , we will increasingly focus our efforts on helping prepare more capable iraqi security forces -- forces with skilled officers , and an effective command structure .
as those forces become more self - reliant and take on greater security responsibilities , america and its coalition partners will increasingly be in a supporting role .
in the end , iraqis must be able to defend their own country -- and we will help that proud , new nation secure its liberty .
recently an iraqi interpreter said to a reporter , " tell america not to abandon us . "
he and all iraqis can be certain : while our military strategy is adapting to circumstances , our commitment remains firm and unchanging .
we are standing for the freedom of our iraqi friends , and freedom in iraq will make america safer for generations to come .
we will not set an artificial timetable for leaving iraq , because that would embolden the terrorists and make them believe they can wait us out .
we are in iraq to achieve a result : a country that is democratic , representative of all its people , at peace with its neighbors , and able to defend itself .
and when that result is achieved , our men and women serving in iraq will return home with the honor they have earned .
right now , americans in uniform are serving at posts across the world , often taking great risks on my orders .
we have given them training and equipment ; and they have given us an example of idealism and character that makes every american proud .
the volunteers of our military are unrelenting in battle , unwavering in loyalty , unmatched in honor and decency , and every day they are making our nation more secure .
some of our servicemen and women have survived terrible injuries , and this grateful country will do everything we can to help them recover .
and we have said farewell to some very good men and women , who died for our freedom , and whose memory this nation will honor forever .
one name we honor is marine corps sergeant byron norwood of pflugerville , texas , who was killed during the assault on fallujah .
his mom , janet , sent me a letter and told me how much byron loved being a marine , and how proud he was to be on the front line against terror .
she wrote , " when byron was home the last time , i said that i wanted to protect him like i had since he was born .
he just hugged me and said : " you 've done your job , mom .
now it 's my turn to protect you . ' "
ladies and gentlemen , with grateful hearts , we honor freedom 's defenders , and our military families , represented here this evening by sergeant norwood 's mom and dad , janet and bill norwood .
in these four years , americans have seen the unfolding of large events .
we have known times of sorrow , and hours of uncertainty , and days of victory .
in all this history , even when we have disagreed , we have seen threads of purpose that unite us .
the attack on freedom in our world has reaffirmed our confidence in freedom 's power to change the world .
we are all part of a great venture : to extend the promise of freedom in our country , to renew the values that sustain our liberty , and to spread the peace that freedom brings .
as franklin roosevelt once reminded americans , " each age is a dream that is dying , or one that is coming to birth . "
and we live in the country where the biggest dreams are born .
the abolition of slavery was only a dream -- until it was fulfilled .
the liberation of europe from fascism was only a dream -- until it was achieved .
the fall of imperial communism was only a dream -- until , one day , it was accomplished .
our generation has dreams of its own , and we also go forward with confidence .
the road of providence is uneven and unpredictable -- yet we know where it leads : it leads to freedom .
thank you , and may god bless america .

well , thank you all very much for that warm welcome .
general meyer , thank you .
general bunting and general casey , secretary marsh , congressman goodlatte , albert beveridge , members of the corps of cadets , distinguished guests , ladies and gentlemen .
i want to thank you for your warm welcome and thank you for inviting me to one of america 's great institutions .
i brought along a little graduation present .
i 'm sure you 'll like it ; some of you will need it .
as commander in chief , i hereby grant amnesty -- .
general bunting , i 'm sure you can tell who needed it .
and i know you 'll be generous in the interpretation of this doctrine .
i want to congratulate the winners of the george c. marshall rotc award .
the more than 260 young men and women who represent -- the winners represent the best of our country and the best future for the united states army .
you stand out among the nearly 30,000 young americans who are today enrolled in the army rotc ; the officers who will serve in the military of the future , and one day will lead it .
a majority of the army 's current officers started out in the rotc .
for nearly 90 years , this great program has developed leaders and shaped character .
those looking for idealism on the college campuses of america will find it in the men and women of the rotc .
rotc 's traditions and values are a contribution and a credit to every college and every university where they 're found .
secretary of state colin powell was in the rotc at city college of new york , an experience that helped set the course of his life .
in his own words , he said this , " the order , the self - discipline , the pride that had been instilled in me by our rotc prepared me well for my army career or , for that matter , any career i might have chosen . "
colin powell 's career has taken him from service in vietnam to the top rank in the military , and now on a peace mission to the middle east .
america is fortunate and i am proud to have rotc graduate colin powell serving our country .
only one other army general has gone on to serve as secretary of state , and that was george marshall , himself -- vmi 's highest - ranking cadet in the class of 1901 .
as army chief of staff , general marshall became the architect of america 's victory in the second world war .
he fought tenaciously against our enemies , and then worked just as hard to secure the peace .
president truman considered george c. marshall the greatest man he knew .
above all , said winston churchill , marshall " always fought victoriously against defeatism , discouragement and disillusionment . "
the key to morale and to victory , marshall said , is " steadfastness and courage and hope . "
and , today , we are called to defend freedom against ruthless enemies .
and , once again , we need steadfastness , courage and hope .
the war against terror will be long .
and as george marshall so clearly understood , it will not be enough to make the world safer .
we must also work to make the world better .
in the days just after september the 11th , i told the american people that this would be a different war , fought on many fronts .
today , around the world , we make progress on the many fronts .
in some cases , we use military force .
in others , we 're fighting through diplomacy , financial pressure , or special operations .
in every case , we will defeat the threats against our country and the civilized world .
our progress -- our progress is measured day by day , terrorist by terrorist .
we recently apprehended one of al qaeda 's top leaders , a man named abu zabaydah .
he was spending a lot of time as one of the top operating officials of al qaeda , plotting and planning murder .
he 's not plotting and he 's not planning anymore .
he 's under lock and key , and we 're going to give him some company .
we 're hunting down the killers one by one .
we 're learning a lot about al qaeda operations and their plans .
as our enemies have fled their hideouts in afghanistan , they left some things behind .
we found laptop computers , drawings and maps .
and through them , we 're gaining a clearer picture of the terrorist targets and their methods .
our international coalition against these killers is strong and united and acting .
european nations have frozen almost $ 50 million in suspected terrorist assets , and that 's important .
many european states are taking aggressive and effective law enforcement action to join us in rounding up these terrorists and their cells .
we 're making good progress .
yet , it 's important for americans to know this war will not be quick and this war will not be easy .
the first phase of our military operation was in afghanistan , where our armed forces continue to perform with bravery and with skill .
you 've got to understand that as we routed out the taliban , they were n't sent in to conquer ; they were sent in to liberate .
and they succeeded .
and our military makes us proud .
the battles in afghanistan are not over .
american and allied troops are taking risks today in what we call operation mountain lion -- hunting down the al qaeda and taliban forces , and keeping them on the run .
coalition naval forces , in the largest combined flotilla since world war ii , are patrolling escape routes and intercepting ships to search for terrorists and their supplies .
as the spring thaw comes , we expect cells of trained killers to try to regroup , to murder , create mayhem and try to undermine afghanistan 's efforts to build a lasting peace .
we know this from not only intelligence , but from the history of military conflict in afghanistan .
it 's been one of initial success , followed by long years of floundering and ultimate failure .
we 're not going to repeat that mistake .
in the united states of america , the terrorists have chosen a foe unlike they have any -- they have never faced before .
they 've never faced a country like ours before : we 're tough , we 're determined , we 're relentless .
we will stay until the mission is done .
we know that true peace will only be achieved when we give the afghan people the means to achieve their own aspirations .
peace -- peace will be achieved by helping afghanistan develop its own stable government .
peace will be achieved by helping afghanistan train and develop its own national army .
and peace will be achieved through an education system for boys and girls which works .
we 're working hard in afghanistan .
we 're clearing minefields .
we 're rebuilding roads .
we 're improving medical care .
and we will work to help afghanistan to develop an economy that can feed its people without feeding the world 's demand for drugs .
and we help the afghan people recover from the taliban rule .
and as we do so , we find mounting horror , evidence of horror .
in the hazarajat region , the red cross has found signs of massacres committed by the taliban last year , victims who lie in mass graves .
this is the legacy of the first regime to fall in the war against terror .
these mass graves are a reminder of the kind of enemy we have fought and have defeated .
and they are the kind of evil we continue to fight .
by helping to build an afghanistan that is free from this evil and is a better place in which to live , we are working in the best traditions of george marshall .
marshall knew that our military victory against enemies in world war ii had to be followed by a moral victory that resulted in better lives for individual human beings .
after 1945 , the united states of america was the only nation in the world strong enough to help rebuild a europe and a japan that had been decimated by world war ii .
today , our former enemies are our friends .
and europe and japan are strong partners in the rebuilding of afghanistan .
this transformation is a powerful testimony to the success of marshall 's vision , and a beacon to light the path that we , too , must follow .
in the second phase of the war on terror , our military and law enforcement intelligence officers are helping countries around the world in their efforts to crack down on terror within their borders .
global terrorism will be defeated only by global response .
we must prevent al qaeda from moving its operations to other countries .
we must deny terrorists the funds they need to operate .
we must deny them safe havens to plan new horrors and indoctrinate new recruits .
we 're working with yemen 's government to prevent terrorists from reassembling there .
we sent troops to help train local forces in the philippines , to help them defeat terrorists trying to establish a militant regime .
and in the republic of georgia , we provide temporary help to its military , as it routes out a terrorist cell near the russian border .
wherever global terror threatens the civilized world , we and our friends and our allies will respond and will respond decisively .
every nation that joins our cause is welcome .
every nation that needs our help will have it .
and no nation can be neutral .
around the world , the nations must choose .
they are with us , or they 're with the terrorists .
and in the middle east , where acts of terror have triggered mounting violence , all parties have a choice to make .
every leader , every state must choose between two separate paths : the path of peace or the path of terror .
in the stricken faces of mothers , palestinian mothers and israeli mothers , the entire world is witnessing the agonizing cost of this conflict .
now , every nation and every leader in the region must work to end terror .
all parties have responsibilities .
these responsibilities are not easy , but they 're clear .
and secretary of state powell is helping make them clear .
i want to thank secretary powell for his hard work at a difficult task .
he returns home having made progress towards peace .
we 're confronting hatred that is centuries old , disputes that have lingered for decades .
but i want you to know , i will continue to lead toward a vision of peace .
we will continue to remind folks they have responsibilities in the short run to defuse the current crisis .
the palestinian authority must act , must act on its words of condemnation against terror .
israel must continue its withdrawals .
and all arab states must step up to their responsibilities .
the egyptians and jordanians and saudis have helped in the wider war on terrorism .
and they must help confront terrorism in the middle east .
all parties have a responsibility to stop funding or inciting terror .
and all parties must say clearly that a murderer is not a martyr ; he or she is just a murderer .
and all parties must realize that the only vision for a long - term solution is for two states -- israel , palestine -- to live side by side in security and in peace .
that will require hard choices and leadership by israelis , palestinians , and their arab neighbors .
the time is now for all to make the choice for peace .
and , finally , the civilized world faces a grave threat from weapons of mass destruction .
a small number of outlaw regimes today possess and are developing chemical and biological and nuclear weapons .
they 're building missiles to deliver them , and at the same time cultivating ties to terrorist groups .
in their threat to peace , in their mad ambitions , in their destructive potential and in the repression of their own people , these regimes constitute an axis of evil and the world must confront them .
america , along with other nations , will oppose the proliferation of dangerous weapons and technologies .
we will proceed with missile defenses to protect the american people , our troops and our friends and allies .
and america will take the necessary action to oppose emerging threats .
we 'll be deliberate and we will work with our friends and allies .
and , as we do so , we will uphold our duty to defend freedom .
we will fight against terrorist organizations in different ways , with different tactics , in different places .
and we will fight the threat from weapons of mass destruction in different ways , with different tactics , in different places .
yet , our objective is always the same : we will defeat global terror , and we will not allow the world 's most dangerous regimes to threaten us with the world 's most dangerous weapons .
america has a much greater purpose than just eliminating threats and containing resentment , because we believe in the dignity and value of every individual .
america seeks hope and opportunity for all people in all cultures .
and that is why we 're helping to rebuild afghanistan .
and that is why we 've launched a new compact for development for the millennium challenge account .
and that is why we work for free trade , to lift people out of poverty throughout the world .
a better world can seem very distant when children are sent to kill other children , and old hatreds are stoked and carefully passed from one generation to another , and a violent few love death more than life .
yet hatred , fanaticism are not the way of the future , because the hopes of humanity are always stronger than its hatreds .
and these hopes are universal in every country and in every country -- in every culture .
men and women everywhere want to live in dignity to create and build and own , to raise their children in peace and security .
the way to a peaceful future can be found in the non - negotiable demands of human dignity .
dignity requires the rule of law , limits on the power of the state , respect for women , private property , equal justice , religious tolerance .
no nation owns these principles .
no nation is exempt from them .
sixty years ago , few would have predicted the triumph of these values in germany and japan .
fifteen years ago , few would have predicted the advance of these values in russia .
yet , americans are not surprised .
we know that the demands of human dignity are written in every heart .
the demands have a power and momentum of their own , defying all pessimism .
and they are destined to change lives and nations on every continent .
america has acted on these hopes throughout our history .
general george marshall is admired for the war he fought , yet best remembered for the peace he secured .
the marshall plan , rebuilding europe and lifting up former enemies , showed that america is not content with military victory alone .
americans always see a greater hope and a better day .
and america sees a just and hopeful world beyond the war on terror .
many of you will help achieve this better world .
at a young age , you 've taken up a great calling .
you 'll serve your country and our values .
you 'll protect your fellow citizens .
and , by your effort and example , you will advance the cause of freedom around the world .
and so i 'm here to thank you for your commitment and congratulate you on the high honor you have received .
may god bless you all , and may god bless america .

thanks for coming , thanks for the warm welcome , thanks for joining me as i make this important announcement -- an announcement that i believe will make america a more compassionate and more humane and stronger country .
i appreciate members of my cabinet who have joined me today , starting with our secretary of state , colin powell .
i 'm honored that our attorney general , john ashcroft , has joined us .
secretary of commerce , don evans .
secretary tom ridge , of the department of homeland security .
el embajador of mexico , tony garza .
i thank all the other members of my administration who have joined us today .
i appreciate the members of congress who have taken time to come : senator larry craig , congressman chris cannon , and congressman jeff flake .
i 'm honored you all have joined us , thank you for coming .
i appreciate the members of citizen groups who have joined us today .
chairman of the hispanic alliance for progress , manny lujan .
gil moreno , the president and ceo of the association for the advancement of mexican americans .
roberto de posada , the president of the latino coalition .
and hector flores , the president of lulac .
thank you all for joining us .
many of you here today are americans by choice , and you have followed in the path of millions .
and over the generations we have received energetic , ambitious , optimistic people from every part of the world .
by tradition and conviction , our country is a welcoming society .
america is a stronger and better nation because of the hard work and the faith and entrepreneurial spirit of immigrants .
every generation of immigrants has reaffirmed the wisdom of remaining open to the talents and dreams of the world .
and every generation of immigrants has reaffirmed our ability to assimilate newcomers -- which is one of the defining strengths of our country .
during one great period of immigration -- between 1891 and 1920 -- our nation received some 18 million men , women and children from other nations .
the hard work of these immigrants helped make our economy the largest in the world .
the children of immigrants put on the uniform and helped to liberate the lands of their ancestors .
one of the primary reasons america became a great power in the 20th century is because we welcomed the talent and the character and the patriotism of immigrant families .
the contributions of immigrants to america continue .
about 14 percent of our nation 's civilian workforce is foreign - born .
most begin their working lives in america by taking hard jobs and clocking long hours in important industries .
many immigrants also start businesses , taking the familiar path from hired labor to ownership .
as a texan , i have known many immigrant families , mainly from mexico , and i have seen what they add to our country .
they bring to america the values of faith in god , love of family , hard work and self reliance -- the values that made us a great nation to begin with .
we 've all seen those values in action , through the service and sacrifice of more than 35,000 foreign - born men and women currently on active duty in the united states military .
one of them is master gunnery sergeant guadalupe denogean , an immigrant from mexico who has served in the marine corps for 25 years and counting .
last year , i was honored and proud to witness sergeant denogean take the oath of citizenship in a hospital where he was recovering from wounds he received in iraq .
i 'm honored to be his commander - in - chief , i 'm proud to call him a fellow american .
as a nation that values immigration , and depends on immigration , we should have immigration laws that work and make us proud .
yet today we do not .
instead , we see many employers turning to the illegal labor market .
we see millions of hard - working men and women condemned to fear and insecurity in a massive , undocumented economy .
illegal entry across our borders makes more difficult the urgent task of securing the homeland .
the system is not working .
our nation needs an immigration system that serves the american economy , and reflects the american dream .
reform must begin by confronting a basic fact of life and economics : some of the jobs being generated in america 's growing economy are jobs american citizens are not filling .
yet these jobs represent a tremendous opportunity for workers from abroad who want to work and fulfill their duties as a husband or a wife , a son or a daughter .
their search for a better life is one of the most basic desires of human beings .
many undocumented workers have walked mile after mile , through the heat of the day and the cold of the night .
some have risked their lives in dangerous desert border crossings , or entrusted their lives to the brutal rings of heartless human smugglers .
workers who seek only to earn a living end up in the shadows of american life -- fearful , often abused and exploited .
when they are victimized by crime , they are afraid to call the police , or seek recourse in the legal system .
they are cut off from their families far away , fearing if they leave our country to visit relatives back home , they might never be able to return to their jobs .
the situation i described is wrong .
it is not the american way .
out of common sense and fairness , our laws should allow willing workers to enter our country and fill jobs that americans have are not filling .
we must make our immigration laws more rational , and more humane .
and i believe we can do so without jeopardizing the livelihoods of american citizens .
our reforms should be guided by a few basic principles .
first , america must control its borders .
following the attacks of september the 11th , 2001 , this duty of the federal government has become even more urgent .
and we 're fulfilling that duty .
for the first time in our history , we have consolidated all border agencies under one roof to make sure they share information and the work is more effective .
we 're matching all visa applicants against an expanded screening list to identify terrorists and criminals and immigration violators .
this month , we have begun using advanced technology to better record and track aliens who enter our country -- and to make sure they leave as scheduled .
we have deployed new gamma and x - ray systems to scan cargo and containers and shipments at ports of entry to america .
we have significantly expanded the border patrol -- with more than a thousand new agents on the borders , and 40 percent greater funding over the last two years .
we 're working closely with the canadian and mexican governments to increase border security .
america is acting on a basic belief : our borders should be open to legal travel and honest trade ; our borders should be shut and barred tight to criminals , to drug traders , to drug traffickers and to criminals , and to terrorists .
second , new immigration laws should serve the economic needs of our country .
if an american employer is offering a job that american citizens are not willing to take , we ought to welcome into our country a person who will fill that job .
third , we should not give unfair rewards to illegal immigrants in the citizenship process or disadvantage those who came here lawfully , or hope to do so .
fourth , new laws should provide incentives for temporary , foreign workers to return permanently to their home countries after their period of work in the united states has expired .
today , i ask the congress to join me in passing new immigration laws that reflect these principles , that meet america 's economic needs , and live up to our highest ideals .
i propose a new temporary worker program that will match willing foreign workers with willing american employers , when no americans can be found to fill the jobs .
this program will offer legal status , as temporary workers , to the millions of undocumented men and women now employed in the united states , and to those in foreign countries who seek to participate in the program and have been offered employment here .
this new system should be clear and efficient , so employers are able to find workers quickly and simply .
all who participate in the temporary worker program must have a job , or , if not living in the united states , a job offer .
the legal status granted by this program will last three years and will be renewable -- but it will have an end .
participants who do not remain employed , who do not follow the rules of the program , or who break the law will not be eligible for continued participation and will be required to return to their home .
under my proposal , employers have key responsibilities .
employers who extend job offers must first make every reasonable effort to find an american worker for the job at hand .
our government will develop a quick and simple system for employers to search for american workers .
employers must not hire undocumented aliens or temporary workers whose legal status has expired .
they must report to the government the temporary workers they hire , and who leave their employ , so that we can keep track of people in the program , and better enforce immigration laws .
there must be strong workplace enforcement with tough penalties for anyone , for any employer violating these laws .
undocumented workers now here will be required to pay a one - time fee to register for the temporary worker program .
those who seek to join the program from abroad , and have complied with our immigration laws , will not have to pay any fee .
all participants will be issued a temporary worker card that will allow them to travel back and forth between their home and the united states without fear of being denied re - entry into our country .
this program expects temporary workers to return permanently to their home countries after their period of work in the united states has expired .
and there should be financial incentives for them to do so .
i will work with foreign governments on a plan to give temporary workers credit , when they enter their own nation 's retirement system , for the time they have worked in america .
i also support making it easier for temporary workers to contribute a portion of their earnings to tax - preferred savings accounts , money they can collect as they return to their native countries .
after all , in many of those countries , a small nest egg is what is necessary to start their own business , or buy some land for their family .
some temporary workers will make the decision to pursue american citizenship .
those who make this choice will be allowed to apply in the normal way .
they will not be given unfair advantage over people who have followed legal procedures from the start .
i oppose amnesty , placing undocumented workers on the automatic path to citizenship .
granting amnesty encourages the violation of our laws , and perpetuates illegal immigration .
america is a welcoming country , but citizenship must not be the automatic reward for violating the laws of america .
the citizenship line , however , is too long , and our current limits on legal immigration are too low .
my administration will work with the congress to increase the annual number of green cards that can lead to citizenship .
those willing to take the difficult path of citizenship -- the path of work , and patience , and assimilation -- should be welcome in america , like generations of immigrants before them .
in the process of immigration reform , we must also set high expectations for what new citizens should know .
an understanding of what it means to be an american is not a formality in the naturalization process , it is essential to full participation in our democracy .
my administration will examine the standard of knowledge in the current citizenship test .
we must ensure that new citizens know not only the facts of our history , but the ideals that have shaped our history .
every citizen of america has an obligation to learn the values that make us one nation : liberty and civic responsibility , equality under god , and tolerance for others .
this new temporary worker program will bring more than economic benefits to america .
our homeland will be more secure when we can better account for those who enter our country , instead of the current situation in which millions of people are unknown , unknown to the law .
law enforcement will face fewer problems with undocumented workers , and will be better able to focus on the true threats to our nation from criminals and terrorists .
and when temporary workers can travel legally and freely , there will be more efficient management of our borders and more effective enforcement against those who pose a danger to our country .
this new system will be more compassionate .
decent , hard - working people will now be protected by labor laws , with the right to change jobs , earn fair wages , and enjoy the same working conditions that the law requires for american workers .
temporary workers will be able to establish their identities by obtaining the legal documents we all take for granted .
and they will be able to talk openly to authorities , to report crimes when they are harmed , without the fear of being deported .
the best way , in the long run , to reduce the pressures that create illegal immigration in the first place is to expand economic opportunity among the countries in our neighborhood .
in a few days i will go to mexico for the special summit of the americas , where we will discuss ways to advance free trade , and to fight corruption , and encourage the reforms that lead to prosperity .
real growth and real hope in the nations of our hemisphere will lessen the flow of new immigrants to america when more citizens of other countries are able to achieve their dreams at their own home .
yet our country has always benefited from the dreams that others have brought here .
by working hard for a better life , immigrants contribute to the life of our nation .
the temporary worker program i am proposing today represents the best tradition of our society , a society that honors the law , and welcomes the newcomer .
this plan will help return order and fairness to our immigration system , and in so doing we will honor our values , by showing our respect for those who work hard and share in the ideals of america .
may god bless you all .

thank you very much .
mr. speaker , vice president cheney , members of congress , distinguished guests , fellow citizens : 
 as we gather tonight , our nation is at war ; our economy is in recession ; and the civilized world faces unprecedented dangers .
yet , the state of our union has never been stronger .
we last met in an hour of shock and suffering .
in four short months , our nation has comforted the victims , begun to rebuild new york and the pentagon , rallied a great coalition , captured , arrested , and rid the world of thousands of terrorists , destroyed afghanistan 's terrorist training camps , saved a people from starvation , and freed a country from brutal oppression .
the american flag flies again over our embassy in kabul .
terrorists who once occupied afghanistan now occupy cells at guantanamo bay .
and terrorist leaders who urged followers to sacrifice their lives are running for their own .
america and afghanistan are now allies against terror .
we 'll be partners in rebuilding that country .
and this evening we welcomed the distinguished interim leader of a liberated afghanistan , chairman hamid karzai .
the last time we met in this chamber , the mothers and daughters of afghanistan were captives in their own homes , forbidden from working or going to school .
today women are free and are part of afghanistan 's new government .
and we welcome the new minister of women 's affairs , dr. sima samar .
our progress is a tribute to the spirit of the afghan people , to the resolve of our coalition , and to the might of the united states military .
when i called our troops into action , i did so with complete confidence in their courage and skill .
and tonight , thanks to them , we are winning the war on terror .
the men and women of our armed forces have delivered a message now clear to every enemy of the united states : even 7,000 miles away , across oceans and continents , on mountaintops and in caves , you will not escape the justice of this nation .
for many americans , these four months have brought sorrow and pain that will never completely go away .
every day a retired firefighter returns to ground zero to feel closer to his two sons who died there .
at a memorial in new york , a little boy left his football with a note for his lost father : " dear daddy , please take this to heaven .
i do n't want to play football until i can play with you again some day . "
last month , at the grave of her husband , micheal , a cia officer and marine who died in mazar - e - sharif , shannon spann said these words of farewell , " semper fi , my love . "
shannon is with us tonight .
shannon , i assure you and all who have lost a loved one that our cause is just , and our country will never forget the debt we owe micheal and all who gave their lives for freedom .
our cause is just , and it continues .
our discoveries in afghanistan confirmed our worst fears and showed us the true scope of the task ahead .
we have seen the depth of our enemies ' hatred in videos where they laugh about the loss of innocent life .
and the depth of their hatred is equaled by the madness of the destruction they design .
we have found diagrams of american nuclear powerplants and public water facilities , detailed instructions for making chemical weapons , surveillance maps of american cities , and thorough descriptions of landmarks in america and throughout the world .
what we have found in afghanistan confirms that , far from ending there , our war against terror is only beginning .
most of the 19 men who hijacked planes on september 11 were trained in afghanistan 's camps , and so were tens of thousands of others .
thousands of dangerous killers , schooled in the methods of murder , often supported by outlaw regimes , are now spread throughout the world like ticking timebombs , set to go off without warning .
thanks to the work of our law enforcement officials and coalition partners , hundreds of terrorists have been arrested .
yet , tens of thousands of trained terrorists are still at large .
these enemies view the entire world as a battlefield , and we must pursue them wherever they are .
so long as training camps operate , so long as nations harbor terrorists , freedom is at risk .
and america and our allies must not and will not allow it .
our nation will continue to be steadfast and patient and persistent in the pursuit of two great objectives .
first , we will shut down terrorist camps , disrupt terrorist plans , and bring terrorists to justice .
and second , we must prevent the terrorists and regimes who seek chemical , biological , or nuclear weapons from threatening the united states and the world .
our military has put the terror training camps of afghanistan out of business , yet camps still exist in at least a dozen countries .
a terrorist underworld , including groups like hamas , hezbollah , islamic jihad , jaish - e - mohammed , operates in remote jungles and deserts and hides in the centers of large cities .
while the most visible military action is in afghanistan , america is acting elsewhere .
we now have troops in the philippines , helping to train that country 's armed forces to go after terrorist cells that have executed an american and still hold hostages .
our soldiers , working with the bosnian government , seized terrorists who were plotting to bomb our embassy .
our navy is patrolling the coast of africa to block the shipment of weapons and the establishment of terrorist camps in somalia .
my hope is that all nations will heed our call and eliminate the terrorist parasites who threaten their countries and our own .
many nations are acting forcefully .
pakistan is now cracking down on terror , and i admire the strong leadership of president musharraf .
but some governments will be timid in the face of terror .
and make no mistake about it : if they do not act , america will .
our second goal is to prevent regimes that sponsor terror from threatening america or our friends and allies with weapons of mass destruction .
some of these regimes have been pretty quiet since september 11 , but we know their true nature .
north korea is a regime arming with missiles and weapons of mass destruction , while starving its citizens .
iran aggressively pursues these weapons and exports terror , while an unelected few repress the iranian people 's hope for freedom .
iraq continues to flaunt its hostility toward america and to support terror .
the iraqi regime has plotted to develop anthrax and nerve gas and nuclear weapons for over a decade .
this is a regime that has already used poison gas to murder thousands of its own citizens , leaving the bodies of mothers huddled over their dead children .
this is a regime that agreed to international inspections , then kicked out the inspectors .
this is a regime that has something to hide from the civilized world .
states like these and their terrorist allies constitute an axis of evil , arming to threaten the peace of the world .
by seeking weapons of mass destruction , these regimes pose a grave and growing danger .
they could provide these arms to terrorists , giving them the means to match their hatred .
they could attack our allies or attempt to blackmail the united states .
in any of these cases , the price of indifference would be catastrophic .
we will work closely with our coalition to deny terrorists and their state sponsors the materials , technology , and expertise to make and deliver weapons of mass destruction .
we will develop and deploy effective missile defenses to protect america and our allies from sudden attack .
and all nations should know : america will do what is necessary to ensure our nation 's security .
we 'll be deliberate ; yet , time is not on our side .
i will not wait on events while dangers gather .
i will not stand by as peril draws closer and closer .
the united states of america will not permit the world 's most dangerous regimes to threaten us with the world 's most destructive weapons .
our war on terror is well begun , but it is only begun .
this campaign may not be finished on our watch ; yet , it must be and it will be waged on our watch .
we ca n't stop short .
if we stop now , leaving terror camps intact and terrorist states unchecked , our sense of security would be false and temporary .
history has called america and our allies to action , and it is both our responsibility and our privilege to fight freedom 's fight .
our first priority must always be the security of our nation , and that will be reflected in the budget i send to congress .
my budget supports three great goals for america : we will win this war ; we will protect our homeland ; and we will revive our economy .
september 11 brought out the best in america and the best in this congress .
and i join the american people in applauding your unity and resolve .
now americans deserve to have this same spirit directed toward addressing problems here at home .
i 'm a proud member of my party .
yet as we act to win the war , protect our people , and create jobs in america , we must act , first and foremost , not as republicans , not as democrats but as americans .
it costs a lot to fight this war .
we have spent more than $ 1 billion a month , over $ 30 million a day , and we must be prepared for future operations .
afghanistan proved that expensive precision weapons defeat the enemy and spare innocent lives , and we need more of them .
we need to replace aging aircraft and make our military more agile to put our troops anywhere in the world quickly and safely .
our men and women in uniform deserve the best weapons , the best equipment , the best training , and they also deserve another pay raise .
my budget includes the largest increase in defense spending in two decades , because while the price of freedom and security is high , it is never too high .
whatever it costs to defend our country , we will pay .
the next priority of my budget is to do everything possible to protect our citizens and strengthen our nation against the ongoing threat of another attack .
time and distance from the events of september 11 will not make us safer unless we act on its lessons .
america is no longer protected by vast oceans .
we are protected from attack only by vigorous action abroad and increased vigilance at home .
my budget nearly doubles funding for a sustained strategy of homeland security , focused on four key areas : bioterrorism , emergency response , airport and border security , and improved intelligence .
we will develop vaccines to fight anthrax and other deadly diseases .
we 'll increase funding to help states and communities train and equip our heroic police and firefighters .
we will improve intelligence collection and sharing , expand patrols at our borders , strengthen the security of air travel , and use technology to track the arrivals and departures of visitors to the united states .
homeland security will make america not only stronger but , in many ways , better .
knowledge gained from bioterrorism research will improve public health .
stronger police and fire departments will mean safer neighborhoods .
stricter border enforcement will help combat illegal drugs .
and as government works to better secure our homeland , america will continue to depend on the eyes and ears of alert citizens .
a few days before christmas , an airline flight attendant spotted a passenger lighting a match .
the crew and passengers quickly subdued the man , who had been trained by al qaeda and was armed with explosives .
the people on that plane were alert and , as a result , likely saved nearly 200 lives .
and tonight we welcome and thank flight attendants hermis moutardier and christina jones .
once we have funded our national security and our homeland security , the final great priority of my budget is economic security for the american people .
to achieve these great national objectives -- to win the war , protect the homeland , and revitalize our economy -- our budget will run a deficit that will be small and short term , so long as congress restrains spending and acts in a fiscally responsible manner .
we have clear priorities , and we must act at home with the same purpose and resolve we have shown overseas .
we 'll prevail in the war , and we will defeat this recession .
americans who have lost their jobs need our help , and i support extending unemployment benefits and direct assistance for health care coverage .
yet , american workers want more than unemployment checks ; they want a steady paycheck .
when america works , america prospers , so my economic security plan can be summed up in one word : jobs .
good jobs begin with good schools , and here we 've made a fine start .
republicans and democrats worked together to achieve historic education reform so that no child is left behind .
i was proud to work with members of both parties : chairman john boehner and congressman george miller ; senator judd gregg .
and i was so proud of our work , i even had nice things to say about my friend ted kennedy .
i know the folks at the crawford coffee shop could n't believe i 'd say such a thing --   -- but our work on this bill shows what is possible if we set aside posturing and focus on results .
there is more to do .
we need to prepare our children to read and succeed in school with improved head start and early childhood development programs .
we must upgrade our teacher colleges and teacher training and launch a major recruiting drive with a great goal for america , a quality teacher in every classroom .
good jobs also depend on reliable and affordable energy .
this congress must act to encourage conservation , promote technology , build infrastructure , and it must act to increase energy production at home so america is less dependent on foreign oil .
good jobs depend on expanded trade .
selling into new markets creates new jobs , so i ask congress to finally approve trade promotion authority .
on these two key issues , trade and energy , the house of representatives has acted to create jobs , and i urge the senate to pass this legislation .
good jobs depend on sound tax policy .
last year , some in this hall thought my tax relief plan was too small ; some thought it was too big .
but when the checks arrived in the mail , most americans thought tax relief was just about right .
congress listened to the people and responded by reducing tax rates , doubling the child credit , and ending the death tax .
for the sake of long - term growth and to help americans plan for the future , let 's make these tax cuts permanent .
the way out of this recession , the way to create jobs , is to grow the economy by encouraging investment in factories and equipment and by speeding up tax relief so people have more money to spend .
for the sake of american workers , let 's pass a stimulus package .
good jobs must be the aim of welfare reform .
as we reauthorize these important reforms , we must always remember the goal is to reduce dependency on government and offer every american the dignity of a job .
americans know economic security can vanish in an instant without health security .
i ask congress to join me this year to enact a patients ' bill of rights , to give uninsured workers credits to help buy health coverage , to approve an historic increase in the spending for veterans ' health , and to give seniors a sound and modern medicare system that includes coverage for prescription drugs .
a good job should lead to security in retirement .
i ask congress to enact new safeguards for 401 k and pension plans .
employees who have worked hard and saved all their lives should not have to risk losing everything if their company fails .
through stricter accounting standards and tougher disclosure requirements , corporate america must be made more accountable to employees and shareholders and held to the highest standards of conduct .
retirement security also depends upon keeping the commitments of social security , and we will .
we must make social security financially stable and allow personal retirement accounts for younger workers who choose them .
members , you and i will work together in the months ahead on other issues : productive farm policy ; a cleaner environment ; broader homeownership , especially among minorities ; and ways to encourage the good work of charities and faith - based groups .
i ask you to join me on these important domestic issues in the same spirit of cooperation we 've applied to our war against terrorism .
during these last few months , i 've been humbled and privileged to see the true character of this country in a time of testing .
our enemies believed america was weak and materialistic , that we would splinter in fear and selfishness .
they were as wrong as they are evil .
the american people have responded magnificently , with courage and compassion , strength and resolve .
as i have met the heroes , hugged the families , and looked into the tired faces of rescuers , i have stood in awe of the american people .
and i hope you will join me -- i hope you will join me in expressing thanks to one american for the strength and calm and comfort she brings to our nation in crisis , our first lady , laura bush .
none of us would ever wish the evil that was done on september 11 .
yet , after america was attacked , it was as if our entire country looked into a mirror and saw our better selves .
we were reminded that we are citizens with obligations to each other , to our country , and to history .
we began to think less of the goods we can accumulate and more about the good we can do .
for too long our culture has said , " if it feels good , do it . "
now america is embracing a new ethic and a new creed , " let 's roll . "
in the sacrifice of soldiers , the fierce brotherhood of firefighters , and the bravery and generosity of ordinary citizens , we have glimpsed what a new culture of responsibility could look like .
we want to be a nation that serves goals larger than self .
we 've been offered a unique opportunity , and we must not let this moment pass .
my call tonight is for every american to commit at least two years , 4,000 hours over the rest of your lifetime , to the service of your neighbors and your nation .
many are already serving , and i thank you .
if you are n't sure how to help , i 've got a good place to start .
to sustain and extend the best that has emerged in america , i invite you to join the new usa freedom corps .
the freedom corps will focus on three areas of need : responding in case of crisis at home ; rebuilding our communities ; and extending american compassion throughout the world .
one purpose of the usa freedom corps will be homeland security .
america needs retired doctors and nurses who can be mobilized in major emergencies , volunteers to help police and fire departments , transportation and utility workers well - trained in spotting danger .
our country also needs citizens working to rebuild our communities .
we need mentors to love children , especially children whose parents are in prison .
and we need more talented teachers in troubled schools .
usa freedom corps will expand and improve the good efforts of americorps and senior corps to recruit more than 200,000 new volunteers .
and america needs citizens to extend the compassion of our country to every part of the world .
so we will renew the promise of the peace corps , double its volunteers over the next five years , and ask it to join a new effort to encourage development and education and opportunity in the islamic world .
this time of adversity offers a unique moment of opportunity , a moment we must seize to change our culture .
through the gathering momentum of millions of acts of service and decency and kindness , i know we can overcome evil with greater good .
and we have a great opportunity during this time of war to lead the world toward the values that will bring lasting peace .
all fathers and mothers , in all societies , want their children to be educated and live free from poverty and violence .
no people on earth yearn to be oppressed or aspire to servitude or eagerly await the midnight knock of the secret police .
if anyone doubts this , let them look to afghanistan , where the islamic " street " greeted the fall of tyranny with song and celebration .
let the skeptics look to islam 's own rich history , with its centuries of learning and tolerance and progress .
america will lead by defending liberty and justice because they are right and true and unchanging for all people everywhere .
no nation owns these aspirations , and no nation is exempt from them .
we have no intention of imposing our culture .
but america will always stand firm for the nonnegotiable demands of human dignity : the rule of law ; limits on the power of the state ; respect for women ; private property ; free speech ; equal justice ; and religious tolerance .
america will take the side of brave men and women who advocate these values around the world , including the islamic world , because we have a greater objective than eliminating threats and containing resentment .
we seek a just and peaceful world beyond the war on terror .
in this moment of opportunity , a common danger is erasing old rivalries .
america is working with russia and china and india , in ways we have never before , to achieve peace and prosperity .
in every region , free markets and free trade and free societies are proving their power to lift lives .
together with friends and allies from europe to asia and africa to latin america , we will demonstrate that the forces of terror can not stop the momentum of freedom .
the last time i spoke here , i expressed the hope that life would return to normal .
in some ways , it has .
in others , it never will .
those of us who have lived through these challenging times have been changed by them .
we 've come to know truths that we will never question : evil is real , and it must be opposed .
beyond all differences of race or creed , we are one country , mourning together and facing danger together .
deep in the american character , there is honor , and it is stronger than cynicism .
and many have discovered again that even in tragedy -- especially in tragedy -- god is near .
in a single instant , we realized that this will be a decisive decade in the history of liberty , that we 've been called to a unique role in human events .
rarely has the world faced a choice more clear or consequential .
our enemies send other people 's children on missions of suicide and murder .
they embrace tyranny and death as a cause and a creed .
we stand for a different choice , made long ago on the day of our founding .
we affirm it again today .
we choose freedom and the dignity of every life .
steadfast in our purpose , we now press on .
we have known freedom 's price .
we have shown freedom 's power .
and in this great conflict , my fellow americans , we will see freedom 's victory .
thank you all .
may god bless .

vice president cheney , mr. chief justice , president carter , president bush , president clinton , reverend clergy , distinguished guests , fellow citizens : 
 on this day , prescribed by law and marked by ceremony , we celebrate the durable wisdom of our constitution , and recall the deep commitments that unite our country .
i am grateful for the honor of this hour , mindful of the consequential times in which we live , and determined to fulfill the oath that i have sworn and you have witnessed .
at this second gathering , our duties are defined not by the words i use , but by the history we have seen together .
for a half century , america defended our own freedom by standing watch on distant borders .
after the shipwreck of communism came years of relative quiet , years of repose , years of sabbatical - and then there came a day of fire .
we have seen our vulnerability - and we have seen its deepest source .
for as long as whole regions of the world simmer in resentment and tyranny - prone to ideologies that feed hatred and excuse murder - violence will gather , and multiply in destructive power , and cross the most defended borders , and raise a mortal threat .
there is only one force of history that can break the reign of hatred and resentment , and expose the pretensions of tyrants , and reward the hopes of the decent and tolerant , and that is the force of human freedom .
we are led , by events and common sense , to one conclusion : the survival of liberty in our land increasingly depends on the success of liberty in other lands .
the best hope for peace in our world is the expansion of freedom in all the world .
america 's vital interests and our deepest beliefs are now one .
from the day of our founding , we have proclaimed that every man and woman on this earth has rights , and dignity , and matchless value , because they bear the image of the maker of heaven and earth .
across the generations we have proclaimed the imperative of self - government , because no one is fit to be a master , and no one deserves to be a slave .
advancing these ideals is the mission that created our nation .
it is the honorable achievement of our fathers .
now it is the urgent requirement of our nation 's security , and the calling of our time .
so it is the policy of the united states to seek and support the growth of democratic movements and institutions in every nation and culture , with the ultimate goal of ending tyranny in our world .
this is not primarily the task of arms , though we will defend ourselves and our friends by force of arms when necessary .
freedom , by its nature , must be chosen , and defended by citizens , and sustained by the rule of law and the protection of minorities .
and when the soul of a nation finally speaks , the institutions that arise may reflect customs and traditions very different from our own .
america will not impose our own style of government on the unwilling .
our goal instead is to help others find their own voice , attain their own freedom , and make their own way .
the great objective of ending tyranny is the concentrated work of generations .
the difficulty of the task is no excuse for avoiding it .
america 's influence is not unlimited , but fortunately for the oppressed , america 's influence is considerable , and we will use it confidently in freedom 's cause .
my most solemn duty is to protect this nation and its people against further attacks and emerging threats .
some have unwisely chosen to test america 's resolve , and have found it firm .
we will persistently clarify the choice before every ruler and every nation : the moral choice between oppression , which is always wrong , and freedom , which is eternally right .
america will not pretend that jailed dissidents prefer their chains , or that women welcome humiliation and servitude , or that any human being aspires to live at the mercy of bullies .
we will encourage reform in other governments by making clear that success in our relations will require the decent treatment of their own people .
america 's belief in human dignity will guide our policies , yet rights must be more than the grudging concessions of dictators ; they are secured by free dissent and the participation of the governed .
in the long run , there is no justice without freedom , and there can be no human rights without human liberty .
some , i know , have questioned the global appeal of liberty - though this time in history , four decades defined by the swiftest advance of freedom ever seen , is an odd time for doubt .
americans , of all people , should never be surprised by the power of our ideals .
eventually , the call of freedom comes to every mind and every soul .
we do not accept the existence of permanent tyranny because we do not accept the possibility of permanent slavery .
liberty will come to those who love it .
today , america speaks anew to the peoples of the world : 
 all who live in tyranny and hopelessness can know : the united states will not ignore your oppression , or excuse your oppressors .
when you stand for your liberty , we will stand with you .
democratic reformers facing repression , prison , or exile can know : america sees you for who you are : the future leaders of your free country .
the rulers of outlaw regimes can know that we still believe as abraham lincoln did : " those who deny freedom to others deserve it not for themselves ; and , under the rule of a just god , can not long retain it . "
the leaders of governments with long habits of control need to know : to serve your people you must learn to trust them .
start on this journey of progress and justice , and america will walk at your side .
and all the allies of the united states can know : we honor your friendship , we rely on your counsel , and we depend on your help .
division among free nations is a primary goal of freedom 's enemies .
the concerted effort of free nations to promote democracy is a prelude to our enemies ' defeat .
today , i also speak anew to my fellow citizens : 
 from all of you , i have asked patience in the hard task of securing america , which you have granted in good measure .
our country has accepted obligations that are difficult to fulfill , and would be dishonorable to abandon .
yet because we have acted in the great liberating tradition of this nation , tens of millions have achieved their freedom .
and as hope kindles hope , millions more will find it .
by our efforts , we have lit a fire as well - a fire in the minds of men .
it warms those who feel its power , it burns those who fight its progress , and one day this untamed fire of freedom will reach the darkest corners of our world .
a few americans have accepted the hardest duties in this cause - in the quiet work of intelligence and diplomacy ... the idealistic work of helping raise up free governments ... the dangerous and necessary work of fighting our enemies .
some have shown their devotion to our country in deaths that honored their whole lives - and we will always honor their names and their sacrifice .
all americans have witnessed this idealism , and some for the first time .
i ask our youngest citizens to believe the evidence of your eyes .
you have seen duty and allegiance in the determined faces of our soldiers .
you have seen that life is fragile , and evil is real , and courage triumphs .
make the choice to serve in a cause larger than your wants , larger than yourself - and in your days you will add not just to the wealth of our country , but to its character .
america has need of idealism and courage , because we have essential work at home - the unfinished work of american freedom .
in a world moving toward liberty , we are determined to show the meaning and promise of liberty .
in america 's ideal of freedom , citizens find the dignity and security of economic independence , instead of laboring on the edge of subsistence .
this is the broader definition of liberty that motivated the homestead act , the social security act , and the g. i. bill of rights .
and now we will extend this vision by reforming great institutions to serve the needs of our time .
to give every american a stake in the promise and future of our country , we will bring the highest standards to our schools , and build an ownership society .
we will widen the ownership of homes and businesses , retirement savings and health insurance - preparing our people for the challenges of life in a free society .
by making every citizen an agent of his or her own destiny , we will give our fellow americans greater freedom from want and fear , and make our society more prosperous and just and equal .
in america 's ideal of freedom , the public interest depends on private character - on integrity , and tolerance toward others , and the rule of conscience in our own lives .
self - government relies , in the end , on the governing of the self .
that edifice of character is built in families , supported by communities with standards , and sustained in our national life by the truths of sinai , the sermon on the mount , the words of the koran , and the varied faiths of our people .
americans move forward in every generation by reaffirming all that is good and true that came before - ideals of justice and conduct that are the same yesterday , today , and forever .
in america 's ideal of freedom , the exercise of rights is ennobled by service , and mercy , and a heart for the weak .
liberty for all does not mean independence from one another .
our nation relies on men and women who look after a neighbor and surround the lost with love .
americans , at our best , value the life we see in one another , and must always remember that even the unwanted have worth .
and our country must abandon all the habits of racism , because we can not carry the message of freedom and the baggage of bigotry at the same time .
from the perspective of a single day , including this day of dedication , the issues and questions before our country are many .
from the viewpoint of centuries , the questions that come to us are narrowed and few .
did our generation advance the cause of freedom ?
and did our character bring credit to that cause ?
these questions that judge us also unite us , because americans of every party and background , americans by choice and by birth , are bound to one another in the cause of freedom .
we have known divisions , which must be healed to move forward in great purposes - and i will strive in good faith to heal them .
yet those divisions do not define america .
we felt the unity and fellowship of our nation when freedom came under attack , and our response came like a single hand over a single heart .
and we can feel that same unity and pride whenever america acts for good , and the victims of disaster are given hope , and the unjust encounter justice , and the captives are set free .
we go forward with complete confidence in the eventual triumph of freedom .
not because history runs on the wheels of inevitability ; it is human choices that move events .
not because we consider ourselves a chosen nation ; god moves and chooses as he wills .
we have confidence because freedom is the permanent hope of mankind , the hunger in dark places , the longing of the soul .
when our founders declared a new order of the ages ; when soldiers died in wave upon wave for a union based on liberty ; when citizens marched in peaceful outrage under the banner " freedom now " - they were acting on an ancient hope that is meant to be fulfilled .
history has an ebb and flow of justice , but history also has a visible direction , set by liberty and the author of liberty .
when the declaration of independence was first read in public and the liberty bell was sounded in celebration , a witness said , " it rang as if it meant something . "
in our time it means something still .
america , in this young century , proclaims liberty throughout all the world , and to all the inhabitants thereof .
renewed in our strength - tested , but not weary - we are ready for the greatest achievements in the history of freedom .
may god bless you , and may he watch over the united states of america .

good morning .
the global devastation of hiv / aids staggers the imagination and shocks the conscience .
the disease has already killed over 20 million people and it 's poised to kill at least 40 million more .
in africa , the disease clouds the future of entire nations and threatens to hold back the hopes of an entire continent .
in the hardest - hit countries of sub - sahara africa as much as one - third of the adult population is infected with hiv , and 10 percent or more of the school teachers will die of aids within five years .
the wasted human lives that lie behind these numbers are a call to action for every person on the planet and for every government .
so , today , my administration is announcing another important new initiative in the fight against hiv / aids .
i want to thank secretary powell and secretary o'neill for their hard work on this project .
i appreciate so very much tommy thompson , secretary of the department of health and human services for he and his staff 's vision and implementation , procedures for this project .
i want to thank andrew natsios , the administrator of usaid .
i appreciate dr. tony fauci , the director of nih , for being here , as well , of the allergy and infectious diseases department .
thank you , tony , for your hard work on this .
i appreciate senator bill frist and senator jesse helms , for their vision on this issue .
and i appreciate jim kolbe , from the house of representatives .
thank you all for being here today .
one of our best opportunities for progress against aids lies in preventing mothers from passing on the hiv virus to their children .
worldwide , close to 2,000 babies are infected with hiv every day , during pregnancy , birth or through breast feeding .
most of those infected will die before their 5th birthday .
the ones who are not infected will grow up as orphans when their parents die of aids .
new advances in medical treatment give us the ability to save many of these young lives .
and we must , and we will .
today i announce that my administration plans to make $ 500 million available to prevent mother - to - child transmission of hiv .
this new effort , which will be funded during the next 16 months , will allow us to treat one million women annually , and reduce mother - to - child transmission by 40 percent within five years or less in target countries .
i thank all the members of congress who supported this initiative , especially senators frist and helms .
their visionary leadership on this issue will mean the difference between life and death for hundreds of thousands of children .
our initiative will focus on 12 countries in africa and others in the caribbean where the problem is most severe and where our help can make the greatest amount of difference .
we 'll pursue medical strategies that have a proven track record .
we 'll define specific goals .
we will demand effective management .
when the lives of babies and mothers are at stake , the only measure of compassion is real results .
we have a three - part strategy .
first , in places with stronger health care systems , we will provide voluntary testing , prevention , counseling , and a comprehensive therapy of anti - retroviral medications for both mother and child , beginning before delivery , and continuing after delivery .
this combination has proven extremely effective in preventing transmission of the hiv virus .
second , in places with weaker health care systems , we 'll provide testing and counseling , and we will support programs that administer a single dose of nevirapine to the mother at the time of delivery , and at least one dose to the infant shortly after birth .
this therapy reduces the chances of infection by nearly 50 percent .
third , and most importantly , we will make a major effort to improve the health care delivery systems in targeted countries .
this will allow more women and babies to receive the comprehensive therapy .
it will allow for better and longer treatment and care of all aids victims .
and it will lead to better health care in general for all the country 's citizens .
we 'll help build better health care systems by pairing hospitals in america and hospitals in africa , so that african hospitals can gain more expertise in administering effective aids programs .
we 'll also send volunteer medical professionals from the united states to assist and train their african counterparts .
and we will recruit and pay african medical and graduate students to provide testing , treatment and care .
this major commitment of my government to prevent mother - to- child hiv transmission is the first of this scale by any government , anywhere .
in time , we will gain valuable experience , improve treatment methods , and sharpen our training strategies .
health care systems in targeted countries will get better .
and this will make even more progress possible .
and as we see what works , we will make more funding available .
the united states already contributes approximately a billion dollars a year to international efforts to combat hiv / aids .
in addition , we plan to spend more than $ 2.5 billion on research and development for new drugs and new treatments .
we 've committed $ 500 million to the global fund to fight aids and other infectious diseases , and we stand ready to commit more as this fund demonstrates its success .
today 's initiative is not a substitute for any of these efforts .
it is not a substitute for further u. s. contributions to the global fund .
this initiative will complement those efforts , and it is an essential new step in our global struggle against aids .
today , i call on other industrialized nations and international organizations to join this crucial effort to save children from disease and death .
medical science gives us the power to save these young lives .
conscience demands we do so .
thank you very much .

mr. speaker , vice president cheney , members of congress , distinguished guests , and fellow citizens : 
 america this evening is a nation called to great responsibilities , and we are rising to meet them .
as we gather tonight , hundreds of thousands of american service men and women are deployed across the world in the war on terror .
by bringing hope to the oppressed and delivering justice to the violent , they are making america more secure .
each day , law enforcement personnel and intelligence officers are tracking terrorist threats ; analysts are examining airline passenger lists ; the men and women of our new homeland security department are patrolling our coasts and borders .
and their vigilance is protecting america .
americans are proving once again to be the hardest working people in the world .
the american economy is growing stronger .
the tax relief you passed is working .
tonight members of congress can take pride in the great works of compassion and reform that skeptics had thought impossible .
you 're raising the standards for our public schools , and you are giving our senior citizens prescription drug coverage under medicare .
we have faced serious challenges together , and now we face a choice : we can go forward with confidence and resolve , or we can turn back to the dangerous illusion that terrorists are not plotting and outlaw regimes are no threat to us .
we can press on with economic growth and reforms in education and medicare , or we can turn back to old policies and old divisions .
we 've not come all this way , through tragedy and trial and war , only to falter and leave our work unfinished .
americans are rising to the tasks of history , and they expect the same from us .
in their efforts , their enterprise , and their character , the american people are showing that the state of our union is confident and strong .
our greatest responsibility is the active defense of the american people .
twenty - eight months have passed since september 11 , 2001 -- over two years without an attack on american soil .
and it is tempting to believe that the danger is behind us .
that hope is understandable , comforting -- and false .
the killing has continued in bali , jakarta , casablanca , riyadh , mombasa , jerusalem , istanbul , and baghdad .
the terrorists continue to plot against america and the civilized world .
and by our will and courage , this danger will be defeated .
inside the united states , where the war began , we must continue to give our homeland security and law enforcement personnel every tool they need to defend us .
and one of those essential tools is the patriot act , which allows federal law enforcement to better share information to track terrorists , to disrupt their cells , and to seize their assets .
for years , we have used similar provisions to catch embezzlers and drug traffickers .
if these methods are good for hunting criminals , they are even more important for hunting terrorists .
key provisions of the patriot act are set to expire next year .
the terrorist threat will not expire on that schedule .
our law enforcement needs this vital legislation to protect our citizens .
you need to renew the patriot act .
america is on the offensive against the terrorists who started this war .
last march , khalid sheik mohammed , a mastermind of september 11 , awoke to find himself in the custody of u. s. and pakistani authorities .
last august 11 brought the capture of the terrorist hambali , who was a key player in the attack in indonesia that killed over 200 people .
we 're tracking al qaeda around the world , and nearly two - thirds of their known leaders have now been captured or killed .
thousands of very skilled and determined military personnel are on the manhunt , going after the remaining killers who hide in cities and caves , and one by one , we will bring these terrorists to justice .
as part of the offensive against terror , we are also confronting the regimes that harbor and support terrorists and could supply them with nuclear , chemical , or biological weapons .
the united states and our allies are determined : we refuse to live in the shadow of this ultimate danger .
the first to see our determination were the taliban , who made afghanistan the primary training base of al qaeda killers .
as of this month , that country has a new constitution guaranteeing free elections and full participation by women .
businesses are opening .
health care centers are being established , and the boys and girls of afghanistan are back in school .
with the help from the new afghan army , our coalition is leading aggressive raids against the surviving members of the taliban and al qaeda .
the men and women of afghanistan are building a nation that is free and proud and fighting terror , and america is honored to be their friend .
since we last met in this chamber , combat forces of the united states , great britain , australia , poland , and other countries enforced the demands of the united nations , ended the rule of saddam hussein , and the people of iraq are free .
having broken the ba'athist regime , we face a remnant of violent saddam supporters .
men who ran away from our troops in battle are now dispersed and attack from the shadows .
these killers , joined by foreign terrorists , are a serious , continuing danger .
yet we 're making progress against them .
the once all - powerful ruler of iraq was found in a hole and now sits in a prison cell .
of the top 55 officials of the former regime , we have captured or killed 45 .
our forces are on the offensive , leading over 1,600 patrols a day and conducting an average of 180 raids a week .
we are dealing with these thugs in iraq just as surely as we dealt with saddam hussein 's evil regime .
the work of building a new iraq is hard , and it is right .
and america has always been willing to do what it takes for what is right .
last january , iraq 's only law was the whim of one brutal man .
today , our coalition is working with the iraqi governing council to draft a basic law with a bill of rights .
we 're working with iraqis and the united nations to prepare for a transition to full iraqi sovereignty by the end of june .
as democracy takes hold in iraq , the enemies of freedom will do all in their power to spread violence and fear .
they are trying to shake the will of our country and our friends , but the united states of america will never be intimidated by thugs and assassins .
the killers will fail , and the iraqi people will live in freedom .
month by month , iraqis are assuming more responsibility for their own security and their own future .
and tonight we are honored to welcome one of iraq 's most respected leaders , the current president of the iraqi governing council , adnan pachachi .
sir , america stands with you and the iraqi people as you build a free and peaceful nation .
because of american leadership and resolve , the world is changing for the better .
last month , the leader of libya voluntarily pledged to disclose and dismantle all of his regime 's weapons of mass destruction programs , including a uranium enrichment project for nuclear weapons .
colonel qadhafi correctly judged that his country would be better off and far more secure without weapons of mass murder .
nine months of intense negotiations involving the united states and great britain succeeded with libya , while 12 years of diplomacy with iraq did not .
and one reason is clear : for diplomacy to be effective , words must be credible , and no one can now doubt the word of america .
different threats require different strategies .
along with nations in the region , we 're insisting that north korea eliminate its nuclear program .
america and the international community are demanding that iran meet its commitments and not develop nuclear weapons .
america is committed to keeping the world 's most dangerous weapons out of the hands of the most dangerous regimes .
when i came to this rostrum on september 20 , 2001 , i brought the police shield of a fallen officer , my reminder of lives that ended and a task that does not end .
i gave to you and to all americans my complete commitment to securing our country and defeating our enemies .
and this pledge , given by one , has been kept by many .
you in the congress have provided the resources for our defense and cast the difficult votes of war and peace .
our closest allies have been unwavering .
america 's intelligence personnel and diplomats have been skilled and tireless .
and the men and women of the american military -- they have taken the hardest duty .
we 've seen their skill and their courage in armored charges and midnight raids and lonely hours on faithful watch .
we have seen the joy when they return and felt the sorrow when one is lost .
i 've had the honor of meeting our service men and women at many posts , from the deck of a carrier in the pacific to a mess hall in baghdad .
many of our troops are listening tonight , and i want you and your families to know : america is proud of you .
and my administration and this congress will give you the resources you need to fight and win the war on terror .
i know that some people question if america is really in a war at all .
they view terrorism more as a crime , a problem to be solved mainly with law enforcement and indictments .
after the world trade center was first attacked in 1993 , some of the guilty were indicted and tried and convicted and sent to prison .
but the matter was not settled .
the terrorists were still training and plotting in other nations and drawing up more ambitious plans .
after the chaos and carnage of september 11 , it is not enough to serve our enemies with legal papers .
the terrorists and their supporters declared war on the united states , and war is what they got .
some in this chamber and in our country did not support the liberation of iraq .
objections to war often come from principled motives , but let us be candid about the consequences of leaving saddam hussein in power .
we 're seeking all the facts .
already , the kay report identified dozens of weapons - of - mass - destruction - related program activities and significant amounts of equipment that iraq concealed from the united nations .
had we failed to act , the dictator 's weapons of mass destruction programs would continue to this day .
had we failed to act , security council resolutions on iraq would have been revealed as empty threats , weakening the united nations and encouraging defiance by dictators around the world .
iraq 's torture chambers would still be filled with victims , terrified and innocent .
the killing fields of iraq , where hundreds of thousands of men and women and children vanished into the sands , would still be known only to the killers .
for all who love freedom and peace , the world without saddam hussein 's regime is a better and safer place .
some critics have said our duties in iraq must be internationalized .
this particular criticism is hard to explain to our partners in britain , australia , japan , south korea , the philippines , thailand , italy , spain , poland , denmark , hungary , bulgaria , ukraine , romania , the netherlands , norway , el salvador , and the 17 other countries that have committed troops to iraq .
as we debate at home , we must never ignore the vital contributions of our international partners or dismiss their sacrifices .
from the beginning , america has sought international support for our operations in afghanistan and iraq , and we have gained much support .
there is a difference , however , between leading a coalition of many nations and submitting to the objections of a few .
america will never seek a permission slip to defend the security of our country .
we also hear doubts that democracy is a realistic goal for the greater middle east , where freedom is rare .
yet it is mistaken and condescending to assume that whole cultures and great religions are incompatible with liberty and self - government .
i believe that god has planted in every human heart the desire to live in freedom .
and even when that desire is crushed by tyranny for decades , it will rise again .
as long as the middle east remains a place of tyranny and despair and anger , it will continue to produce men and movements that threaten the safety of america and our friends .
so america is pursuing a forward strategy of freedom in the greater middle east .
we will challenge the enemies of reform , confront the allies of terror , and expect a higher standard from our friend .
to cut through the barriers of hateful propaganda , the voice of america and other broadcast services are expanding their programming in arabic and persian , and soon a new television service will begin providing reliable news and information across the region .
i will send you a proposal to double the budget of the national endowment for democracy and to focus its new work on the development of free elections and free markets , free press , and free labor unions in the middle east .
and above all , we will finish the historic work of democracy in afghanistan and iraq so those nations can light the way for others and help transform a troubled part of the world .
america is a nation with a mission , and that mission comes from our most basic beliefs .
we have no desire to dominate , no ambitions of empire .
our aim is a democratic peace , a peace founded upon the dignity and rights of every man and woman .
america acts in this cause with friends and allies at our side , yet we understand our special calling : this great republic will lead the cause of freedom .
in the last three years , adversity has also revealed the fundamental strengths of the american economy .
we have come through recession and terrorist attack and corporate scandals and the uncertainties of war .
and because you acted to stimulate our economy with tax relief , this economy is strong and growing stronger .
you have doubled the child tax credit from 500 to $ 1,000 , reduced the marriage penalty , begun to phase out the death tax , reduced taxes on capital gains and stock dividends , cut taxes on small businesses , and you have lowered taxes for every american who pays income taxes .
americans took those dollars and put them to work , driving this economy forward .
the pace of economic growth in the third quarter of 2003 was the fastest in nearly 20 years ; new home construction , the highest in almost 20 years ; homeownership rates , the highest ever .
manufacturing activity is increasing .
inflation is low .
interest rates are low .
exports are growing .
productivity is high , and jobs are on the rise .
these numbers confirm that the american people are using their money far better than government would have , and you were right to return it .
america 's growing economy is also a changing economy .
as technology transforms the way almost every job is done , america becomes more productive , and workers need new skills .
much of our job growth will be found in high - skilled fields like health care and biotechnology .
so we must respond by helping more americans gain the skills to find good jobs in our new economy .
all skills begin with the basics of reading and math , which are supposed to be learned in the early grades of our schools .
yet for too long , for too many children , those skills were never mastered .
by passing the no child left behind act , you have made the expectation of literacy the law of our country .
we 're providing more funding for our schools , a 36-percent increase since 2001 .
we 're requiring higher standards .
we are regularly testing every child on the fundamentals .
we are reporting results to parents and making sure they have better options when schools are not performing .
we are making progress toward excellence for every child in america .
but the status quo always has defenders .
some want to undermine the no child left behind act by weakening standards and accountability .
yet the results we require are really a matter of common sense : we expect third graders to read and do math at the third grade level , and that 's not asking too much .
testing is the only way to identify and help students who are falling behind .
this nation will not go back to the days of simply shuffling children along from grade to grade without them learning the basics .
i refuse to give up on any child , and the no child left behind act is opening the door of opportunity to all of america 's children .
at the same time , we must ensure that older students and adults can gain the skills they need to find work now .
many of the fastest growing occupations require strong math and science preparation and training beyond the high school level .
so tonight , i propose a series of measures called jobs for the 21st century .
this program will provide extra help to middle and high school students who fall behind in reading and math , expand advanced placement programs in low - income schools , invite math and science professionals from the private sector to teach part - time in our high schools .
i propose larger pell grants for students who prepare for college with demanding courses in high school .
i propose increasing our support for america 's fine community colleges , so they can -- i do so , so they can train workers for industries that are creating the most new jobs .
by all these actions , we 'll help more and more americans to join in the growing prosperity of our country .
job training is important , and so is job creation .
we must continue to pursue an aggressive , progrowth economic agenda .
congress has some unfinished business on the issue of taxes .
the tax reductions you passed are set to expire .
unless you act , the unfair tax on marriage will go back up .
unless you act , millions of families will be charged $ 300 more in federal taxes for every child .
unless you act , small businesses will pay higher taxes .
unless you act , the death tax will eventually come back to life .
unless you act , americans face a tax increase .
what congress has given , the congress should not take away .
for the sake of job growth , the tax cuts you passed should be permanent .
our agenda for jobs and growth must help small - business owners and employees with relief from needless federal regulation and protect them from junk and frivolous lawsuits .
consumers and businesses need reliable supplies of energy to make our economy run , so i urge you to pass legislation to modernize our electricity system , promote conservation , and make america less dependent on foreign sources of energy .
my administration is promoting free and fair trade to open up new markets for america 's entrepreneurs and manufacturers and farmers , to create jobs for american workers .
younger workers should have the opportunity to build a nest egg by saving part of their social security taxes in a personal retirement account .
we should make the social security system a source of ownership for the american people .
and we should limit the burden of government on this economy by acting as good stewards of taxpayers ' dollars .
in two weeks , i will send you a budget that funds the war , protects the homeland , and meets important domestic needs while limiting the growth in discretionary spending to less than four percent .
this will require that congress focus on priorities , cut wasteful spending , and be wise with the people 's money .
by doing so , we can cut the deficit in half over the next five years .
tonight i also ask you to reform our immigration laws so they reflect our values and benefit our economy .
i propose a new temporary worker program to match willing foreign workers with willing employers when no americans can be found to fill the job .
this reform will be good for our economy because employers will find needed workers in an honest and orderly system .
a temporary worker program will help protect our homeland , allowing border patrol and law enforcement to focus on true threats to our national security .
i oppose amnesty , because it would encourage further illegal immigration and unfairly reward those who break our laws .
my temporary worker program will preserve the citizenship path for those who respect the law while bringing millions of hard - working men and women out from the shadows of american life .
our nation 's health care system , like our economy , is also in a time of change .
amazing medical technologies are improving and saving lives .
this dramatic progress has brought its own challenge , in the rising costs of medical care and health insurance .
members of congress , we must work together to help control those costs and extend the benefits of modern medicine throughout our country .
meeting these goals requires bipartisan effort , and two months ago , you showed the way .
by strengthening medicare and adding a prescription drug benefit , you kept a basic commitment to our seniors .
you are giving them the modern medicine they deserve .
starting this year , under the law you passed , seniors can choose to receive a drug discount card , saving them 10 to 25 percent off the retail price of most prescription drugs , and millions of low - income seniors can get an additional $ 600 to buy medicine .
beginning next year , seniors will have new coverage for preventive screenings against diabetes and heart disease , and seniors just entering medicare can receive wellness exams .
in january of 2006 , seniors can get prescription drug coverage under medicare .
for a monthly premium of about $ 35 , most seniors who do not have that coverage today can expect to see their drug bills cut roughly in half .
under this reform , senior citizens will be able to keep their medicare just as it is , or they can choose a medicare plan that fits them best , just as you , as members of congress , can choose an insurance plan that meets your needs .
and starting this year , millions of americans will be able to save money tax - free for their medical expenses in a health savings account .
i signed this measure proudly , and any attempt to limit the choices of our seniors or to take away their prescription drug coverage under medicare will meet my veto .
on the critical issue of health care , our goal is to ensure that americans can choose and afford private health care coverage that best fits their individual needs .
to make insurance more affordable , congress must act to address rapidly rising health care costs .
small businesses should be able to band together and negotiate for lower insurance rates , so they can cover more workers with health insurance .
i urge you to pass association health plans .
i ask you to give lower income americans a refundable tax credit that would allow millions to buy their own basic health insurance .
by computerizing health records , we can avoid dangerous medical mistakes , reduce costs , and improve care .
to protect the doctor - patient relationship and keep good doctors doing good work , we must eliminate wasteful and frivolous medical lawsuits .
and tonight i propose that individuals who buy catastrophic health care coverage as part of our new health savings accounts be allowed to deduct 100 percent of the premiums from their taxes .
a government - run health care system is the wrong prescription .
by keeping costs under control , expanding access , and helping more americans afford coverage , we will preserve the system of private medicine that makes america 's health care the best in the world .
we are living in a time of great change in our world , in our economy , in science and medicine .
yet some things endure : courage and compassion , reverence and integrity , respect for differences of faith and race .
the values we try to live by never change , and they are instilled in us by fundamental institutions such as families and schools and religious congregations .
these institutions , these unseen pillars of civilization , must remain strong in america , and we will defend them .
we must stand with our families to help them raise healthy , responsible children .
when it comes to helping children make right choices , there is work for all of us to do .
one of the worst decisions our children can make is to gamble their lives and futures on drugs .
our government is helping parents confront this problem with aggressive education , treatment , and law enforcement .
drug use in high school has declined by 11 percent over the last two years .
four hundred thousand fewer young people are using illegal drugs than in the year 2001 .
in my budget , i propose new funding to continue our aggressive , community - based strategy to reduce demand for illegal drugs .
drug testing in our schools has proven to be an effective part of this effort .
so tonight i propose an additional 23 million for schools that want to use drug testing as a tool to save children 's lives .
the aim here is not to punish children but to send them this message : we love you , and we do not want to lose you .
to help children make right choices , they need good examples .
athletics play such an important role in our society , but unfortunately , some in professional sports are not setting much of an example .
the use of performance - enhancing drugs like steroids in baseball , football , and other sports is dangerous , and it sends the wrong message , that there are shortcuts to accomplishment and that performance is more important than character .
so tonight i call on team owners , union representatives , coaches , and players to take the lead , to send the right signal , to get tough , and to get rid of steroids now .
to encourage right choices , we must be willing to confront the dangers young people face , even when they 're difficult to talk about .
each year , about three million teenagers contract sexually transmitted diseases that can harm them or kill them or prevent them from ever becoming parents .
in my budget , i propose a grassroots campaign to help inform families about these medical risks .
we will double federal funding for abstinence programs , so schools can teach this fact of life : abstinence for young people is the only certain way to avoid sexually transmitted diseases .
decisions children now make can affect their health and character for the rest of their lives .
all of us , parents and schools and government , must work together to counter the negative influence of the culture and to send the right messages to our children .
a strong america must also value the institution of marriage .
i believe we should respect individuals as we take a principled stand for one of the most fundamental , enduring institutions of our civilization .
congress has already taken a stand on this issue by passing the defense of marriage act , signed in 1996 by president clinton .
that statute protects marriage under federal law as a union of a man and a woman and declares that one state may not redefine marriage for other states .
activist judges , however , have begun redefining marriage by court order , without regard for the will of the people and their elected representatives .
on an issue of such great consequence , the people 's voice must be heard .
if judges insist on forcing their arbitrary will upon the people , the only alternative left to the people would be the constitutional process .
our nation must defend the sanctity of marriage .
the outcome of this debate is important , and so is the way we conduct it .
the same moral tradition that defines marriage also teaches that each individual has dignity and value in god 's sight .
it 's also important to strengthen our communities by unleashing the compassion of america 's religious institutions .
religious charities of every creed are doing some of the most vital work in our country : mentoring children , feeding the hungry , taking the hand of the lonely .
yet government has often denied social service grants and contracts to these groups , just because they have a cross or a star of david or a crescent on the wall .
by executive order , i have opened billions of dollars in grant money to competition that includes faith - based charities .
tonight i ask you to codify this into law , so people of faith can know that the law will never discriminate against them again .
in the past , we 've worked together to bring mentors to children of prisoners and provide treatment for the addicted and help for the homeless .
tonight i ask you to consider another group of americans in need of help .
this year , some 600,000 inmates will be released from prison back into society .
we know from long experience that if they ca n't find work or a home or help , they are much more likely to commit crime and return to prison .
so tonight i propose a four - year , $ 300 million prisoner reentry initiative to expand job training and placement services , to provide transitional housing , and to help newly released prisoners get mentoring , including from faith - based groups .
america is the land of second chance , and when the gates of the prison open , the path ahead should lead to a better life .
for all americans , the last three years have brought tests we did not ask for and achievements shared by all .
by our actions , we have shown what kind of nation we are .
in grief , we have found the grace to go on .
in challenge , we rediscovered the courage and daring of a free people .
in victory , we have shown the noble aims and good heart of america .
and having come this far , we sense that we live in a time set apart .
i 've been witness to the character of the people of america , who have shown calm in times of danger , compassion for one another , and toughness for the long haul .
all of us have been partners in a great enterprise .
and even some of the youngest understand that we are living in historic times .
last month a girl in lincoln , rhode island , sent me a letter .
it began , " dear george w. bush .
if there 's anything you know i , ashley pearson , age 10 , can do to help anyone , please send me a letter and tell me what i can do to save our country . "
she added this p. s. : " if you can send a letter to the troops , please put , ` ashley pearson believes in you . ' "
tonight , ashley , your message to our troops has just been conveyed .
and yes , you have some duties yourself : study hard in school ; listen to your mom or dad ; help someone in need ; and when you and your friends see a man or woman in uniform , say , " thank you . "
and ashley , while you do your part , all of us here in this great chamber will do our best to keep you and the rest of america safe and free .
my fellow citizens , we now move forward with confidence and faith .
our nation is strong and steadfast .
the cause we serve is right , because it is the cause of all mankind .
the momentum of freedom in our world is unmistakable , and it is not carried forward by our power alone .
we can trust in that greater power who guides the unfolding of the years .
and in all that is to come , we can know that his purposes are just and true .
may god continue to bless america .

good evening .
three days ago , in large numbers , iraqis went to the polls to choose their own leaders -- a landmark day in the history of liberty .
in the coming weeks , the ballots will be counted , a new government formed , and a people who suffered in tyranny for so long will become full members of the free world .
this election will not mean the end of violence .
but it is the beginning of something new : constitutional democracy at the heart of the middle east .
and this vote -- 6,000 miles away , in a vital region of the world -- means that america has an ally of growing strength in the fight against terror .
all who had a part in this achievement -- iraqis , and americans and our coalition partners -- can be proud .
yet our work is not done .
there is more testing and sacrifice before us .
i know many americans have questions about the cost and direction of this war .
so tonight i want to talk to you about how far we have come in iraq , and the path that lies ahead .
from this office , nearly three years ago , i announced the start of military operations in iraq .
our coalition confronted a regime that defied united nations security council resolutions , violated a cease - fire agreement , sponsored terrorism , and possessed , we believed , weapons of mass destruction .
after the swift fall of baghdad , we found mass graves filled by a dictator ; we found some capacity to restart programs to produce weapons of mass destruction , but we did not find those weapons .
it is true that saddam hussein had a history of pursuing and using weapons of mass destruction .
it is true that he systematically concealed those programs , and blocked the work of u. n. weapons inspectors .
it is true that many nations believed that saddam had weapons of mass destruction .
but much of the intelligence turned out to be wrong .
as your president , i am responsible for the decision to go into iraq .
yet it was right to remove saddam hussein from power .
he was given an ultimatum -- and he made his choice for war .
and the result of that war was to rid a -- the world of a murderous dictator who menaced his people , invaded his neighbors , and declared america to be his enemy .
saddam hussein , captured and jailed , is still the same raging tyrant -- only now without a throne .
his power to harm a single man , woman , or child is gone forever .
and the world is better for it .
since the removal of saddam , this war , like other wars in our history , has been difficult .
the mission of american troops in urban raids and desert patrols , fighting saddam loyalists and foreign terrorists , has brought danger and suffering and loss .
this loss has caused sorrow for our whole nation -- and it has led some to ask if we are creating more problems than we 're solving .
that is an important question , and the answer depends on your view of the war on terror .
if you think the terrorists would become peaceful if only america would stop provoking them , then it might make sense to leave them alone .
this is not the threat i see .
i see a global terrorist movement that exploits islam in the service of radical political aims -- a vision in which books are burned , and women are oppressed , and all dissent is crushed .
terrorist operatives conduct their campaign of murder with a set of declared and specific goals -- to de - moralize free nations , to drive us out of the middle east , to spread an empire of fear across that region , and to wage a perpetual war against america and our friends .
these terrorists view the world as a giant battlefield -- and they seek to attack us wherever they can .
this has attracted al qaeda to iraq , where they are attempting to frighten and intimidate america into a policy of retreat .
the terrorists do not merely object to american actions in iraq and elsewhere , they object to our deepest values and our way of life .
and if we were not fighting them in iraq , in afghanistan , in southeast asia , and in other places , the terrorists would not be peaceful citizens , they would be on the offense , and headed our way .
september the 11th , 2001 required us to take every emerging threat to our country seriously , and it shattered the illusion that terrorists attack us only after we provoke them .
on that day , we were not in iraq , we were not in afghanistan , but the terrorists attacked us anyway -- and killed nearly 3,000 men , women , and children in our own country .
my conviction comes down to this : we do not create terrorism by fighting the terrorists .
we invite terrorism by ignoring them .
and we will defeat the terrorists by capturing and killing them abroad , removing their safe havens , and strengthening new allies like iraq and afghanistan in the fight we share .
the work in iraq has been especially difficult -- more difficult than we expected .
reconstruction efforts and the training of iraqi security forces started more slowly than we hoped .
we continue to see violence and suffering , caused by an enemy that is determined and brutal , unconstrained by conscience or the rules of war .
some look at the challenges in iraq and conclude that the war is lost , and not worth another dime or another day .
i do n't believe that .
our military commanders do not believe that .
our troops in the field , who bear the burden and make the sacrifice , do not believe that america has lost .
and not even the terrorists believe it .
we know from their own communications that they feel a tightening noose , and fear the rise of a democratic iraq .
the terrorists will continue to have the coward 's power to plant roadside bombs and recruit suicide bombers .
and you will continue to see the grim results on the evening news .
this proves that the war is difficult -- it does n't mean that we are losing .
behind the images of chaos that terrorists create for the cameras , we are making steady gains with a clear objective in view .
america , our coalition , and iraqi leaders are working toward the same goal -- a democratic iraq that can defend itself , that will never again be a safe haven for terrorists , and that will serve as a model of freedom for the middle east .
we have put in place a strategy to achieve this goal -- a strategy i 've been discussing in detail over the last few weeks .
this plan has three critical elements .
first , our coalition will remain on the offense -- finding and clearing out the enemy , transferring control of more territory to iraqi units , and building up the iraqi security forces so they can increasingly lead the fight .
at this time last year , there were only a handful of iraqi army and police battalions ready for combat .
now , there are more than 125 iraqi combat battalions fighting the enemy , more than 50 are taking the lead , and we have transferred more than a dozen military bases to iraqi control .
second , we 're helping the iraqi government establish the institutions of a unified and lasting democracy , in which all of iraq 's people are included and represented .
here also , the news is encouraging .
three days ago , more than 10 million iraqis went to the polls -- including many sunni iraqis who had boycotted national elections last january .
iraqis of every background are recognizing that democracy is the future of the country they love -- and they want their voices heard .
one iraqi , after dipping his finger in the purple ink as he cast his ballot , stuck his finger in the air and said : " this is a thorn in the eyes of the terrorists . "
another voter was asked , " are you sunni or shia ? "
and he responded , " i am iraqi . "
third , after a number of setbacks , our coalition is moving forward with a reconstruction plan to revive iraq 's economy and infrastructure -- and to give iraqis confidence that a free life will be a better life .
today in iraq , seven in 10 iraqis say their lives are going well , and nearly two - thirds expect things to improve even more in the year ahead .
despite the violence , iraqis are optimistic -- and that optimism is justified .
in all three aspects of our strategy -- security , democracy , and reconstruction -- we have learned from our experiences , and fixed what has not worked .
we will continue to listen to honest criticism , and make every change that will help us complete the mission .
yet there is a difference between honest critics who recognize what is wrong , and defeatists who refuse to see that anything is right .
defeatism may have its partisan uses , but it is not justified by the facts .
for every scene of destruction in iraq , there are more scenes of rebuilding and hope .
for every life lost , there are countless more lives reclaimed .
and for every terrorist working to stop freedom in iraq , there are many more iraqis and americans working to defeat them .
my fellow citizens : not only can we win the war in iraq , we are winning the war in iraq .
it is also important for every american to understand the consequences of pulling out of iraq before our work is done .
we would abandon our iraqi friends and signal to the world that america can not be trusted to keep its word .
we would undermine the morale of our troops by betraying the cause for which they have sacrificed .
we would cause the tyrants in the middle east to laugh at our failed resolve , and tighten their repressive grip .
we would hand iraq over to enemies who have pledged to attack us and the global terrorist movement would be emboldened and more dangerous than ever before .
to retreat before victory would be an act of recklessness and dishonor , and i will not allow it .
we 're approaching a new year , and there are certain things all americans can expect to see .
we will see more sacrifice -- from our military , their families , and the iraqi people .
we will see a concerted effort to improve iraqi police forces and fight corruption .
we will see the iraqi military gaining strength and confidence , and the democratic process moving forward .
as these achievements come , it should require fewer american troops to accomplish our mission .
i will make decisions on troop levels based on the progress we see on the ground and the advice of our military leaders -- not based on artificial timetables set by politicians in washington .
our forces in iraq are on the road to victory -- and that is the road that will take them home .
in the months ahead , all americans will have a part in the success of this war .
members of congress will need to provide resources for our military .
our men and women in uniform , who have done so much already , will continue their brave and urgent work .
and tonight , i ask all of you listening to carefully consider the stakes of this war , to realize how far we have come and the good we are doing , and to have patience in this difficult , noble , and necessary cause .
i also want to speak to those of you who did not support my decision to send troops to iraq : i have heard your disagreement , and i know how deeply it is felt .
yet now there are only two options before our country -- victory or defeat .
and the need for victory is larger than any president or political party , because the security of our people is in the balance .
i do n't expect you to support everything i do , but tonight i have a request : do not give in to despair , and do not give up on this fight for freedom .
americans can expect some things of me , as well .
my most solemn responsibility is to protect our nation , and that requires me to make some tough decisions .
i see the consequences of those decisions when i meet wounded servicemen and women who can not leave their hospital beds , but summon the strength to look me in the eye and say they would do it all over again .
i see the consequences when i talk to parents who miss a child so much -- but tell me he loved being a soldier , he believed in his mission , and , mr. president , finish the job .
i know that some of my decisions have led to terrible loss -- and not one of those decisions has been taken lightly .
i know this war is controversial -- yet being your president requires doing what i believe is right and accepting the consequences .
and i have never been more certain that america 's actions in iraq are essential to the security of our citizens , and will lay the foundation of peace for our children and grandchildren .
next week , americans will gather to celebrate christmas and hanukkah .
many families will be praying for loved ones spending this season far from home -- in iraq , afghanistan , and other dangerous places .
our nation joins in those prayers .
we pray for the safety and strength of our troops .
we trust , with them , in a love that conquers all fear , in a light that reaches the darkest corners of the earth .
and we remember the words of the christmas carol , written during the civil war : " god is not dead , nor   he sleep ; the wrong shall fail , the right prevail , with peace on earth , goodwill to men . "
thank you , and good night .

thank you all .
deputy secretary england , thanks for the introduction .
one boss may not be here , but the other one is .
i appreciate your kind words .
i 'm pleased to be back here with the men and women of the defense department .
on this day in 2003 , the united states began operation iraqi freedom .
as the campaign unfolded , tens and thousands of our troops poured across the iraqi border to liberate the iraqi people and remove a regime that threatened free nations .
five years into this battle , there is an understandable debate over whether the war was worth fighting ; whether the fight is worth winning ; and whether we can win it .
the answers are clear to me : removing saddam hussein from power was the right decision , and this is a fight america can and must win .
the men and women who crossed into iraq 5 years ago removed a tyrant , liberated a country , and rescued millions from unspeakable horrors .
some of those troops are with us today , and you need to know that the american people are proud of your accomplishment , and so is the commander in chief .
i appreciate admiral mullen , the joint chiefs who are here .
thanks for coming .
secretary donald winter of the navy ; deputy secretary of state john negroponte is with us .
admiral thad allen of the coast guard is with us .
ambassador from iraq is with us ; mr. ambassador , we 're proud to have you here .
soldiers , sailors , marines , airmen , and coast men -- coast guard men , thanks for coming ; thanks for wearing the uniform .
men and women of the department of state are here as well .
operation iraqi freedom was a remarkable display of military effectiveness .
forces from the uk , australia , poland , and other allies joined our troops in the initial operations .
as they advanced , our troops fought their way through sandstorms so intense that they blackened the daytime sky .
our troops engaged in pitched battles with fedayeen saddam , death squads acting on the orders of saddam hussein , that obeyed neither the conventions of war nor the dictates of conscience .
these death squads hid in schools , and they hid in hospitals , hoping to draw fire against iraqi civilians .
they used women and children as human shields .
they stopped at nothing in their efforts to prevent us from prevailing , but they could n't stop the coalition advance .
aided by the most effective and precise air campaign in history , coalition forces raced across 350 miles of enemy territory , destroying republican guard divisions , pushing through the karbala gap , capturing saddam international airport , and liberating baghdad in less than 1 month .
along the way , our troops added new chapters to the story of american military heroism .
during these first weeks of battle , army sergeant first class paul ray smith and his troops came under a surprise attack by about a hundred republican guard forces .
sergeant smith rallied his men .
he led a counterattack , killing as many as 50 enemy soldiers before being fatally wounded .
his actions saved the lives of more than a hundred american troops and earned him the medal of honor .
today , in light of the challenges we have faced in iraq , some look back at this period as the easy part of the war .
yet there was nothing easy about it .
the liberation of iraq took incredible skill and amazing courage .
and the speed , precision , and brilliant execution of the campaign will be studied by military historians for years to come .
what our troops found in iraq following saddam 's removal was horrifying .
they uncovered children 's prisons and torture chambers and rape rooms where iraqi women were violated in front of their families .
they found videos showing regime thugs mutilating iraqis deemed disloyal to saddam .
and across the iraqi countryside , they uncovered mass graves of thousands executed by the regime .
because we acted , saddam hussein no longer fills fields with the remains of innocent men , women , and children .
because we acted , saddam 's torture chambers and rape rooms and children 's prisons have been closed for good .
because we acted , saddam 's regime is no longer invading its neighbors or attacking them with chemical weapons and ballistic missiles .
because we acted , saddam 's regime is no longer paying the families of suicide bombers in the holy land .
because we acted , saddam 's regime is no longer shooting at american and british aircraft patrolling the no - fly zones and defying the will of the united nations .
because we acted , the world is better and united states of america is safer .
when the iraqi regime was removed , it did not lay down its arms and surrender .
instead , former regime elements took off their uniforms and faded into the countryside to fight the emergence of a free iraq .
and then they were joined by foreign terrorists who were seeking to stop the advance of liberty in the middle east and seeking to establish safe havens from which to plot new attacks across the world .
the battle in iraq has been longer and harder and more costly than we anticipated , but it is a fight we must win .
so our troops have engaged these enemies with courage and determination .
and as they 've battled the terrorists and extremists in iraq , they have helped the iraqi people reclaim their nation and helped a young democracy rise from the rubble of saddam hussein 's tyranny .
over the past 5 years , we have seen moments of triumph and moments of tragedy .
we have watched in admiration as 12 million iraqis defied the terrorists and went to the polls and chose their leaders in free elections .
we watched in horror as al qaida beheaded innocent captives and sent suicide bombers to blow up mosques and markets .
these actions show the brutal nature of the enemy in iraq , and they serve as a grim reminder .
the terrorists who murder the innocent in the streets of baghdad want to murder the innocent in the streets of america .
defeating this enemy in iraq will make it less likely that we will face the enemy here at home .
a little over a year ago , the fight in iraq was faltering .
extremist elements were succeeding in their efforts to plunge iraq into chaos .
they had established safe havens in many parts of the country .
they were creating divisions among the iraqis along sectarian lines .
and their strategy of using violence in iraq to cause divisions in america was working as pressures built here in washington for withdrawal before the job was done .
my administration understood that america could not retreat in the face of terror .
and we knew that if we did not act , the violence that had been consuming iraq would worsen and spread and could eventually reach genocidal levels .
baghdad could have disintegrated into a contagion of killing , and iraq could have descended into full - blown sectarian warfare .
so we reviewed the strategy and changed course in iraq .
we sent reinforcements into the country in a dramatic policy shift that is now known as the surge .
general david petraeus took command with a new mission : work with iraqi forces to protect the iraqi people ; pressure the enemy into strongholds ; and deny the terrorists sanctuary anywhere in the country .
and that is precisely what we have done .
in anbar , sunni tribal leaders had grown tired of al qaida 's brutality and started a popular uprising called the anbar awakening .
to take advantage of this opportunity , we sent 4,000 additional marines to help these brave iraqis drive al qaida from the province .
as this effort succeeded , it inspired other iraqis to take up the fight .
soon similar uprisings began to spread across the country .
today , there are more than 90,000 concerned local citizens who are protecting their communities from the terrorists and insurgents and the extremists .
the government in baghdad has stepped forward with a surge of its own ; they 've added more than 100,000 new iraqi soldiers and police during the past year .
these iraqi troops have fought bravely , and thousands have given their lives in this struggle .
together , these americans and iraqi forces have driven the terrorists from many of the sanctuaries they once held .
now the terrorists have gathered in and around the northern iraqi city of mosul , and iraqi and american forces are relentlessly pursuing them .
there will be tough fighting in mosul and areas of northern iraq in the weeks ahead .
but there 's no doubt in my mind , because of the courage of our troops and the bravery of the iraqis , the al qaida terrorists in this region will suffer the same fate as al qaida suffered elsewhere in iraq .
as we have fought al qaida , coalition and iraqi forces have also taken the fight to shi'a extremist groups , many of them backed and financed and armed by iran .
a year ago , these groups were on the rise .
today , they are increasingly isolated , and iraqis of all faiths are putting their lives on the line to stop these extremists from hijacking their young democracy .
to ensure that military progress in iraq is quickly followed up with real improvements in daily life , we have doubled the number of provincial reconstruction teams in iraq .
these teams of civilian experts are serving all iraqi -- 18 iraqi provinces , and they 're helping to strengthen responsible leaders and build up local economies and bring iraqis together , so that reconciliation can happen from the ground up .
they 're very effective .
they 're helping give ordinary iraqis confidence that by rejecting the extremists and reconciling with one another , they can claim their place in a free iraq and build better lives for their families .
there 's still hard work to be done in iraq .
the gains we have made are fragile and reversible .
but on this anniversary , the american people should know that since the surge began , the level of violence is significantly down , civilian deaths are down , sectarian killings are down , attacks on american forces are down .
we have captured or killed thousands of extremists in iraq , including hundreds of key al qaida leaders and operatives .
our men and women in uniform are performing with characteristic honor and valor .
the surge is working .
and as a return on our success in iraq , we 've begun bringing some of our troops home .
the surge has done more than turn the situation in iraq around , it has opened the door to a major strategic victory in the broader war on terror .
for the terrorists , iraq was supposed to be the place where al qaida rallied arab masses to drive america out .
instead , iraq has become the place where arabs joined with americans to drive al qaida out .
in iraq , we are witnessing the first large - scale arab uprising against osama bin laden , his grim ideology , and his murderous network .
and the significance of this development can not be overstated .
the terrorist movement feeds on a sense of inevitability and claims to rise on the tide of history .
the accomplishments of the surge in iraq are exposing this myth and discrediting the extremists .
when iraqi and american forces finish the job , the effects will reverberate far beyond iraq 's borders .
usama bin laden once said : " when people see a strong horse and a weak horse , by nature they will like the strong horse . "
by defeating al qaida in iraq , we will show the world that al qaida is the weak horse .
we will show that men and women who love liberty can defeat the terrorists .
and we will show that the future of the middle east does not belong to terror .
the future of the middle east belongs to freedom .
the challenge in this period ahead is to consolidate the gains we have made and seal the extremists ' defeat .
we have learned through hard experience what happens when we pull our forces back too fast ; the terrorists and extremists step in , they fill vacuums , establish safe havens , and use them to spread chaos and carnage .
general petraeus has warned that too fast a drawdown could result in such an unraveling with al qaida and insurgents and militia extremists regaining lost ground and increasing violence .
men and women of the armed forces : having come so far and achieved so much , we 're not going to let this to happen .
next month , general petraeus and ambassador crocker will come to washington to testify before congress .
i will await their recommendations before making decisions on our troop levels in iraq .
any further drawdown will be based on conditions on the ground and the recommendations of our commanders .
and they must not jeopardize the hard - fought gains our troops and civilians have made over the past year .
successes we are seeing in iraq are undeniable , yet some in washington still call for retreat .
war critics can no longer credibly argue that we 're losing in iraq , so they now argue the war costs too much .
in recent months , we 've heard exaggerated amounts of the costs of this war .
no one are -- would argue that this war has not come at a high cost in lives and treasure ; but those costs are necessary when we consider the cost of a strategic victory for our enemies in iraq .
if we were to allow our enemies to prevail in iraq , the violence that is now declining would accelerate , and iraq would descend into chaos .
al qaida would regain its lost sanctuaries and establish new ones , fomenting violence and terror that could spread beyond iraq 's borders , with serious consequences for the world 's economy .
out of such chaos in iraq , the terrorist movement could emerge emboldened , with new recruits , new resources , and an even greater determination to dominate the region and harm america .
an emboldened al qaida with access to iraq 's oil resources could pursue its ambitions to acquire weapons of mass destruction to attack america and other free nations .
iran would be emboldened as well , with a renewed determination to develop nuclear weapons and impose its brand of hegemony across the middle east .
our enemies would see an america -- an american failure in iraq as evidence of weakness and a lack of resolve .
to allow this to happen would be to ignore the lessons of september the 11th and make it more likely that america would suffer another attack like the one we experienced that day ; a day in which 19 armed men with box cutters killed nearly 3,000 people in our -- on our soil ; a day after which , in the following of that attack , more than a million americans lost work , lost their jobs .
the terrorists intend even greater harm to our country .
and we have no greater responsibility than to defeat our enemies across the world so that they can not carry out such an attack .
as our coalition fights the enemy in iraq , we 've stayed on the offensive on other fronts in the war on terror .
you know , just a few weeks after commencing operation iraqi freedom , u. s. forces captured khalid sheikh mohammed , the mastermind behind the september the 11th terrorist attacks ; we got him in pakistan .
about the same time as we launched operation iraqi freedom , coalition forces thousands of -- hundreds of miles away launched an assault on the terrorists in the mountains of southern afghanistan in an operation called operation valiant strike .
throughout the war on terror , we have brought the enemy -- we have fought the enemy on every single battlefront .
and so long as terrorist danger remains , the united states of america will continue to fight the enemy wherever it makes its stand .
we will stay on the offense .
but in the long run , defeating the terrorists requires an alternative to their murderous ideology .
and there we have another advantage .
we 've got a singular advantage with our military when it comes to finding the terrorists and bringing them to justice .
and we have another advantage in our strong belief in the transformative power of liberty .
so we 're helping the people of iraq establish a democracy in the heart of the middle east .
a free iraq will fight terrorists instead of harboring them .
a free iraq will be an example for others of the power of liberty to change the societies and to displace despair with hope .
by spreading the hope of liberty in the middle east , we will help free societies take root .
and when they do , freedom will yield the peace that we all desire .
our troops on the frontlines understand what is at stake .
they know that the mission in iraq has been difficult and has been trying for our nation , because they 're the ones who 've carried most of the burdens .
they 're all volunteers who have stepped forward to defend america in a time of danger .
some of them have gone out of their way to return to the fight .
one of these brave americans is a marine gunnery sergeant named william " spanky " gibson .
in may of 2006 in ramadi , a terrorist sniper 's bullet ripped through his left knee ; doctors then amputated his leg .
after months of difficult rehabilitation , spanky was not only walking , he was training for triathlons .
last year , at the escape from alcatraz swim near san francisco , he met marine general james mattis , who asked if there 's anything he could do for him .
spanky had just one request : he asked to redeploy to iraq .
today , he 's serving in fallujah , the first full - leg amputee to return to the frontlines .
here 's what he says about his decision to return : " the iraqis where -- are where we were 232 years ago as a nation .
now they 're starting a new nation , and that 's one of my big reasons for coming back here .
i wanted to tell the people of this country that i 'm back to help wherever i can . "
when americans like spanky gibson serve on our side , the enemy in iraq does n't got a chance .
we 're grateful to all the brave men and women of our military who have served the cause of freedom .
you 've done the hard work , far from home and far from your loved ones .
we give thanks for all our military families who love you and have supported you in this mission .
we appreciate the fine civilians from many departments who serve alongside you .
many of you served in iraq and afghanistan , and some have been on these fronts several times .
you will never forget the people who fought at your side .
you will always remember the comrades who served with you in combat but did not make the journey home .
america remembers them as well .
more than 4,400 men and women have given their lives in the war on terror .
we 'll pray for their families .
we 'll always honor their memory .
the best way we can honor them is by making sure that their sacrifice was not in vain .
five years ago tonight , i promised the american people that in the struggle ahead , " we will accept no outcome but victory . "
today , standing before men and women who helped liberate a nation , i reaffirm the commitment .
the battle in iraq is noble ; it is necessary ; and it is just .
and with your courage , the battle in iraq will end in victory .
god bless .

thank you all very much .
please be seated .
thanks for the warm welcome , and thanks for inviting me to join you in this 20th anniversary of the national endowment for democracy .
the staff and directors of this organization have seen a lot of history over the last two decades , you 've been a part of that history .
by speaking for and standing for freedom , you 've lifted the hopes of people around the world , and you 've brought great credit to america .
i appreciate vin for the short introduction .
i 'm a man who likes short introductions .
and he did n't let me down .
but more importantly , i appreciate the invitation .
i appreciate the members of congress who are here , senators from both political parties , members of the house of representatives from both political parties .
i appreciate the ambassadors who are here .
i appreciate the guests who have come .
i appreciate the bipartisan spirit , the nonpartisan spirit of the national endowment for democracy .
i 'm glad that republicans and democrats and independents are working together to advance human liberty .
the roots of our democracy can be traced to england , and to its parliament -- and so can the roots of this organization .
in june of 1982 , president ronald reagan spoke at westminster palace and declared , the turning point had arrived in history .
he argued that soviet communism had failed , precisely because it did not respect its own people -- their creativity , their genius and their rights .
president reagan said that the day of soviet tyranny was passing , that freedom had a momentum which would not be halted .
he gave this organization its mandate : to add to the momentum of freedom across the world .
your mandate was important 20 years ago ; it is equally important today .
a number of critics were dismissive of that speech by the president .
according to one editorial of the time , " it seems hard to be a sophisticated european and also an admirer of ronald reagan . "
some observers on both sides of the atlantic pronounced the speech simplistic and naive , and even dangerous .
in fact , ronald reagan 's words were courageous and optimistic and entirely correct .
the great democratic movement president reagan described was already well underway .
in the early 1970s , there were about 40 democracies in the world .
by the middle of that decade , portugal and spain and greece held free elections .
soon there were new democracies in latin america , and free institutions were spreading in korea , in taiwan , and in east asia .
this very week in 1989 , there were protests in east berlin and in leipzig .
by the end of that year , every communist dictatorship in central america * had collapsed .
within another year , the south african government released nelson mandela .
four years later , he was elected president of his country -- ascending , like walesa and havel , from prisoner of state to head of state .
as the 20th century ended , there were around 120 democracies in the world -- and i can assure you more are on the way .
ronald reagan would be pleased , and he would not be surprised .
we 've witnessed , in little over a generation , the swiftest advance of freedom in the 2,500 year story of democracy .
historians in the future will offer their own explanations for why this happened .
yet we already know some of the reasons they will cite .
it is no accident that the rise of so many democracies took place in a time when the world 's most influential nation was itself a democracy .
the united states made military and moral commitments in europe and asia , which protected free nations from aggression , and created the conditions in which new democracies could flourish .
as we provided security for whole nations , we also provided inspiration for oppressed peoples .
in prison camps , in banned union meetings , in clandestine churches , men and women knew that the whole world was not sharing their own nightmare .
they knew of at least one place -- a bright and hopeful land -- where freedom was valued and secure .
and they prayed that america would not forget them , or forget the mission to promote liberty around the world .
historians will note that in many nations , the advance of markets and free enterprise helped to create a middle class that was confident enough to demand their own rights .
they will point to the role of technology in frustrating censorship and central control -- and marvel at the power of instant communications to spread the truth , the news , and courage across borders .
historians in the future will reflect on an extraordinary , undeniable fact : over time , free nations grow stronger and dictatorships grow weaker .
in the middle of the 20th century , some imagined that the central planning and social regimentation were a shortcut to national strength .
in fact , the prosperity , and social vitality and technological progress of a people are directly determined by extent of their liberty .
freedom honors and unleashes human creativity -- and creativity determines the strength and wealth of nations .
liberty is both the plan of heaven for humanity , and the best hope for progress here on earth .
the progress of liberty is a powerful trend .
yet , we also know that liberty , if not defended , can be lost .
the success of freedom is not determined by some dialectic of history .
by definition , the success of freedom rests upon the choices and the courage of free peoples , and upon their willingness to sacrifice .
in the trenches of world war i , through a two - front war in the 1940s , the difficult battles of korea and vietnam , and in missions of rescue and liberation on nearly every continent , americans have amply displayed our willingness to sacrifice for liberty .
the sacrifices of americans have not always been recognized or appreciated , yet they have been worthwhile .
because we and our allies were steadfast , germany and japan are democratic nations that no longer threaten the world .
a global nuclear standoff with the soviet union ended peacefully -- as did the soviet union .
the nations of europe are moving towards unity , not dividing into armed camps and descending into genocide .
every nation has learned , or should have learned , an important lesson : freedom is worth fighting for , dying for , and standing for -- and the advance of freedom leads to peace .
and now we must apply that lesson in our own time .
we 've reached another great turning point -- and the resolve we show will shape the next stage of the world democratic movement .
our commitment to democracy is tested in countries like cuba and burma and north korea and zimbabwe -- outposts of oppression in our world .
the people in these nations live in captivity , and fear and silence .
yet , these regimes can not hold back freedom forever -- and , one day , from prison camps and prison cells , and from exile , the leaders of new democracies will arrive .
communism , and militarism and rule by the capricious and corrupt are the relics of a passing era .
and we will stand with these oppressed peoples until the day of their freedom finally arrives .
our commitment to democracy is tested in china .
that nation now has a sliver , a fragment of liberty .
yet , china 's people will eventually want their liberty pure and whole .
china has discovered that economic freedom leads to national wealth .
china 's leaders will also discover that freedom is indivisible -- that social and religious freedom is also essential to national greatness and national dignity .
eventually , men and women who are allowed to control their own wealth will insist on controlling their own lives and their own country .
our commitment to democracy is also tested in the middle east , which is my focus today , and must be a focus of american policy for decades to come .
in many nations of the middle east -- countries of great strategic importance -- democracy has not yet taken root .
and the questions arise : are the peoples of the middle east somehow beyond the reach of liberty ?
are millions of men and women and children condemned by history or culture to live in despotism ?
are they alone never to know freedom , and never even to have a choice in the matter ?
i , for one , do not believe it .
i believe every person has the ability and the right to be free .
some skeptics of democracy assert that the traditions of islam are inhospitable to the representative government .
this " cultural condescension , " as ronald reagan termed it , has a long history .
after the japanese surrender in 1945 , a so - called japan expert asserted that democracy in that former empire would " never work . "
another observer declared the prospects for democracy in post - hitler germany are , and i quote , " most uncertain at best " -- he made that claim in 1957 .
seventy - four years ago , the sunday london times declared nine - tenths of the population of india to be " illiterates not caring a fig for politics . "
yet when indian democracy was imperiled in the 1970s , the indian people showed their commitment to liberty in a national referendum that saved their form of government .
time after time , observers have questioned whether this country , or that people , or this group , are " ready " for democracy -- as if freedom were a prize you win for meeting our own western standards of progress .
in fact , the daily work of democracy itself is the path of progress .
it teaches cooperation , the free exchange of ideas , and the peaceful resolution of differences .
as men and women are showing , from bangladesh to botswana , to mongolia , it is the practice of democracy that makes a nation ready for democracy , and every nation can start on this path .
it should be clear to all that islam -- the faith of one - fifth of humanity -- is consistent with democratic rule .
democratic progress is found in many predominantly muslim countries -- in turkey and indonesia , and senegal and albania , niger and sierra leone .
muslim men and women are good citizens of india and south africa , of the nations of western europe , and of the united states of america .
more than half of all the muslims in the world live in freedom under democratically constituted governments .
they succeed in democratic societies , not in spite of their faith , but because of it .
a religion that demands individual moral accountability , and encourages the encounter of the individual with god , is fully compatible with the rights and responsibilities of self - government .
yet there 's a great challenge today in the middle east .
in the words of a recent report by arab scholars , the global wave of democracy has -- and i quote -- " barely reached the arab states . "
they continue : " this freedom deficit undermines human development and is one of the most painful manifestations of lagging political development . "
the freedom deficit they describe has terrible consequences , of the people of the middle east and for the world .
in many middle eastern countries , poverty is deep and it is spreading , women lack rights and are denied schooling .
whole societies remain stagnant while the world moves ahead .
these are not the failures of a culture or a religion .
these are the failures of political and economic doctrines .
as the colonial era passed away , the middle east saw the establishment of many military dictatorships .
some rulers adopted the dogmas of socialism , seized total control of political parties and the media and universities .
they allied themselves with the soviet bloc and with international terrorism .
dictators in iraq and syria promised the restoration of national honor , a return to ancient glories .
they 've left instead a legacy of torture , oppression , misery , and ruin .
other men , and groups of men , have gained influence in the middle east and beyond through an ideology of theocratic terror .
behind their language of religion is the ambition for absolute political power .
ruling cabals like the taliban show their version of religious piety in public whippings of women , ruthless suppression of any difference or dissent , and support for terrorists who arm and train to murder the innocent .
the taliban promised religious purity and national pride .
instead , by systematically destroying a proud and working society , they left behind suffering and starvation .
many middle eastern governments now understand that military dictatorship and theocratic rule are a straight , smooth highway to nowhere .
but some governments still cling to the old habits of central control .
there are governments that still fear and repress independent thought and creativity , and private enterprise -- the human qualities that make for a -- strong and successful societies .
even when these nations have vast natural resources , they do not respect or develop their greatest resources -- the talent and energy of men and women working and living in freedom .
instead of dwelling on past wrongs and blaming others , governments in the middle east need to confront real problems , and serve the true interests of their nations .
the good and capable people of the middle east all deserve responsible leadership .
for too long , many people in that region have been victims and subjects -- they deserve to be active citizens .
governments across the middle east and north africa are beginning to see the need for change .
morocco has a diverse new parliament ; king mohammed has urged it to extend the rights to women .
here is how his majesty explained his reforms to parliament : " how can society achieve progress while women , who represent half the nation , see their rights violated and suffer as a result of injustice , violence , and marginalization , notwithstanding the dignity and justice granted to them by our glorious religion ? "
the king of morocco is correct : the future of muslim nations will be better for all with the full participation of women .
in bahrain last year , citizens elected their own parliament for the first time in nearly three decades .
oman has extended the vote to all adult citizens ; qatar has a new constitution ; yemen has a multiparty political system ; kuwait has a directly elected national assembly ; and jordan held historic elections this summer .
recent surveys in arab nations reveal broad support for political pluralism , the rule of law , and free speech .
these are the stirrings of middle eastern democracy , and they carry the promise of greater change to come .
as changes come to the middle eastern region , those with power should ask themselves : will they be remembered for resisting reform , or for leading it ?
in iran , the demand for democracy is strong and broad , as we saw last month when thousands gathered to welcome home shirin ebadi , the winner of the nobel peace prize .
the regime in teheran must heed the democratic demands of the iranian people , or lose its last claim to legitimacy .
for the palestinian people , the only path to independence and dignity and progress is the path of democracy .
and the palestinian leaders who block and undermine democratic reform , and feed hatred and encourage violence are not leaders at all .
they 're the main obstacles to peace , and to the success of the palestinian people .
the saudi government is taking first steps toward reform , including a plan for gradual introduction of elections .
by giving the saudi people a greater role in their own society , the saudi government can demonstrate true leadership in the region .
the great and proud nation of egypt has shown the way toward peace in the middle east , and now should show the way toward democracy in the middle east .
champions of democracy in the region understand that democracy is not perfect , it is not the path to utopia , but it 's the only path to national success and dignity .
as we watch and encourage reforms in the region , we are mindful that modernization is not the same as westernization .
representative governments in the middle east will reflect their own cultures .
they will not , and should not , look like us .
democratic nations may be constitutional monarchies , federal republics , or parliamentary systems .
and working democracies always need time to develop -- as did our own .
we 've taken a 200-year journey toward inclusion and justice -- and this makes us patient and understanding as other nations are at different stages of this journey .
there are , however , essential principles common to every successful society , in every culture .
successful societies limit the power of the state and the power of the military -- so that governments respond to the will of the people , and not the will of an elite .
successful societies protect freedom with the consistent and impartial rule of law , instead of selecting applying -- selectively applying the law to punish political opponents .
successful societies allow room for healthy civic institutions -- for political parties and labor unions and independent newspapers and broadcast media .
successful societies guarantee religious liberty -- the right to serve and honor god without fear of persecution .
successful societies privatize their economies , and secure the rights of property .
they prohibit and punish official corruption , and invest in the health and education of their people .
they recognize the rights of women .
and instead of directing hatred and resentment against others , successful societies appeal to the hopes of their own people .
these vital principles are being applies in the nations of afghanistan and iraq .
with the steady leadership of president karzai , the people of afghanistan are building a modern and peaceful government .
next month , 500 delegates will convene a national assembly in kabul to approve a new afghan constitution .
the proposed draft would establish a bicameral parliament , set national elections next year , and recognize afghanistan 's muslim identity , while protecting the rights of all citizens .
afghanistan faces continuing economic and security challenges -- it will face those challenges as a free and stable democracy .
in iraq , the coalition provisional authority and the iraqi governing council are also working together to build a democracy -- and after three decades of tyranny , this work is not easy .
the former dictator ruled by terror and treachery , and left deeply ingrained habits of fear and distrust .
remnants of his regime , joined by foreign terrorists , continue their battle against order and against civilization .
our coalition is responding to recent attacks with precision raids , guided by intelligence provided by the iraqis , themselves .
and we 're working closely with iraqi citizens as they prepare a constitution , as they move toward free elections and take increasing responsibility for their own affairs .
as in the defense of greece in 1947 , and later in the berlin airlift , the strength and will of free peoples are now being tested before a watching world .
and we will meet this test .
securing democracy in iraq is the work of many hands .
american and coalition forces are sacrificing for the peace of iraq and for the security of free nations .
aid workers from many countries are facing danger to help the iraqi people .
the national endowment for democracy is promoting women 's rights , and training iraqi journalists , and teaching the skills of political participation .
iraqis , themselves -- police and borders guards and local officials -- are joining in the work and they are sharing in the sacrifice .
this is a massive and difficult undertaking -- it is worth our effort , it is worth our sacrifice , because we know the stakes .
the failure of iraqi democracy would embolden terrorists around the world , increase dangers to the american people , and extinguish the hopes of millions in the region .
iraqi democracy will succeed -- and that success will send forth the news , from damascus to teheran -- that freedom can be the future of every nation .
the establishment of a free iraq at the heart of the middle east will be a watershed event in the global democratic revolution .
sixty years of western nations excusing and accommodating the lack of freedom in the middle east did nothing to make us safe -- because in the long run , stability can not be purchased at the expense of liberty .
as long as the middle east remains a place where freedom does not flourish , it will remain a place of stagnation , resentment , and violence ready for export .
and with the spread of weapons that can bring catastrophic harm to our country and to our friends , it would be reckless to accept the status quo .
therefore , the united states has adopted a new policy , a forward strategy of freedom in the middle east .
this strategy requires the same persistence and energy and idealism we have shown before .
and it will yield the same results .
as in europe , as in asia , as in every region of the world , the advance of freedom leads to peace .
the advance of freedom is the calling of our time ; it is the calling of our country .
from the fourteen points to the four freedoms , to the speech at westminster , america has put our power at the service of principle .
we believe that liberty is the design of nature ; we believe that liberty is the direction of history .
we believe that human fulfillment and excellence come in the responsible exercise of liberty .
and we believe that freedom -- the freedom we prize -- is not for us alone , it is the right and the capacity of all mankind .
working for the spread of freedom can be hard .
yet , america has accomplished hard tasks before .
our nation is strong ; we 're strong of heart .
and we 're not alone .
freedom is finding allies in every country ; freedom finds allies in every culture .
and as we meet the terror and violence of the world , we can be certain the author of freedom is not indifferent to the fate of freedom .
with all the tests and all the challenges of our age , this is , above all , the age of liberty .
each of you at this endowment is fully engaged in the great cause of liberty .
and i thank you .
may god bless your work .
and may god continue to bless america .

thank you very much .
please be seated .
thank you .
larry , thank you for the introduction .
thank you for giving laura and me a chance to come to this historic hall to talk about a big issue facing the world .
and today i appreciate you giving me a chance to come and for me to outline the steps that america and our partners are taking and are going to take to overcome this financial crisis .
and i thank the manhattan institute for all you have done .
i appreciate the fact that i am here in a fabulous city to give this speech .
people say , are you confident about our future ?
and the answer is , absolutely .
and it 's easy to be confident when you 're a city like new york city .
after all , there 's an unbelievable spirit in this city .
this is a city whose skyline has offered immigrants their first glimpse of freedom .
this is a city where people rallied when that freedom came under attack .
this is a city whose capital markets have attracted investments from around the world and financed the dreams of entrepreneurs all across america .
this is a city that has been and will always be the financial capital of the world .
and i am grateful to be in the presence of two men who serve ably and nobly new york city -- mayor koch and mayor giuliani .
thank you all for coming .
glad you 're here .
i thank the manhattan institute board of trustees and its chairman paul singer for doing good work , being a good policy center .
and before i begin , i must say , i would hope that ray kelly would tell new york 's finest how much i appreciate the incredible hospitality that we are always shown here in new york city .
you 're the head of a fabulous police force , and we thank you very much , sir .
we live in a world in which our economies are interconnected .
prosperity and progress have reached farther than any time in our history .
unfortunately , as we have seen in recent months , financial turmoil anywhere in the world affects economies everywhere in the world .
and so this weekend i 'm going to host a summit on financial markets and the world economy with leaders from developed and developing nations that account for nearly 90 percent of the world economy .
leaders of the world bank , the international monetary fund , the united nations , and the financial stability forum are going to be there , as well .
we 'll have dinner at the white house tomorrow night , and we 'll meet most of the day on saturday .
the leaders attending this weekend 's meeting agree on a clear purpose -- to address the current crisis , and to lay the foundation for reforms that will help prevent a similar crisis in the future .
we also agree that this undertaking is too large to be accomplished in a single session .
the issues are too complex , the problem is too significant to try to solve , or to come up with reasonable recommendations in just one meeting .
so this summit will be the first of a series of meetings .
it will focus on five key objectives : understanding the causes of the global crisis , reviewing the effectiveness of our responses thus far , developing principles for reforming our financial and regulatory systems , launching a specific action plan to implement those principles , and reaffirming our conviction that free market principles offer the surest path to lasting prosperity .
first , we 're working toward a common understanding of the causes behind the global crisis .
different countries will naturally bring different perspectives , but there are some points on which we can all agree : 
 over the past decade , the world experienced a period of strong economic growth .
nations accumulated huge amounts of savings , and looked for safe places to invest them .
because of our attractive political , legal , and entrepreneurial climates , the united states and other developed nations received a large share of that money .
the massive inflow of foreign capital , combined with low interest rates , produced a period of easy credit .
and that easy credit especially affected the housing market .
flush with cash , many lenders issued mortgages and many borrowers could not afford them .
financial institutions then purchased these loans , packaged them together , and converted them into complex securities designed to yield large returns .
these securities were then purchased by investors and financial institutions in the united states and europe and elsewhere -- often with little analysis of their true underlying value .
the financial crisis was ignited when booming housing markets began to decline .
as home values dropped , many borrowers defaulted on their mortgages , and institutions holding securities backed by those mortgages suffered serious losses .
because of outdated regulatory structures and poor risk management practices , many financial institutions in america and europe were too highly leveraged .
when capital ran short , many faced severe financial jeopardy .
this led to high - profile failures of financial institutions in america and europe , led to contractions and widespread anxiety -- all of which contributed to sharp declines in the equity markets .
these developments have placed a heavy burden on hardworking people around the world .
stock market drops have eroded the value of retirement accounts and pension funds .
the tightening of credit has made it harder for families to borrow money for cars or home improvements or education of the children .
businesses have found it harder to get loans to expand their operations and create jobs .
many nations have suffered job losses , and have serious concerns about the worsening economy .
developing nations have been hit hard as nervous investors have withdrawn their capital .
we are faced with the prospect of a global meltdown .
and so we 've responded with bold measures .
i 'm a market - oriented guy , but not when i 'm faced with the prospect of a global meltdown .
at saturday 's summit , we 're going to review the effectiveness of our actions .
here in the united states , we have taken unprecedented steps to boost liquidity , recapitalize financial institutions , guarantee most new debt issued by insured banks , and prevent the disorderly collapse of large , interconnected enterprises .
these were historic actions taken necessary to make -- necessary so that the economy would not melt down and affect millions of our fellow citizens .
in europe , governments are also purchasing equity in banks and providing government guarantees for loans .
in asia , nations like china and japan and south korea have lowered interest rates and have launched significant economic stimulus plans .
in the middle east , nations like kuwait and the uae have guaranteed deposits and opened up new government lending to banks .
in addition , nations around the world have taken unprecedented joint measures .
last month , a number of central banks carried out a coordinated interest rate cut .
the federal reserve is extending needed liquidity to central banks around the world .
the imf and world bank are working to ensure that developing nations can weather this crisis .
this crisis did not develop overnight , and it 's not going to be solved overnight .
but our actions are having an impact .
credit markets are beginning to thaw .
businesses are gaining access to essential short - term financing .
a measure of stability is returning to financial systems here at home and around the world .
it 's going to require more time for these improvements to fully take hold , and there 's going to be difficult days ahead .
but the united states and our partner are taking the right steps to get through this crisis .
in addition to addressing the current crisis , we will also need to make broader reforms to strengthen the global economy over the long term .
this weekend , leaders will establish principles for adapting our financial systems to the realities of the 21st century marketplace .
we will discuss specific actions we can take to implement these principles .
we will direct our finance ministers to work with other experts and report back to us with detailed recommendations on further reasonable actions .
one vital principle of reform is that our nations must make our financial markets more transparent .
for example , we should consider improving accounting rules for securities , so that investors around the world can understand the true value of the assets they purchase .
secondly , we must ensure that markets , firms , and financial products are properly regulated .
for example , credit default swaps -- financial products that insure against potential losses -- should be processed through centralized clearinghouses instead of through unregulated , " over the counter " markets .
by bringing greater stability to this large and important financial sector , we reduce the risk to our overall financial systems .
third , we must enhance the integrity of our financial markets .
for example , authorities in every nation should take a fresh look at the rules governing market manipulation and fraud -- and ensure that investors are properly protected .
fourth , we must strengthen cooperation among the world 's financial authorities .
for example , leading nations should better coordinate national laws and regulations .
we should also reform international financial institutions such as the imf and the world bank , which are based largely on the economic order of 1944 .
to better reflect the realities of today 's global economy , both the imf and world bank should modernize their governance structures .
they should consider extending greater voter -- voting power to dynamic developing nations , especially as they increase their contributions to these institutions .
they should consider ways to streamline their executive boards , and make them more representative .
in addition to these important -- to these management changes , we should move forward with other reforms to make the imf and world bank more transparent , accountable , and effective .
for example , the imf should agree to work more closely with member countries to ensure that their exchange rate policies are market - oriented and fair .
and the world bank should ensure its development programs reflect the priorities of the people they are designed to serve -- and focus on measurable results .
all these steps require decisive actions from governments around the world .
at the same time , we must recognize that government intervention is not a cure - all .
for example , some blame the crisis on insufficient regulation of the american mortgage market .
but many european countries had much more extensive regulations , and still experienced problems almost identical to our own .
history has shown that the greater threat to economic prosperity is not too little government involvement in the market , it is too much government involvement in the market .
we saw this in the case of fannie mae and freddie mac .
because these firms were chartered by the united states congress , many believed they were backed by the full faith and credit of the united states government .
investors put huge amounts of money into fannie and freddie , which they used to build up irresponsibly large portfolios of mortgage - backed securities .
and when the housing market declined , these securities , of course , plummeted in value .
it took a taxpayer - funded rescue to keep fannie and freddie from collapsing in a way that would have devastated the global financial system .
and there is a clear lesson : our aim should not be more government -- it should be smarter government .
all this leads to the most important principle that should guide our work : while reforms in the financial sector are essential , the long - term solution to today 's problems is sustained economic growth .
and the surest path to that growth is free markets and free people .
this is a decisive moment for the global economy .
in the wake of the financial crisis , voices from the left and right are equating the free enterprise system with greed and exploitation and failure .
it 's true this crisis included failures -- by lenders and borrowers and by financial firms and by governments and independent regulators .
but the crisis was not a failure of the free market system .
and the answer is not to try to reinvent that system .
it is to fix the problems we face , make the reforms we need , and move forward with the free market principles that have delivered prosperity and hope to people all across the globe .
like any other system designed by man , capitalism is not perfect .
it can be subject to excesses and abuse .
but it is by far the most efficient and just way of structuring an economy .
at its most basic level , capitalism offers people the freedom to choose where they work and what they do , the opportunity to buy or sell products they want , and the dignity that comes with profiting from their talent and hard work .
the free market system provides the incentives that lead to prosperity -- the incentive to work , to innovate , to save , to invest wisely , and to create jobs for others .
and as millions of people pursue these incentives together , whole societies benefit .
free market capitalism is far more than economic theory .
it is the engine of social mobility -- the highway to the american dream .
it 's what makes it possible for a husband and wife to start their own business , or a new immigrant to open a restaurant , or a single mom to go back to college and to build a better career .
it is what allowed entrepreneurs in silicon valley to change the way the world sells products and searches for information .
it 's what transformed america from a rugged frontier to the greatest economic power in history -- a nation that gave the world the steamboat and the airplane , the computer and the cat scan , the internet and the ipod .
ultimately , the best evidence for free market capitalism is its performance compared to other economic systems .
free markets allowed japan , an island with few natural resources , to recover from war and grow into the world 's second - largest economy .
free markets allowed south korea to make itself into one of the most technologically advanced societies in the world .
free markets turned small areas like singapore and hong kong and taiwan into global economic players .
today , the success of the world 's largest economies comes from their embrace of free markets .
meanwhile , nations that have pursued other models have experienced devastating results .
soviet communism starved millions , bankrupted an empire , and collapsed as decisively as the berlin wall .
cuba , once known for its vast fields of cane , is now forced to ration sugar .
and while iran sits atop giant oil reserves , its people can not put enough gasoline in its -- in their cars .
the record is unmistakable : if you seek economic growth , if you seek opportunity , if you seek social justice and human dignity , the free market system is the way to go .
and it would be a terrible mistake to allow a few months of crisis to undermine 60 years of success .
just as important as maintaining free markets within countries is maintaining the free movement of goods and services between countries .
when nations open their markets to trade and investment , their businesses and farmers and workers find new buyers for their products .
consumers benefit from more choices and better prices .
entrepreneurs can get their ideas off the ground with funding from anywhere in the world .
thanks in large part to open markets , the volume of global trade today is nearly 30 times greater than it was six decades ago -- and some of the most dramatic gains have come in the developing world .
as president , i have seen the transformative power of trade up close .
i 've been to a caterpillar factory in east peoria , illinois , where thousands of good - paying american jobs are supported by exports .
i 've walked the grounds of a trade fair in ghana , where i met women who support their families by exporting handmade dresses and jewelry .
i 've spoken with a farmer in guatemala who decided to grow high - value crops he could sell overseas -- and helped create more than 1,000 jobs .
stories like these show why it is so important to keep markets open to trade and investment .
this openness is especially urgent during times of economic strain .
shortly after the stock market crash in 1929 , congress passed the smoot - hawley tariff -- a protectionist measure designed to wall off america 's economy from global competition .
the result was not economic security .
it was economic ruin .
and leaders around the world must keep this example in mind , and reject the temptation of protectionism .
there are clear - cut ways for nations to demonstrate the commitment to open markets .
the united states congress has an immediate opportunity by approving free trade agreements with colombia , peru * , and south korea .
america and other wealthy nations must also ensure this crisis does not become an excuse to reverse our engagement with the developing world .
and developing nations should continue policies that foster enterprise and investment .
as well , all nations should pledge to conclude a framework this year that leads to a successful doha agreement .
we 're facing this challenge together and we 're going to get through it together .
the united states is determined to show the way back to economic growth and prosperity .
i know some may question whether america 's leadership in the global economy will continue .
the world can be confident that it will , because our markets are flexible and we can rebound from setbacks .
we saw that resilience in the 1940s , when america pulled itself out of depression , marshaled a powerful army , and helped save the world from tyranny .
we saw that resilience in the 1980s , when americans overcame gas lines , turned stagflation into strong economic growth , and won the cold war .
we saw that resilience after september the 11th , 2001 , when our nation recovered from a brutal attack , revitalized our shaken economy , and rallied the forces of freedom in the great ideological struggle of the 21st century .
the world will see the resilience of america once again .
we will work with our partners to correct the problems in the global financial system .
we will rebuild our economic strength .
and we will continue to lead the world toward prosperity and peace .
thanks for coming and god bless .

thank you all very much .
okay .
i know you all are anxious to get back to class .
so please be seated .
thank you for such a warm welcome .
it 's great to be in the home of the big blue .
hamilton high school .
i want to thank you all for coming .
i particularly want to thank my friend , the governor of the great state of ohio , governor taft , for being here .
i want to thank tracy miller for being so hospitable .
i want to thank all who have come to witness this historic moment .
for those of you who have studied the history of our government , you know most bills are signed at the white house .
but i decided to sign this bill in one of the most important places in america -- a public school .
we 've got large challenges here in america .
there 's no greater challenge than to make sure that every child -- and all of us on this stage mean every child , not just a few children --   -- every single child , regardless of where they live , how they 're raised , the income level of their family , every child receive a first - class education in america .
and as you know , we 've got another challenge , and that 's to protect america from evil ones .
and i want to assure the seniors and juniors and sophomores here at hamilton high school that the effort that this great country is engaged in , the effort to defend freedom and to defend our people , the effort to rout out terror wherever it exists , is noble and just and right , and your great country will prevail in this effort .
i long for peace .
but i also understand that if we do not lead the world against terror , that your children and your grandchildren will not grow up in a society that is as free as the society we have today .
freedom is the precious gift that one generation can pass to the next .
it is a gift and a promise that i intend to keep to the american children .
and we owe the children of america a good education .
and today begins a new era , a new time in public education in our country .
as of this hour , america 's schools will be on a new path of reform , and a new path of results .
our schools will have higher expectations .
we believe every child can learn .
our schools will have greater resources to help meet those goals .
parents will have more information about the schools , and more say in how their children are educated .
from this day forward , all students will have a better chance to learn , to excel , and to live out their dreams .
i want to thank the secretary of education , rod paige , for being here and for his leadership .
i asked rod to join my administration because i wanted somebody who understood what it meant to run a school district in washington , d. c.i did n't need somebody that based his knowledge on theory ; i wanted somebody who based his knowledge on experience .
and rod was a teacher , a school board member , and the superintendent of the houston independent school district .
he did a fine job there , and he 's doing a fine job in washington .
reaching this moment has not been easy , as you could tell from chairman boehner 's discussion .
but we made it , because of the willingness of four fine leaders to do what was right for america .
we made it because proud members of the house and the senate , loyal to their parties , decided to set partisan politics aside and focus on what was right for america .
i want to thank george miller .
i call him big george , jorge el grande .
as john mentioned , george and i are n't from the same political ideology -- except when i met with george in austin , i could tell he shares the same passion i share for making sure that every child gets educated .
and he , like me and others , realize that a system that simply shuffles children through the schools is a system that 's going to leave people behind .
and so we made up our minds right then and there to do something about it .
i appreciate so very much my friend , judd gregg , from the state of new hampshire , being here .
he was my campaign manager in the new hampshire primary .
i still invited him to come with me .
after here , we 're going to new hampshire .
i look forward to singing judd 's praises because he is a solid , solid united states senator -- honest , full of integrity , and like the others here , he buckled down to do what was right for the children .
and then , of course , there 's senator edward kennedy .
and the folks at the crawford coffee shop --   -- would be somewhat shocked when i told them i actually like the fellow .
he is a fabulous united states senator .
when he 's against you , it 's tough .
when he 's with you , it is a great experience .
and i 'm signing this bill here because it 's the home of the chairman , john boehner .
john did a really good job .
he shepherded the process .
he made sure people showed up for the meetings .
he was dogged in his determination to get this bill done .
it would not have happened without his leadership .
and all four of these members up here need to be proud of the legacy they have left behind .
this is a good bill for the american children , and i 'm proud to sign it in their presence .
there are other members of the congress who are here , as well , and i want to thank them for coming .
senator evan bayh from the state of indiana , is here .
evan , thank you for your leadership on education reform .
senator mike dewine of your state of ohio , who helped author --   -- who helped to author the safe and drug - free schools part of this bill .
thank you for your leadership .
steve chabot of ohio , van hilleary of tennessee -- thank you both for coming , as well .
in that box is the bill .
i do n't intend to read it all .
it 's not exactly light reading .
but if you were to read it all , you would find that it contains some very important principles that will help guide our public school system for the next decades .
first principle is accountability .
every school has a job to do .
and that 's to teach the basics and teach them well .
if we want to make sure no child is left behind , every child must learn to read .
and every child must learn to add and subtract .
so in return for federal dollars , we are asking states to design accountability systems to show parents and teachers whether or not children can read and write and add and subtract in grades three through eight .
the fundamental principle of this bill is that every child can learn , we expect every child to learn , and you must show us whether or not every child is learning .
i read a quote one time from a young lady in new york .
she said , " i do n't ever remember taking an exam .
they just kept passing me along .
i ended up dropping out in the 7th grade .
i basically felt nobody cared . "
the story of children being just shuffled through the system is one of the saddest stories of america .
let 's just move them through .
it 's so much easier to move a child through than trying to figure out how to solve a child 's problems .
the first step to making sure that a child is not shuffled through is to test that child as to whether or not he or she can read and write , or add and subtract .
the first way to solve a problem is to diagnose it .
and so , what this bill says , it says every child can learn .
and we want to know early , before it 's too late , whether or not a child has a problem in learning .
i understand taking tests are n't fun .
too bad .
we need to know in america .
we need to know whether or not children have got the basic education .
no longer is it acceptable to hide poor performance .
no longer is it acceptable to keep results away from parents .
one of the interesting things about this bill , it says that we 're never going to give up on a school that 's performing poorly ; that when we find poor performance , a school will be given time and incentives and resources to correct their problems .
a school will be given time to try other methodologies , perhaps other leadership , to make sure that people can succeed .
if , however , schools do n't perform , if , however , given the new resources , focused resources , they are unable to solve the problem of not educating their children , there must be real consequences .
there must be a moment in which parents can say , i 've had enough of this school .
parents must be given real options in the face of failure in order to make sure reform is meaningful .
and so , therefore , this bill 's second principle is , is that we trust parents to make the right decisions for their children .
any school that does n't perform , any school that can not catch up and do its job , a parent will have these options -- a better public school , a tutor , or a charter school .
we do not want children trapped in schools that will not change and will not teach .
the third principle of this bill is that we have got to trust the local folks on how to achieve standards , to meet the standards .
in washington , there 's some smart people there , but the people who care most about the children in hamilton are the citizens of hamilton .
the people who care most about the children in this school are the teachers and parents and school board members .
and therefore , schools not only have the responsibility to improve , they now have the freedom to improve .
the federal government will not micromanage how schools are run .
we believe strongly -- we believe strongly the best path to education reform is to trust the local people .
and so the new role of the federal government is to set high standards , provide resources , hold people accountable , and liberate school districts to meet the standards .
i ca n't think of any better way to say to teachers , we trust you .
and , first of all , we 've got to thank all the teachers who are here .
i thank you for teaching .
yours is indeed a noble profession .
and our society is better off because you decided to teach .
and by saying we trust local folks , we 're really saying we trust you .
we trust you .
we want you to have as much flexibility as possible to see to it that every child that walks in your classroom can succeed .
so thank you for what you do .
and a fourth principle is that we 're going to spend more money , more resources , but they 'll be directed at methods that work .
not feel - good methods , not sound - good methods , but methods that actually work .
particularly when it comes to reading .
we 're going to spend more on our schools , and we 're going to spend it more wisely .
if we 've learned anything over the last generations , money alone does n't make a good school .
it certainly helps .
but as john mentioned , we 've spent billions of dollars with lousy results .
so now it 's time to spend billions of dollars and get good results .
as john mentioned , too many of our kids ca n't read .
you know , a huge percentage of children in poverty ca n't read at grade level .
that 's not right in america .
we 're going to win the war overseas , and we need to win the war against illiteracy here at home , as well .
and so this bill --   -- so this bill focuses on reading .
it sets a grand goal for the country .
our children will be reading by the third grade .
that 's not an impossible goal .
it 's a goal we must meet if we want every child to succeed .
and so , therefore , we tripled the amount of federal funding for scientifically - based early reading programs .
we 've got money in there to make sure teachers know how to teach what works .
we 've got money in there to help promote proven methods of instruction .
there are no more excuses , as far as i 'm concerned , about not teaching children how to read .
we know what works .
the money is now available , and it 's up to each local district to make sure it happens .
it 's up to you , the citizens of hamilton , to make sure no child is left behind .
and the federal government can spend money and we can help set standards , and we can assist upon accountability .
but the truth of the matter is our schools will flourish when citizens join in the noble cause of making sure no child is left behind .
this is the end of a legislative process .
signing this bill is the end of a long , long time of people sitting in rooms trying to hammer out differences .
it 's a great symbol of what is possible in washington when good people come together to do what 's right .
but it 's just the beginning of change .
and now it 's up to you , the local citizens of our great land , the compassionate , decent citizens of america , to stand up and demand high standards , and to demand that no child -- not one single child in america -- is left behind .
thank you for letting us come .
may god bless .

president clinton , distinguished guests and my fellow citizens , the peaceful transfer of authority is rare in history , yet common in our country .
with a simple oath , we affirm old traditions and make new beginnings .
as i begin , i thank president clinton for his service to our nation .
and i thank vice president gore for a contest conducted with spirit and ended with grace .
i am honored and humbled to stand here , where so many of america 's leaders have come before me , and so many will follow .
we have a place , all of us , in a long story -- a story we continue , but whose end we will not see .
it is the story of a new world that became a friend and liberator of the old , a story of a slave - holding society that became a servant of freedom , the story of a power that went into the world to protect but not possess , to defend but not to conquer .
it is the american story -- a story of flawed and fallible people , united across the generations by grand and enduring ideals .
the grandest of these ideals is an unfolding american promise that everyone belongs , that everyone deserves a chance , that no insignificant person was ever born .
americans are called to enact this promise in our lives and in our laws .
and though our nation has sometimes halted , and sometimes delayed , we must follow no other course .
through much of the last century , america 's faith in freedom and democracy was a rock in a raging sea .
now it is a seed upon the wind , taking root in many nations .
our democratic faith is more than the creed of our country , it is the inborn hope of our humanity , an ideal we carry but do not own , a trust we bear and pass along .
and even after nearly 225 years , we have a long way yet to travel .
while many of our citizens prosper , others doubt the promise , even the justice , of our own country .
the ambitions of some americans are limited by failing schools and hidden prejudice and the circumstances of their birth .
and sometimes our differences run so deep , it seems we share a continent , but not a country .
we do not accept this , and we will not allow it .
our unity , our union , is the serious work of leaders and citizens in every generation .
and this is my solemn pledge : i will work to build a single nation of justice and opportunity .
i know this is in our reach because we are guided by a power larger than ourselves who creates us equal in his image .
and we are confident in principles that unite and lead us onward .
america has never been united by blood or birth or soil .
we are bound by ideals that move us beyond our backgrounds , lift us above our interests and teach us what it means to be citizens .
every child must be taught these principles .
every citizen must uphold them .
and every immigrant , by embracing these ideals , makes our country more , not less , american .
today , we affirm a new commitment to live out our nation 's promise through civility , courage , compassion and character .
america , at its best , matches a commitment to principle with a concern for civility .
a civil society demands from each of us good will and respect , fair dealing and forgiveness .
some seem to believe that our politics can afford to be petty because , in a time of peace , the stakes of our debates appear small .
but the stakes for america are never small .
if our country does not lead the cause of freedom , it will not be led .
if we do not turn the hearts of children toward knowledge and character , we will lose their gifts and undermine their idealism .
if we permit our economy to drift and decline , the vulnerable will suffer most .
we must live up to the calling we share .
civility is not a tactic or a sentiment .
it is the determined choice of trust over cynicism , of community over chaos .
and this commitment , if we keep it , is a way to shared accomplishment .
america , at its best , is also courageous .
our national courage has been clear in times of depression and war , when defending common dangers defined our common good .
now we must choose if the example of our fathers and mothers will inspire us or condemn us .
we must show courage in a time of blessing by confronting problems instead of passing them on to future generations .
together , we will reclaim america 's schools , before ignorance and apathy claim more young lives .
we will reform social security and medicare , sparing our children from struggles we have the power to prevent .
and we will reduce taxes , to recover the momentum of our economy and reward the effort and enterprise of working americans .
we will build our defenses beyond challenge , lest weakness invite challenge .
we will confront weapons of mass destruction , so that a new century is spared new horrors .
the enemies of liberty and our country should make no mistake : america remains engaged in the world by history and by choice , shaping a balance of power that favors freedom .
we will defend our allies and our interests .
we will show purpose without arrogance .
we will meet aggression and bad faith with resolve and strength .
and to all nations , we will speak for the values that gave our nation birth .
america , at its best , is compassionate .
in the quiet of american conscience , we know that deep , persistent poverty is unworthy of our nation 's promise .
and whatever our views of its cause , we can agree that children at risk are not at fault .
abandonment and abuse are not acts of god , they are failures of love .
and the proliferation of prisons , however necessary , is no substitute for hope and order in our souls .
where there is suffering , there is duty .
americans in need are not strangers , they are citizens , not problems , but priorities .
and all of us are diminished when any are hopeless .
government has great responsibilities for public safety and public health , for civil rights and common schools .
yet compassion is the work of a nation , not just a government .
and some needs and hurts are so deep they will only respond to a mentor 's touch or a pastor 's prayer .
church and charity , synagogue and mosque lend our communities their humanity , and they will have an honored place in our plans and in our laws .
many in our country do not know the pain of poverty , but we can listen to those who do .
and i can pledge our nation to a goal : when we see that wounded traveler on the road to jericho , we will not pass to the other side .
america , at its best , is a place where personal responsibility is valued and expected .
encouraging responsibility is not a search for scapegoats , it is a call to conscience .
and though it requires sacrifice , it brings a deeper fulfillment .
we find the fullness of life not only in options , but in commitments .
and we find that children and community are the commitments that set us free .
our public interest depends on private character , on civic duty and family bonds and basic fairness , on uncounted , unhonored acts of decency which give direction to our freedom .
sometimes in life we are called to do great things .
but as a saint of our times has said , every day we are called to do small things with great love .
the most important tasks of a democracy are done by everyone .
i will live and lead by these principles : to advance my convictions with civility , to pursue the public interest with courage , to speak for greater justice and compassion , to call for responsibility and try to live it as well .
in all these ways , i will bring the values of our history to the care of our times .
what you do is as important as anything government does .
i ask you to seek a common good beyond your comfort ; to defend needed reforms against easy attacks ; to serve your nation , beginning with your neighbor .
i ask you to be citizens : citizens , not spectators ; citizens , not subjects ; responsible citizens , building communities of service and a nation of character .
americans are generous and strong and decent , not because we believe in ourselves , but because we hold beliefs beyond ourselves .
when this spirit of citizenship is missing , no government program can replace it .
when this spirit is present , no wrong can stand against it .
after the declaration of independence was signed , virginia statesman john page wrote to thomas jefferson : " we know the race is not to the swift nor the battle to the strong .
do you not think an angel rides in the whirlwind and directs this storm ? "
much time has passed since jefferson arrived for his inauguration .
the years and changes accumulate .
but the themes of this day he would know : our nation 's grand story of courage and its simple dream of dignity .
we are not this story 's author , who fills time and eternity with his purpose .
yet his purpose is achieved in our duty , and our duty is fulfilled in service to one another .
never tiring , never yielding , never finishing , we renew that purpose today , to make our country more just and generous , to affirm the dignity of our lives and every life .
this work continues .
this story goes on .
and an angel still rides in the whirlwind and directs this storm .
god bless you all , and god bless america .

mr. speaker , vice president cheney , members of congress , distinguished citizens and fellow citizens : 
 every year , by law and by custom , we meet here to consider the state of the union .
this year , we gather in this chamber deeply aware of decisive days that lie ahead .
you and i serve our country in a time of great consequence .
during this session of congress , we have the duty to reform domestic programs vital to our country .
we have the opportunity to save millions of lives abroad from a terrible disease .
we will work for a prosperity that is broadly shared , and we will answer every danger and every enemy that threatens the american people .
in all these days of promise and days of reckoning , we can be confident .
in a whirlwind of change and hope and peril , our faith is sure ; our resolve is firm ; and our union is strong .
this country has many challenges .
we will not deny , we will not ignore , we will not pass along our problems to other congresses , to other presidents , and other generations .
we will confront them with focus and clarity and courage .
during the last two years , we have seen what can be accomplished when we work together .
to lift the standards of our public schools , we achieved historic education reform , which must now be carried out in every school and in every classroom so that every child in america can read and learn and succeed in life .
to protect our country , we reorganized our government and created the department of homeland security , which is mobilizing against the threats of a new era .
to bring our economy out of recession , we delivered the largest tax relief in a generation .
to insist on integrity in american business , we passed tough reforms , and we are holding corporate criminals to account .
some might call this a good record .
i call it a good start .
tonight i ask the house and the senate to join me in the next bold steps to serve our fellow citizens .
our first goal is clear : we must have an economy that grows fast enough to employ every man and woman who seeks a job .
after recession , terrorist attacks , corporate scandals , and stock market declines , our economy is recovering .
yet , it 's not growing fast enough or strongly enough .
with unemployment rising , our nation needs more small businesses to open , more companies to invest and expand , more employers to put up the sign that says , " help wanted . "
jobs are created when the economy grows .
the economy grows when americans have more money to spend and invest , and the best and fairest way to make sure americans have that money is not to tax it away in the first place .
i am proposing that all the income - tax reductions set for 2004 and 2006 be made permanent and effective this year .
and under my plan , as soon as i 've signed the bill , this extra money will start showing up in workers ' paychecks .
instead of gradually reducing the marriage penalty , we should do it now .
instead of slowly raising the child credit to $ 1,000 , we should send the checks to american families now .
the tax relief is for everyone who pays income taxes , and it will help our economy immediately : 92 million americans will keep , this year , an average of almost $ 1,100 more of their own money ; a family of four with an income of $ 40,000 would see their federal income taxes fall from $ 1,178 to $ 45 per year ; our plan will improve the bottom line for more than 23 million small businesses .
you , the congress , have already passed all these reductions and promised them for future years .
if this tax relief is good for americans three , or five , or seven years from now , it is even better for americans today .
we should also strengthen the economy by treating investors equally in our tax laws .
it 's fair to tax a company 's profits .
it is not fair to again tax the shareholder on the same profits .
to boost investor confidence and to help the nearly 10 million seniors who receive dividend income , i ask you to end the unfair double taxation of dividends .
lower taxes and greater investment will help this economy expand .
more jobs mean more taxpayers and higher revenues to our government .
the best way to address the deficit and move toward a balanced budget is to encourage economic growth and to show some spending discipline in washington , d. c. 
 we must work together to fund only our most important priorities .
i will send you a budget that increases discretionary spending by 4 percent next year , about as much as the average family 's income is expected to grow .
and that is a good benchmark for us .
federal spending should not rise any faster than the paychecks of american families .
a growing economy and a focus on essential priorities will be crucial to the future of social security .
as we continue to work together to keep social security sound and reliable , we must offer younger workers a chance to invest in retirement accounts that they will control and they will own .
our second goal is high quality , affordable health for all americans .
the american system of medicine is a model of skill and innovation , with a pace of discovery that is adding good years to our lives .
yet for many people , medical care costs too much , and many have no health coverage at all .
these problems will not be solved with a nationalized health care system that dictates coverage and rations care .
instead , we must work toward a system in which all americans have a good insurance policy , choose their own doctors , and seniors and low - income americans receive the help they need .
instead of bureaucrats and trial lawyers and hmos , we must put doctors and nurses and patients back in charge of american medicine .
health care reform must begin with medicare .
medicare is the binding commitment of a caring society .
we must renew that commitment by giving seniors access to preventive medicine and new drugs that are transforming health care in america .
seniors happy with the current medicare system should be able to keep their coverage just the way it is .
and just like you , the members of congress , and your staffs and other federal employees , all seniors should have the choice of a health care plan that provides prescription drugs .
my budget will commit an additional $ 400 billion over the next decade to reform and strengthen medicare .
leaders of both political parties have talked for years about strengthening medicare .
i urge the members of this new congress to act this year .
to improve our health care system , we must address one of the prime causes of higher cost , the constant threat that physicians and hospitals will be unfairly sued .
because of excessive litigation , everybody pays more for health care , and many parts of america are losing fine doctors .
no one has ever been healed by a frivolous lawsuit .
i urge the congress to pass medical liability reform .
our third goal is to promote energy independence for our country , while dramatically improving the environment .
i have sent you a comprehensive energy plan to promote energy efficiency and conservation , to develop cleaner technology , and to produce more energy at home .
i have sent you clear skies legislation that mandates a 70-percent cut in air pollution from powerplants over the next 15 years .
i have sent you a healthy forests initiative , to help prevent the catastrophic fires that devastate communities , kill wildlife , and burn away millions of acres of treasured forests .
i urge you to pass these measures , for the good of both our environment and our economy .
even more , i ask you to take a crucial step and protect our environment in ways that generations before us could not have imagined .
in this century , the greatest environmental progress will come about not through endless lawsuits or command - and - control regulations but through technology and innovation .
tonight i 'm proposing $ 1.2 billion in research funding so that america can lead the world in developing clean , hydrogen - powered automobiles .
a simple chemical reaction between hydrogen and oxygen generates energy , which can be used to power a car , producing only water , not exhaust fumes .
with a new national commitment , our scientists and engineers will overcome obstacles to taking these cars from laboratory to showroom , so that the first car driven by a child born today could be powered by hydrogen and pollution - free .
join me in this important innovation to make our air significantly cleaner and our country much less dependent on foreign sources of energy .
our fourth goal is to apply the compassion of america to the deepest problems of america .
for so many in our country , the homeless and the fatherless , the addicted , the need is great .
yet there 's power , wonder - working power , in the goodness and idealism and faith of the american people .
americans are doing the work of compassion every day , visiting prisoners , providing shelter for battered women , bringing companionship to lonely seniors .
these good works deserve our praise .
they deserve our personal support , and when appropriate , they deserve the assistance of the federal government .
i urge you to pass both my faith - based initiative and the citizen service act , to encourage acts of compassion that can transform america , one heart and one soul at a time .
last year , i called on my fellow citizens to participate in the usa freedom corps , which is enlisting tens of thousands of new volunteers across america .
tonight i ask congress and the american people to focus the spirit of service and the resources of government on the needs of some of our most vulnerable citizens , boys and girls trying to grow up without guidance and attention and children who have to go through a prison gate to be hugged by their mom or dad .
i propose a $ 450 million initiative to bring mentors to more than a million disadvantaged junior high students and children of prisoners .
government will support the training and recruiting of mentors .
yet it is the men and women of america who will fill the need .
one mentor , one person can change a life forever , and i urge you to be that one person .
another cause of hopelessness is addiction to drugs .
addiction crowds out friendship , ambition , moral conviction and reduces all the richness of life to a single destructive desire .
as a government , we are fighting illegal drugs by cutting off supplies and reducing demand through antidrug education programs .
yet for those already addicted , the fight against drugs is a fight for their own lives .
too many americans in search of treatment can not get it .
so tonight i propose a new $ 600 million program to help an additional 300,000 americans receive treatment over the next three years .
our nation is blessed with recovery programs that do amazing work .
one of them is found at the healing place church in baton rouge , louisiana .
a man in the program said , " god does miracles in people 's lives , and you never think it could be you . "
tonight let us bring to all americans who struggle with drug addiction this message of hope : the miracle of recovery is possible , and it could be you .
by caring for children who need mentors and for addicted men and women who need treatment , we are building a more welcoming society , a culture that values every life .
and in this work , we must not overlook the weakest among us .
i ask you to protect infants at the very hour of their birth and end the practice of partial - birth abortion .
and because no human life should be started or ended as the object of an experiment , i ask you to set a high standard for humanity and pass a law against all human cloning .
the qualities of courage and compassion that we strive for in america also determine our conduct abroad .
the american flag stands for more than our power and our interests .
our founders dedicated this country to the cause of human dignity , the rights of every person , and the possibilities of every life .
this conviction leads us into the world to help the afflicted and defend the peace and confound the designs of evil men .
in afghanistan , we helped to liberate an oppressed people .
and we will continue helping them secure their country , rebuild their society , and educate all their children , boys and girls .
in the middle east , we will continue to seek peace between a secure israel and a democratic palestine .
across the earth , america is feeding the hungry .
more than 60 percent of international food aid comes as a gift from the people of the united states .
as our nation moves troops and builds alliances to make our world safer , we must also remember our calling as a blessed country is to make the world better .
today , on the continent of africa , nearly 30 million people have the aids virus , including three million children under the age 15 .
there are whole countries in africa where more than one - third of the adult population carries the infection .
more than four million require immediate drug treatment .
yet across that continent , only 50,000 aids victims -- only 50,000 -- are receiving the medicine they need .
because the aids diagnosis is considered a death sentence , many do not seek treatment .
almost all who do are turned away .
a doctor in rural south africa describes his frustration .
he says , " we have no medicines .
many hospitals tell people , ' you 've got aids .
we ca n't help you .
go home and die . ' "
in an age of miraculous medicines , no person should have to hear those words .
aids can be prevented .
antiretroviral drugs can extend life for many years .
and the cost of those drugs has dropped from $ 12,000 a year to under $ 300 a year , which places a tremendous possibility within our grasp .
ladies and gentlemen , seldom has history offered a greater opportunity to do so much for so many .
we have confronted and will continue to confront hiv / aids in our own country .
and to meet a severe and urgent crisis abroad , tonight i propose the emergency plan for aids relief , a work of mercy beyond all current international efforts to help the people of africa .
this comprehensive plan will prevent seven million new aids infections , treat at least two million people with life - extending drugs , and provide humane care for millions of people suffering from aids and for children orphaned by aids .
i ask the congress to commit $ 15 billion over the next five years , including nearly $ 10 billion in new money , to turn the tide against aids in the most afflicted nations of africa and the caribbean .
this nation can lead the world in sparing innocent people from a plague of nature .
and this nation is leading the world in confronting and defeating the manmade evil of international terrorism .
there are days when our fellow citizens do not hear news about the war on terror .
there 's never a day when i do not learn of another threat or receive reports of operations in progress or give an order in this global war against a scattered network of killers .
the war goes on , and we are winning .
to date , we 've arrested or otherwise dealt with many key commanders of al qaeda .
they include a man who directed logistics and funding for the september 11 attacks , the chief of al qaeda operations in the persian gulf who planned the bombings of our embassies in east africa and the u. s.s. cole , an al qaeda operations chief from southeast asia , a former director of al qaida 's training camps in afghanistan , a key al qaeda operative in europe , a major al qaeda leader in yemen .
all told , more than 3,000 suspected terrorists have been arrested in many countries .
many others have met a different fate .
let 's put it this way : they are no longer a problem to the united states and our friends and allies .
we are working closely with other nations to prevent further attacks .
america and coalition countries have uncovered and stopped terrorist conspiracies targeting the embassy in yemen , the american embassy in singapore , a saudi military base , ships in the straits of hormuz and the straits of gibraltar .
we 've broken al qaeda cells in hamburg , milan , madrid , london , paris , as well as buffalo , new york .
we have the terrorists on the run .
we 're keeping them on the run .
one by one , the terrorists are learning the meaning of american justice .
as we fight this war , we will remember where it began : here , in our own country .
this government is taking unprecedented measures to protect our people and defend our homeland .
we 've intensified security at the borders and ports of entry , posted more than 50,000 newly trained federal screeners in airports , begun inoculating troops and first responders against smallpox , and are deploying the nation 's first early warning network of sensors to detect biological attack .
and this year , for the first time , we are beginning to field a defense to protect this nation against ballistic missiles .
i thank the congress for supporting these measures .
i ask you tonight to add to our future security with a major research and production effort to guard our people against bioterrorism , called project bioshield .
the budget i send you will propose almost $ 6 billion to quickly make available effective vaccines and treatments against agents like anthrax , botulinum toxin , ebola , and plague .
we must assume that our enemies would use these diseases as weapons , and we must act before the dangers are upon us .
since september 11 , our intelligence and law enforcement agencies have worked more closely than ever to track and disrupt the terrorists .
the fbi is improving its ability to analyze intelligence and is transforming itself to meet new threats .
tonight i am instructing the leaders of the fbi , the cia , the homeland security , and the department of defense to develop a terrorist threat integration center , to merge and analyze all threat information in a single location .
our government must have the very best information possible , and we will use it to make sure the right people are in the right places to protect all our citizens .
our war against terror is a contest of will in which perseverance is power .
in the ruins of two towers , at the western wall of the pentagon , on a field in pennsylvania , this nation made a pledge , and we renew that pledge tonight : whatever the duration of this struggle and whatever the difficulties , we will not permit the triumph of violence in the affairs of men ; free people will set the course of history .
today , the gravest danger in the war on terror , the gravest danger facing america and the world , is outlaw regimes that seek and possess nuclear , chemical , and biological weapons .
these regimes could use such weapons for blackmail , terror , and mass murder .
they could also give or sell those weapons to terrorist allies , who would use them without the least hesitation .
this threat is new .
america 's duty is familiar .
throughout the 20th century , small groups of men seized control of great nations , built armies and arsenals , and set out to dominate the weak and intimidate the world .
in each case , their ambitions of cruelty and murder had no limit .
in each case , the ambitions of hitlerism , militarism , and communism were defeated by the will of free peoples , by the strength of great alliances , and by the might of the united states of america .
now , in this century , the ideology of power and domination has appeared again and seeks to gain the ultimate weapons of terror .
once again , this nation and all our friends are all that stand between a world at peace and a world of chaos and constant alarm .
once again , we are called to defend the safety of our people and the hopes of all mankind .
and we accept this responsibility .
america is making a broad and determined effort to confront these dangers .
we have called on the united nations to fulfill its charter and stand by its demand that iraq disarm .
we 're strongly supporting the international atomic energy agency in its mission to track and control nuclear materials around the world .
we 're working with other governments to secure nuclear materials in the former soviet union and to strengthen global treaties banning the production and shipment of missile technologies and weapons of mass destruction .
in all these efforts , however , america 's purpose is more than to follow a process ; it is to achieve a result , the end of terrible threats to the civilized world .
all free nations have a stake in preventing sudden and catastrophic attacks .
and we 're asking them to join us , and many are doing so .
yet the course of this nation does not depend on the decisions of others .
whatever action is required , whenever action is necessary , i will defend the freedom and security of the american people .
different threats require different strategies .
in iran , we continue to see a government that represses its people , pursues weapons of mass destruction , and supports terror .
we also see iranian citizens risking intimidation and death as they speak out for liberty and human rights and democracy .
iranians , like all people , have a right to choose their own government and determine their own destiny , and the united states supports their aspirations to live in freedom .
on the korean peninsula , an oppressive regime rules a people living in fear and starvation .
throughout the 1990s , the united states relied on a negotiated framework to keep north korea from gaining nuclear weapons .
we now know that that regime was deceiving the world and developing those weapons all along .
and today the north korean regime is using its nuclear program to incite fear and seek concessions .
america and the world will not be blackmailed .
america is working with the countries of the region , south korea , japan , china , and russia , to find a peaceful solution and to show the north korean government that nuclear weapons will bring only isolation , economic stagnation , and continued hardship .
the north korean regime will find respect in the world and revival for its people only when it turns away from its nuclear ambitions .
our nation and the world must learn the lessons of the korean peninsula and not allow an even greater threat to rise up in iraq .
a brutal dictator , with a history of reckless aggression , with ties to terrorism , with great potential wealth , will not be permitted to dominate a vital region and threaten the united states .
twelve years ago , saddam hussein faced the prospect of being the last casualty in a war he had started and lost .
to spare himself , he agreed to disarm of all weapons of mass destruction .
for the next 12 years , he systematically violated that agreement .
he pursued chemical , biological , and nuclear weapons , even while inspectors were in his country .
nothing to date has restrained him from his pursuit of these weapons , not economic sanctions , not isolation from the civilized world , not even cruise missile strikes on his military facilities .
almost three months ago , the united nations security council gave saddam hussein his final chance to disarm .
he has shown instead utter contempt for the united nations and for the opinion of the world .
the 108 u. n. inspectors were sent to conduct -- were not sent to conduct a scavenger hunt for hidden materials across a country the size of california .
the job of the inspectors is to verify that iraq 's regime is disarming .
it is up to iraq to show exactly where it is hiding its banned weapons , lay those weapons out for the world to see , and destroy them as directed .
nothing like this has happened .
the united nations concluded in 1999 that saddam hussein had biological weapons sufficient to produce over 25,000 liters of anthrax , enough doses to kill several million people .
he has n't accounted for that material .
he 's given no evidence that he has destroyed it .
the united nations concluded that saddam hussein had materials sufficient to produce more than 38,000 liters of botulinum toxin , enough to subject millions of people to death by respiratory failure .
he has n't accounted for that material .
he 's given no evidence that he has destroyed it .
our intelligence officials estimate that saddam hussein had the materials to produce as much as 500 tons of sarin , mustard , and vx nerve agent .
in such quantities , these chemical agents could also kill untold thousands .
he 's not accounted for these materials .
he has given no evidence that he has destroyed them .
u. s. intelligence indicates that saddam hussein had upwards of 30,000 munitions capable of delivering chemical agents .
inspectors recently turned up 16 of them , despite iraq 's recent declaration denying their existence .
saddam hussein has not accounted for the remaining 29,984 of these prohibited munitions .
he 's given no evidence that he has destroyed them .
from three iraqi defectors we know that iraq , in the late 1990s , had several mobile biological weapons labs .
these are designed to produce germ warfare agents and can be moved from place to a place to evade inspectors .
saddam hussein has not disclosed these facilities .
he 's given no evidence that he has destroyed them .
the international atomic energy agency confirmed in the 1990s that saddam hussein had an advanced nuclear weapons development program , had a design for a nuclear weapon , and was working on five different methods of enriching uranium for a bomb .
the british government has learned that saddam hussein recently sought significant quantities of uranium from africa .
our intelligence sources tell us that he has attempted to purchase high - strength aluminum tubes suitable for nuclear weapons production .
saddam hussein has not credibly explained these activities .
he clearly has much to hide .
the dictator of iraq is not disarming .
to the contrary , he is deceiving .
from intelligence sources we know , for instance , that thousands of iraqi security personnel are at work hiding documents and materials from the u. n. inspectors , sanitizing inspection sites , and monitoring the inspectors themselves .
iraqi officials accompany the inspectors in order to intimidate witnesses .
iraq is blocking u-2 surveillance flights requested by the united nations .
iraqi intelligence officers are posing as the scientists inspectors are supposed to interview .
real scientists have been coached by iraqi officials on what to say .
intelligence sources indicate that saddam hussein has ordered that scientists who cooperate with u. n. inspectors in disarming iraq will be killed , along with their families .
year after year , saddam hussein has gone to elaborate lengths , spent enormous sums , taken great risks to build and keep weapons of mass destruction .
but why ?
the only possible explanation , the only possible use he could have for those weapons , is to dominate , intimidate , or attack .
with nuclear arms or a full arsenal of chemical and biological weapons , saddam hussein could resume his ambitions of conquest in the middle east and create deadly havoc in that region .
and this congress and the american people must recognize another threat .
evidence from intelligence sources , secret communications , and statements by people now in custody reveal that saddam hussein aids and protects terrorists , including members of al qaeda .
secretly and without fingerprints , he could provide one of his hidden weapons to terrorists or help them develop their own .
before september 11 , many in the world believed that saddam hussein could be contained .
but chemical agents , lethal viruses , and shadowy terrorist networks are not easily contained .
imagine those 19 hijackers with other weapons and other plans , this time armed by saddam hussein .
it would take one vial , one canister , one crate slipped into this country to bring a day of horror like none we have ever known .
we will do everything in our power to make sure that that day never comes .
some have said we must not act until the threat is imminent .
since when have terrorists and tyrants announced their intentions , politely putting us on notice before they strike ?
if this threat is permitted to fully and suddenly emerge , all actions , all words , and all recriminations would come too late .
trusting in the sanity and restraint of saddam hussein is not a strategy , and it is not an option .
the dictator who is assembling the world 's most dangerous weapons has already used them on whole villages , leaving thousands of his own citizens dead , blind , or disfigured .
iraqi refugees tell us how forced confessions are obtained , by torturing children while their parents are made to watch .
international human rights groups have cataloged other methods used in the torture chambers of iraq : electric shock , burning with hot irons , dripping acid on the skin , mutilation with electric drills , cutting out tongues , and rape .
if this is not evil , then evil has no meaning .
and tonight i have a message for the brave and oppressed people of iraq : your enemy is not surrounding your country ; your enemy is ruling your country .
and the day he and his regime are removed from power will be the day of your liberation .
the world has waited 12 years for iraq to disarm .
america will not accept a serious and mounting threat to our country and our friends and our allies .
the united states will ask the u. n. security council to convene on february 5 to consider the facts of iraq 's ongoing defiance of the world .
secretary of state powell will present information and intelligence about iraqi 's legal -- iraq 's illegal weapons programs , its attempt to hide those weapons from inspectors , and its links to terrorist groups .
we will consult .
but let there be no misunderstanding : if saddam hussein does not fully disarm , for the safety of our people and for the peace of the world , we will lead a coalition to disarm him .
tonight i have a message for the men and women who will keep the peace , members of the american armed forces : many of you are assembling in or near the middle east , and some crucial hours may lay ahead .
in those hours , the success of our cause will depend on you .
your training has prepared you .
your honor will guide you .
you believe in america , and america believes in you .
sending americans into battle is the most profound decision a president can make .
the technologies of war have changed ; the risks and suffering of war have not .
for the brave americans who bear the risk , no victory is free from sorrow .
this nation fights reluctantly , because we know the cost and we dread the days of mourning that always come .
we seek peace .
we strive for peace .
and sometimes peace must be defended .
a future lived at the mercy of terrible threats is no peace at all .
if war is forced upon us , we will fight in a just cause and by just means , sparing , in every way we can , the innocent .
and if war is forced upon us , we will fight with the full force and might of the united states military , and we will prevail .
and as we and our coalition partners are doing in afghanistan , we will bring to the iraqi people food and medicines and supplies and freedom .
many challenges , abroad and at home , have arrived in a single season .
in two years , america has gone from a sense of invulnerability to an awareness of peril , from bitter division in small matters to calm unity in great causes .
and we go forward with confidence , because this call of history has come to the right country .
americans are a resolute people who have risen to every test of our time .
adversity has revealed the character of our country , to the world and to ourselves .
america is a strong nation and honorable in the use of our strength .
we exercise power without conquest , and we sacrifice for the liberty of strangers .
americans are a free people , who know that freedom is the right of every person and the future of every nation .
the liberty we prize is not america 's gift to the world , it is god 's gift to humanity .
we americans have faith in ourselves , but not in ourselves alone .
we do not know -- we do not claim to know all the ways of providence , yet we can trust in them , placing our confidence in the loving god behind all of life and all of history .
may he guide us now .
and may god continue to bless the united states of america .

thank you very much .
and tonight i have the high privilege and distinct honor of my own as the first president to begin the state of the union message with these words : madam speaker .
in his day , the late congressman thomas d'alesandro , jr. , from baltimore , maryland , saw presidents roosevelt and truman at this rostrum .
but nothing could compare with the sight of his only daughter , nancy , presiding tonight as speaker of the house of representatives .
congratulations , madam speaker .
two members of the house and senate are not with us tonight , and we pray for the recovery and speedy return of senator tim johnson and congressman charlie norwood .
madam speaker , vice president cheney , members of congress , distinguished guests , and fellow citizens : the rite of custom brings us together at a defining hour when decisions are hard and courage is needed .
we enter the year 2007 with large endeavors underway and others that are ours to begin .
in all of this , much is asked of us .
we must have the will to face difficult challenges and determined enemies and the wisdom to face them together .
some in this chamber are new to the house and the senate , and i congratulate the democrat majority .
congress has changed , but not our responsibilities .
each of us is guided by our own convictions , and to these we must stay faithful .
yet we 're all held to the same standards and called to serve the same good purposes : to extend this nation 's prosperity ; to spend the people 's money wisely ; to solve problems , not leave them to future generations ; to guard america against all evil ; and to keep faith with those we have sent forth to defend us .
we 're not the first to come here with a government divided and uncertainty in the air .
like many before us , we can work through our differences , and we can achieve big things for the american people .
our citizens do n't much care which side of the aisle we sit on , as long as we 're willing to cross that aisle when there is work to be done .
our job is to make life better for our fellow americans and to help them build a future of hope and opportunity , and this is the business before us tonight .
a future of hope and opportunity begins with a growing economy , and that is what we have .
we 're now in the 41st month of uninterrupted job growth , a recovery that has created 7.2 million new jobs so far .
unemployment is low ; inflation is low ; wages are rising .
this economy is on the move , and our job is to keep it that way , not with more government but with more enterprise .
next week , i 'll deliver a full report on the state of our economy .
tonight i want to discuss three economic reforms that deserve to be priorities for this congress .
first , we must balance the federal budget .
we can do so without raising taxes .
what we need is spending discipline in washington , d. c. we set a goal of cutting the deficit in half by 2009 and met that goal three years ahead of schedule .
now let us take the next step .
in the coming weeks , i will submit a budget that eliminates the federal deficit within the next five years .
i ask you to make the same commitment .
together we can restrain the spending appetite of the federal government , and we can balance the federal budget .
next , there is the matter of earmarks .
these special interest items are often slipped into bills at the last hour -- when not even c - span is watching .
in 2005 alone , the number of earmarks grew to over 13,000 and totaled nearly $ 18 billion .
even worse , over 90 percent of the earmarks never make it to the floor of the house and senate .
they are dropped into committee reports that are not even part of the bill that arrives on my desk .
you did n't vote them into law ; i did n't sign them into law ; yet they 're treated as if they have the force of law .
the time has come to end this practice .
so let us work together to reform the budget process , expose every earmark to the light of day and to a vote in congress , and cut the number and cost of earmarks at least in half by the end of this session .
and finally , to keep this economy strong , we must take on the challenge of entitlements .
social security and medicare and medicaid are commitments of conscience , and so it is our duty to keep them permanently sound .
yet we 're failing in that duty .
and this failure will one day leave our children with three bad options : huge tax increases ; huge deficits ; or huge and immediate cuts in benefits .
everyone in this chamber knows this to be true , yet somehow we have not found it in ourselves to act .
so let us work together and do it now .
with enough good sense and good will , you and i can fix medicare and medicaid and save social security .
spreading opportunity and hope in america also requires public schools that give children the knowledge and character they need in life .
five years ago , we rose above partisan differences to pass the no child left behind act , preserving local control , raising standards , and holding schools accountable for results .
and because we acted , students are performing better in reading and math and minority students are closing the achievement gap .
now the task is to build on the success without watering down standards , without taking control from local communities , and without backsliding and calling it reform .
we can lift student achievement even higher by giving local leaders flexibility to turn around failing schools and by giving families with children stuck in failing schools the right to choose someplace better .
we must increase funds for students who struggle and make sure these children get the special help they need .
and we can make sure our children are prepared for the jobs of the future and our country is more competitive by strengthening math and science skills .
the no child left behind act has worked for america 's children , and i ask congress to reauthorize this good law .
a future of hope and opportunity requires that all our citizens have affordable and available health care .
when it comes to health care , government has an obligation to care for the elderly , the disabled , and poor children , and we will meet those responsibilities .
for all other americans , private health insurance is the best way to meet their needs .
but many americans can not afford a health insurance policy , and so tonight i propose two new initiatives to help more americans afford their own insurance .
first , i propose a standard tax deduction for health insurance that will be like the standard tax deduction for dependents .
families with health insurance will pay no income on payroll tax -- or payroll taxes on $ 15,000 of their income .
single americans with health insurance will pay no income or payroll taxes on $ 7,500 of their income .
with this reform , more than 100 million men , women , and children who are now covered by employer - provided insurance will benefit from lower tax bills .
at the same time , this reform will level the playing field for those who do not get health insurance through their job .
for americans who now purchase health insurance on their own , this proposal would mean a substantial tax savings -- $ 4,500 for a family of four making $ 60,000 a year .
and for the millions of other americans who have no health insurance at all , this deduction would help put a basic , private health insurance plan within their reach .
changing the tax code is a vital and necessary step to making health care affordable for more americans .
my second proposal is to help the states that are coming up with innovative ways to cover the uninsured .
states that make basic private health insurance available to all their citizens should receive federal funds to help them provide this coverage to the poor and the sick .
i have asked the secretary of health and human services to work with congress to take existing federal funds and use them to create affordable choices grants .
these grants would give our nation 's governors more money and more flexibility to get private health insurance to those most in need .
there are many other ways that congress can help .
we need to expand health savings accounts .
we need to help small businesses through association health plans .
we need to reduce costs and medical errors with better information technology .
we will encourage price transparency .
and to protect good doctors from junk lawsuits , we need to pass medical liability reform .
in all we do , we must remember that the best health care decisions are not made by government and insurance companies but by patients and their doctors .
extending hope and opportunity in our country requires an immigration system worthy of america , with laws that are fair and borders that are secure .
when laws and borders are routinely violated , this harms the interests of our country .
to secure our border , we 're doubling the size of the border patrol and funding new infrastructure and technology .
yet even with all these steps , we can not fully secure the border unless we take pressure off the border , and that requires a temporary worker program .
we should establish a legal and orderly path for foreign workers to enter our country to work on a temporary basis .
as a result , they wo n't have to try to sneak in , and that will leave border agents free to chase down drug smugglers and criminals and terrorists .
we 'll enforce our immigration laws at the worksite and give employers the tools to verify the legal status of their workers , so there 's no excuse left for violating the law .
we need to uphold the great tradition of the melting pot that welcomes and assimilates new arrivals .
we need to resolve the status of the illegal immigrants who are already in our country without animosity and without amnesty .
convictions run deep in this capitol when it comes to immigration .
let us have a serious , civil , and conclusive debate , so that you can pass and i can sign comprehensive immigration reform into law .
extending hope and opportunity depends on a stable supply of energy that keeps america 's economy running and america 's environment clean .
for too long , our nation has been dependent on foreign oil .
and this dependence leaves us more vulnerable to hostile regimes and to terrorists who could cause huge disruptions of oil shipments and raise the price of oil and do great harm to our economy .
it 's in our vital interest to diversify america 's energy supply .
the way forward is through technology .
we must continue changing the way america generates electric power by even greater use of clean coal technology , solar and wind energy , and clean , safe nuclear power .
we need to press on with battery research for plug - in and hybrid vehicles and expand the use of clean diesel vehicles and biodiesel fuel .
we must continue investing in new methods of producing ethanol , using everything from wood chips to grasses to agricultural wastes .
we made a lot of progress , thanks to good policies here in washington and the strong response of the market .
and now even more dramatic advances are within reach .
tonight i ask congress to join me in pursuing a great goal .
let us build on the work we 've done and reduce gasoline usage in the united states by 20 percent in the next 10 years .
when we do that , we will have cut our total imports by the equivalent of three - quarters of all the oil we now import from the middle east .
to reach this goal , we must increase the supply of alternative fuels by setting a mandatory fuels standard to require 35 billion gallons of renewable and alternative fuels in 2017 -- and that is nearly five times the current target .
at the same time , we need to reform and modernize fuel economy standards for cars the way we did for light trucks and conserve up to eight and a half billion more gallons of gasoline by 2017 .
achieving these ambitious goals will dramatically reduce our dependence on foreign oil , but it 's not going to eliminate it .
and so as we continue to diversify our fuel supply , we must step up domestic oil production in environmentally sensitive ways .
and to further protect america against severe disruptions to our oil supply , i ask congress to double the current capacity of the strategic petroleum reserve .
america is on the verge of technological breakthroughs that will enable us to live our lives less dependent on oil .
and these technologies will help us be better stewards of the environment , and they will help us to confront the serious challenge of global climate change .
a future of hope and opportunity requires a fair , impartial system of justice .
the lives of our citizens across our nation are affected by the outcome of cases pending in our federal courts .
we have a shared obligation to ensure that the federal courts have enough judges to hear those cases and deliver timely rulings .
as president , i have a duty to nominate qualified men and women to vacancies on the federal bench , and the united states senate has a duty as well , to give those nominees a fair hearing and a prompt up - or - down vote on the senate floor .
for all of us in this room , there is no higher responsibility than to protect the people of this country from danger .
five years have come and gone since we saw the scenes and felt the sorrow that the terrorists can cause .
we 've had time to take stock of our situation .
we 've added many critical protections to guard the homeland .
we know with certainty that the horrors of that september morning were just a glimpse of what the terrorists intend for us -- unless we stop them .
with the distance of time , we find ourselves debating the causes of conflict and the course we have followed .
such debates are essential when a great democracy faces great questions .
yet one question has surely been settled : that to win the war on terror , we must take the fight to the enemy .
from the start , america and our allies have protected our people by staying on the offense .
the enemy knows that the days of comfortable sanctuary , easy movement , steady financing , and free flowing communications are long over .
for the terrorists , life since 9/11 has never been the same .
our success in this war is often measured by the things that did not happen .
we can not know the full extent of the attacks that we and our allies have prevented , but here is some of what we do know .
we stopped an al qaeda plot to fly a hijacked airplane into the tallest building on the west coast .
we broke up a southeast asian terror cell grooming operatives for attacks inside the united states .
we uncovered an al qaeda cell developing anthrax to be used in attacks against america .
and just last august , british authorities uncovered a plot to blow up passenger planes bound for america over the atlantic ocean .
for each life saved , we owe a debt of gratitude to the brave public servants who devote their lives to finding the terrorists and stopping them .
every success against the terrorists is a reminder of the shoreless ambitions of this enemy .
the evil that inspired and rejoiced in 9/11 is still at work in the world .
and so long as that 's the case , america is still a nation at war .
in the mind of the terrorists , this war began well before september 11 and will not end until their radical vision is fulfilled .
and these past five years have given us a much clearer view of the nature of this enemy .
al qaeda and its followers are sunni extremists possessed by hatred and commanded by a harsh and narrow ideology .
take almost any principle of civilization , and their goal is the opposite .
they preach with threats , instruct with bullets and bombs , and promise paradise for the murder of the innocent .
our enemies are quite explicit about their intentions .
they want to overthrow moderate governments and establish safe havens from which to plan and carry out new attacks on our country .
by killing and terrorizing americans , they want to force our country to retreat from the world and abandon the cause of liberty .
they would then be free to impose their will and spread their totalitarian ideology .
listen to this warning from the late terrorist zarqawi : " we will sacrifice our blood and bodies to put an end to your dreams , and what is coming is even worse . "
usama bin laden declared : " death is better than living on this earth with the unbelievers among us . "
these men are not given to idle words , and they are just one camp in the islamist radical movement .
in recent times , it has also become clear that we face an escalating danger from shi'a extremists who are just as hostile to america and are also determined to dominate the middle east .
many are known to take direction from the regime in iran , which is funding and arming terrorists like hezballah -- a group second only to al qaeda in the american lives it has taken .
the shi'a and sunni extremists are different faces of the same totalitarian threat .
whatever slogans they chant when they slaughter the innocent , they have the same wicked purposes .
they want to kill americans , kill democracy in the middle east , and gain the weapons to kill on an even more horrific scale .
in the sixth year since our nation was attacked , i wish i could report to you that the dangers have ended .
they have not .
and so it remains the policy of this government to use every lawful and proper tool of intelligence , diplomacy , law enforcement , and military action to do our duty , to find these enemies , and to protect the american people .
this war is more than a clash of arms ; it is a decisive ideological struggle .
and the security of our nation is in the balance .
to prevail , we must remove the conditions that inspire blind hatred and drove 19 men to get onto airplanes and to come and kill us .
what every terrorist fears most is human freedom , societies where men and women make their own choices , answer to their own conscience , and live by their hopes instead of their resentments .
free people are not drawn to violent and malignant ideologies , and most will choose a better way when they 're given a chance .
so we advance our own security interests by helping moderates and reformers and brave voices for democracy .
the great question of our day is whether america will help men and women in the middle east to build free societies and share in the rights of all humanity .
and i say , for the sake of our own security , we must .
in the last two years , we 've seen the desire for liberty in the broader middle east , and we have been sobered by the enemy 's fierce reaction .
in 2005 , the world watched as the citizens of lebanon raised the banner of the cedar revolution .
they drove out the syrian occupiers and chose new leaders in free elections .
in 2005 , the people of afghanistan defied the terrorists and elected a democratic legislature .
and in 2005 , the iraqi people held three national elections , choosing a transitional government , adopting the most progressive , democratic constitution in the arab world , and then electing a government under that constitution .
despite endless threats from the killers in their midst , nearly 12 million iraqi citizens came out to vote in a show of hope and solidarity that we should never forget .
a thinking enemy watched all of these scenes , adjusted their tactics , and in 2006 , they struck back .
in lebanon , assassins took the life of pierre gemayel , a prominent participant in the cedar revolution .
hizballah terrorists , with support from syria and iran , sowed conflict in the region and are seeking to undermine lebanon 's legitimately elected government .
in afghanistan , taliban and al qaeda fighters tried to regain power by regrouping and engaging afghan and nato forces .
in iraq , al qaeda and other sunni extremists blew up one of the most sacred places in shi'a islam , the golden mosque of samarra .
this atrocity , directed at a muslim house of prayer , was designed to provoke retaliation from iraqi shi'a , and it succeeded .
radical shi'a elements , some of whom receive support from iran , formed death squads .
the result was a tragic escalation of sectarian rage and reprisal that continues to this day .
this is not the fight we entered in iraq , but it is the fight we 're in .
every one of us wishes this war were over and won .
yet it would not be like us to leave our promises unkept , our friends abandoned , and our own security at risk .
ladies and gentlemen , on this day , at this hour , it is still within our power to shape the outcome of this battle .
let us find our resolve and turn events toward victory .
we 're carrying out a new strategy in iraq , a plan that demands more from iraq 's elected government and gives our forces in iraq the reinforcements they need to complete their mission .
our goal is a democratic iraq that upholds the rule of law , respects the rights of its people , provides them security , and is an ally in the war on terror .
in order to make progress toward this goal , the iraqi government must stop the sectarian violence in its capital .
but the iraqis are not yet ready to do this on their own .
so we 're deploying reinforcements of more than 20,000 additional soldiers and marines to iraq .
the vast majority will go to baghdad , where they will help iraqi forces to clear and secure neighborhoods and serve as advisers embedded in iraqi army units .
with iraqis in the lead , our forces will help secure the city by chasing down the terrorists , insurgents , and the roaming death squads .
and in anbar province , where al qaeda terrorists have gathered and local forces have begun showing a willingness to fight them , we 're sending an additional 4,000 united states marines , with orders to find the terrorists and clear them out .
we did n't drive al qaeda out of their safe haven in afghanistan only to let them set up a new safe haven in a free iraq .
the people of iraq want to live in peace , and now it 's time for their government to act .
iraq 's leaders know that our commitment is not open - ended .
they have promised to deploy more of their own troops to secure baghdad , and they must do so .
they pledged that they will confront violent radicals of any faction or political party , and they need to follow through and lift needless restrictions on iraqi and coalition forces , so these troops can achieve their mission of bringing security to all of the people of baghdad .
iraq 's leaders have committed themselves to a series of benchmarks : to achieve reconciliation ; to share oil revenues among all of iraq 's citizens ; to put the wealth of iraq into the rebuilding of iraq ; to allow more iraqis to reenter their nation 's civic life ; to hold local elections ; and to take responsibility for security in every iraqi province .
but for all of this to happen , baghdad must be secure , and our plan will help the iraqi government take back its capital and make good on its commitments .
my fellow citizens , our military commanders and i have carefully weighed the options .
we discussed every possible approach .
in the end , i chose this course of action because it provides the best chance for success .
many in this chamber understand that america must not fail in iraq , because you understand that the consequences of failure would be grievous and far - reaching .
if american forces step back before baghdad is secure , the iraqi government would be overrun by extremists on all sides .
we could expect an epic battle between shi'a extremists backed by iran and sunni extremists aided by al qaeda and supporters of the old regime .
a contagion of violence could spill out across the country , and in time , the entire region could be drawn into the conflict .
for america , this is a nightmare scenario ; for the enemy , this is the objective .
chaos is the greatest ally -- their greatest ally in this struggle .
and out of chaos in iraq would emerge an emboldened enemy with new safe havens , new recruits , new resources , and an even greater determination to harm america .
to allow this to happen would be to ignore the lessons of september 11 and invite tragedy .
ladies and gentlemen , nothing is more important at this moment in our history than for america to succeed in the middle east , to succeed in iraq , and to spare the american people from this danger .
this is where matters stand tonight , in the here and now .
i have spoken with many of you in person .
i respect you and the arguments you 've made .
we went into this largely united , in our assumptions and in our convictions .
and whatever you voted for , you did not vote for failure .
our country is pursuing a new strategy in iraq , and i ask you to give it a chance to work , and i ask you to support our troops in the field and those on their way .
the war on terror we fight today is a generational struggle that will continue long after you and i have turned our duties over to others .
and that 's why it 's important to work together so our nation can see this great effort through .
both parties and both branches should work in close consultation .
it 's why i 've proposed to establish a special advisory council on the war on terror , made up of leaders in congress from both political parties .
we will share ideas for how to position america to meet every challenge that confronts us .
we 'll show our enemies abroad that we are united in the goal of victory .
and one of the first steps we can take together is to add to the ranks of our military so that the american armed forces are ready for all the challenges ahead .
tonight i ask the congress to authorize an increase in the size of our active army and marine corps by 92,000 in the next five years .
a second task we can take on together is to design and establish a volunteer civilian reserve corps .
such a corps would function much like our military reserve .
it would ease the burden on the armed forces by allowing us to hire civilians with critical skills to serve on missions abroad when america needs them .
it would give people across america who do not wear the uniform a chance to serve in the defining struggle of our time .
americans can have confidence in the outcome of this struggle because we 're not in this struggle alone .
we have a diplomatic strategy that is rallying the world to join in the fight against extremism .
in iraq , multinational forces are operating under a mandate from the united nations .
we 're working with jordan and saudi arabia and egypt and the gulf states to increase support for iraq 's government .
the united nations has imposed sanctions on iran and made it clear that the world will not allow the regime in tehran to acquire nuclear weapons .
with the other members of the quartet -- the u. n. , the eu , and russia -- we 're pursuing diplomacy to help bring peace to the holy land and pursuing the establishment of a democratic palestinian state living side by side with israel in peace and security .
in afghanistan , nato has taken the lead in turning back the taliban and al qaeda offensive -- the first time the alliance has deployed forces outside the north atlantic area .
together with our partners in china and japan , russia and south korea , we 're pursuing intensive diplomacy to achieve a korean peninsula free of nuclear weapons .
we will continue to speak out for the cause of freedom in places like cuba , belarus , and burma , and continue to awaken the conscience of the world to save the people of darfur .
american foreign policy is more than a matter of war and diplomacy .
our work in the world is also based on a timeless truth : to whom much is given , much is required .
we hear the call to take on the challenges of hunger and poverty and disease , and that is precisely what america is doing .
we must continue to fight hiv / aids , especially on the continent of africa .
because you funded the emergency plan for aids relief , the number of people receiving lifesaving drugs has grown from 50,000 to more than 800,000 in three short years .
i ask you to continue funding our efforts to fight hiv / aids .
and i ask you to provide $ 1.2 billion over five years so we can combat malaria in 15 african countries .
i ask that you fund the millennium challenge account , so that american aid reaches the people who need it , in nations where democracy is on the rise and corruption is in retreat .
and let us continue to support the expanded trade and debt relief that are the best hope for lifting lives and eliminating poverty .
when america serves others in this way , we show the strength and generosity of our country .
these deeds reflect the character of our people .
the greatest strength we have is the heroic kindness and courage and self - sacrifice of the american people .
you see this spirit often if you know where to look , and tonight we need only look above to the gallery .
dikembe mutombo grew up in africa amid great poverty and disease .
he came to georgetown university on a scholarship to study medicine , but coach john thompson took a look at dikembe and had a different idea .
dikembe became a star in the nba and a citizen of the united states , but he never forgot the land of his birth or the duty to share his blessings with others .
he built a brand new hospital in his old hometown .
a friend has said of this good - hearted man : " mutombo believes that god has given him this opportunity to do great things . "
and we are proud to call this son of the congo a citizen of the united states of america .
after her daughter was born , julie aigner - clark searched for ways to share her love of music and art with her child .
so she borrowed some equipment and began filming children 's videos in her basement .
the baby einstein company was born , and in just five years , her business grew to more than $ 20 million in sales .
in november 2001 , julie sold baby einstein to walt disney company , and with her help , baby einstein has grown into a $ 200 million business .
julie represents the great enterprising spirit of america .
and she is using her success to help others -- producing child safety videos with john walsh of the national center for missing and exploited children .
julie says of her new project : " i believe it is the most important thing i have ever done .
i believe that children have the right to live in a world that is safe . "
and so tonight we are pleased to welcome this talented business entrepreneur and generous social entrepreneur , julie aigner - clark .
three weeks ago , wesley autrey was waiting at a harlem subway station with his two little girls when he saw a man fall into the path of a train .
with seconds to act , wesley jumped onto the tracks , pulled the man into the space between the rails , and held him as the train passed right above their heads .
he insists he 's not a hero .
he says : " we got guys and girls overseas dying for us to have our freedoms .
we have got to show each other some love . "
there is something wonderful about a country that produces a brave and humble man like wesley autrey .
tommy rieman was a teenager pumping gas in independence , kentucky , when he enlisted in the united states army .
in december 2003 , he was on a reconnaissance mission in iraq when his team came under heavy enemy fire .
from his humvee , sergeant rieman returned fire .
he used his body as a shield to protect his gunner .
he was shot in the chest and arm and received shrapnel wounds to his legs , yet he refused medical attention and stayed in the fight .
he helped to repel a second attack , firing grenades at the enemy 's position .
for his exceptional courage , sergeant rieman was awarded the silver star .
and like so many other americans who have volunteered to defend us , he has earned the respect and the gratitude of our entire country .
in such courage and compassion , ladies and gentlemen , we see the spirit and character of america .
and these qualities are not in short supply .
this is a decent and honorable country -- and resilient too .
we 've been through a lot together .
we 've met challenges and faced dangers , and we know that more lie ahead .
yet we can go forward with confidence , because the state of our union is strong , our cause in the world is right , and tonight that cause goes on .
god bless .
see you next year .
thank you for your prayers .

good afternoon .
congress has just passed and sent to my desk two bills concerning the use of stem cells in biomedical research .
these bills illustrate both the promise and perils we face in the age of biotechnology .
in this new era , our challenge is to harness the power of science to ease human suffering without sanctioning the practices that violate the dignity of human life .
in 2001 , i spoke to the american people and set forth a new policy on stem cell research that struck a balance between the needs of science and the demands of conscience .
when i took office , there was no federal funding for human embryonic stem cell research .
under the policy i announced five years ago , my administration became the first to make federal funds available for this research , yet only on embryonic stem cell lines derived from embryos that had already been destroyed .
my administration has made available more than $ 90 million for research on these lines .
this policy has allowed important research to go forward without using taxpayer funds to encourage the further deliberate destruction of human embryos .
one of the bills congress has passed builds on the progress we have made over the last five years .
so i signed it into law .
congress has also passed a second bill that attempts to overturn the balanced policy i set .
this bill would support the taking of innocent human life in the hope of finding medical benefits for others .
it crosses a moral boundary that our decent society needs to respect , so i vetoed it .
like all americans , i believe our nation must vigorously pursue the tremendous possibility that science offers to cure disease and improve the lives of millions .
we have opportunities to discover cures and treatments that were unthinkable generations ago .
some scientists believe that one source of these cures might be embryonic stem cell research .
embryonic stem cells have the ability to grow into specialized adult tissues , and this may give them the potential to replace damaged or defective cells or body parts and treat a variety of diseases .
yet we must also remember that embryonic stem cells come from human embryos that are destroyed for their cells .
each of these human embryos is a unique human life with inherent dignity and matchless value .
we see that value in the children who are with us today .
each of these children began his or her life as a frozen embryo that was created for in vitro fertilization , but remained unused after the fertility treatments were complete .
each of these children was adopted while still an embryo , and has been blessed with the chance to grow up in a loving family .
these boys and girls are not spare parts .
they remind us of what is lost when embryos are destroyed in the name of research .
they remind us that we all begin our lives as a small collection of cells .
and they remind us that in our zeal for new treatments and cures , america must never abandon our fundamental morals .
some people argue that finding new cures for disease requires the destruction of human embryos like the ones that these families adopted .
i disagree .
i believe that with the right techniques and the right policies , we can achieve scientific progress while living up to our ethical responsibilities .
that 's what i sought in 2001 , when i set forth my administration 's policy allowing federal funding for research on embryonic stem cell lines where the life and death decision had already been made .
this balanced approach has worked .
under this policy , 21 human embryonic stem cell lines are currently in use in research that is eligible for federal funding .
each of these lines can be replicated many times .
and as a result , the national institutes of health have helped make more than 700 shipments to researchers since 2001 .
there is no ban on embryonic stem cell research .
to the contrary , even critics of my policy concede that these federally funded lines are being used in research every day by scientists around the world .
my policy has allowed us to explore the potential of embryonic stem cells , and it has allowed america to continue to lead the world in this area .
since i announced my policy in 2001 , advances in scientific research have also shown the great potential of stem cells that are derived without harming human embryos .
my administration has expanded the funding of research into stem cells that can be drawn from children , adults , and the blood in umbilical cords , with no harm to the donor .
and these stem cells are already being used in medical treatments .
with us today are patients who have benefited from treatments with adult and umbilical - cord - blood stem cells .
and i want to thank you all for coming .
they are living proof that effective medical science can also be ethical .
researchers are now also investigating new techniques that could allow doctors and scientists to produce stem cells just as versatile as those derived from human embryos .
one technique scientists are exploring would involve reprogramming an adult cell .
for example , a skin cell to function like an embryonic stem cell .
science offers the hope that we may one day enjoy the potential benefits of embryonic stem cells without destroying human life .
we must continue to explore these hopeful alternatives and advance the cause of scientific research while staying true to the ideals of a decent and humane society .
the bill i sign today upholds these humane ideals and draws an important ethical line to guide our research .
the fetus farming prohibition act was sponsored by senators santorum and brownback -- both who are here .
and by congressman dave weldon , along with nathan deal .
thank you , congressmen .
this good law prohibits one of the most egregious abuses in biomedical research , the trafficking in human fetuses that are created with the sole intent of aborting them to harvest their parts .
human beings are not a raw material to be exploited , or a commodity to be bought or sold , and this bill will help ensure that we respect the fundamental ethical line .
i 'm disappointed that congress failed to pass another bill that would have promoted good research .
this bill was sponsored by senator santorum and senator arlen specter and congressman roscoe bartlett .
thanks for coming , roscoe .
it would have authorized additional federal funding for promising new research that could produce cells with the abilities of embryonic cells , but without the destruction of human embryos .
this is an important piece of legislation .
this bill was unanimously approved by the senate ; it received 273 votes in the house of representatives , but was blocked by a minority in the house using procedural maneuvers .
i 'm disappointed that the house failed to authorize funding for this vital and ethical research .
it makes no sense to say that you 're in favor of finding cures for terrible diseases as quickly as possible , and then block a bill that would authorize funding for promising and ethical stem cell research .
at a moment when ethical alternatives are becoming available , we can not lose the opportunity to conduct research that would give hope to those suffering from terrible diseases , and help move our nation beyond the current controversies over embryonic stem cell research .
we must pursue this research .
and so i direct the secretary of health and human services , secretary leavitt , and the director of the national institutes of health to use all the tools at their disposal to aid the search for stem cell techniques that advance promising medical science in an ethical and morally responsible way .
unfortunately , congress has sent me a bill that fails to meet this ethical test .
this legislation would overturn the balanced policy on embryonic stem cell research that my administration has followed for the past five years .
this bill would also undermine the principle that congress , itself , has followed for more than a decade , when it has prohibited federal funding for research that destroys human embryos .
if this bill would have become law , american taxpayers would , for the first time in our history , be compelled to fund the deliberate destruction of human embryos .
and i 'm not going to allow it .
i made it clear to the congress that i will not allow our nation to cross this moral line .
i felt like crossing this line would be a mistake , and once crossed , we would find it almost impossible to turn back .
crossing the line would needlessly encourage a conflict between science and ethics that can only do damage to both , and to our nation as a whole .
if we 're to find the right ways to advance ethical medical research , we must also be willing , when necessary , to reject the wrong ways .
so today , i 'm keeping the promise i made to the american people by returning this bill to congress with my veto .
as science brings us ever closer to unlocking the secrets of human biology , it also offers temptations to manipulate human life and violate human dignity .
our conscience and history as a nation demand that we resist this temptation .
america was founded on the principle that we are all created equal , and endowed by our creator with the right to life .
we can advance the cause of science while upholding this founding promise .
we can harness the promise of technology without becoming slaves to technology .
and we can ensure that science serves the cause of humanity instead of the other way around .
america pursues medical advances in the name of life , and we will achieve the great breakthroughs we all seek with reverence for the gift of life .
i believe america 's scientists have the ingenuity and skill to meet this challenge .
and i look forward to working with congress and the scientific community to achieve these great and noble goals in the years ahead .
thank you all for coming and may god bless .

good evening .
i 'm speaking to you from the city of new orleans -- nearly empty , still partly under water , and waiting for life and hope to return .
eastward from lake pontchartrain , across the mississippi coast , to alabama into florida , millions of lives were changed in a day by a cruel and wasteful storm .
in the aftermath , we have seen fellow citizens left stunned and uprooted , searching for loved ones , and grieving for the dead , and looking for meaning in a tragedy that seems so blind and random .
we 've also witnessed the kind of desperation no citizen of this great and generous nation should ever have to know -- fellow americans calling out for food and water , vulnerable people left at the mercy of criminals who had no mercy , and the bodies of the dead lying uncovered and untended in the street .
these days of sorrow and outrage have also been marked by acts of courage and kindness that make all americans proud .
coast guard and other personnel rescued tens of thousands of people from flooded neighborhoods .
religious congregations and families have welcomed strangers as brothers and sisters and neighbors .
in the community of chalmette , when two men tried to break into a home , the owner invited them to stay -- and took in 15 other people who had no place to go .
at tulane hospital for children , doctors and nurses did not eat for days so patients could have food , and eventually carried the patients on their backs up eight flights of stairs to helicopters .
many first responders were victims themselves , wounded healers , with a sense of duty greater than their own suffering .
when i met steve scott of the biloxi fire department , he and his colleagues were conducting a house - to - house search for survivors .
steve told me this : " i lost my house and i lost my cars , but i still got my family ... and i still got my spirit . "
across the gulf coast , among people who have lost much , and suffered much , and given to the limit of their power , we are seeing that same spirit -- a core of strength that survives all hurt , a faith in god no storm can take away , and a powerful american determination to clear the ruins and build better than before .
tonight so many victims of the hurricane and the flood are far from home and friends and familiar things .
you need to know that our whole nation cares about you , and in the journey ahead you 're not alone .
to all who carry a burden of loss , i extend the deepest sympathy of our country .
to every person who has served and sacrificed in this emergency , i offer the gratitude of our country .
and tonight i also offer this pledge of the american people : throughout the area hit by the hurricane , we will do what it takes , we will stay as long as it takes , to help citizens rebuild their communities and their lives .
and all who question the future of the crescent city need to know there is no way to imagine america without new orleans , and this great city will rise again .
the work of rescue is largely finished ; the work of recovery is moving forward .
in nearly all of mississippi , electric power has been restored .
trade is starting to return to the port of new orleans , and agricultural shipments are moving down the mississippi river .
all major gasoline pipelines are now in operation , preventing the supply disruptions that many feared .
the breaks in the levees have been closed , the pumps are running , and the water here in new orleans is receding by the hour .
environmental officials are on the ground , taking water samples , identifying and dealing with hazardous debris , and working to get drinking water and waste water treatment systems operating again .
and some very sad duties are being carried out by professionals who gather the dead , treat them with respect , and prepare them for their rest .
in the task of recovery and rebuilding , some of the hardest work is still ahead , and it will require the creative skill and generosity of a united country .
our first commitment is to meet the immediate needs of those who had to flee their homes and leave all their possessions behind .
for these americans , every night brings uncertainty , every day requires new courage , and in the months to come will bring more than their fair share of struggles .
the department of homeland security is registering evacuees who are now in shelters and churches , or private homes , whether in the gulf region or far away .
i have signed an order providing immediate assistance to people from the disaster area .
as of today , more than 500,000 evacuee families have gotten emergency help to pay for food , clothing , and other essentials .
evacuees who have not yet registered should contact fema or the red cross .
we need to know who you are , because many of you will be eligible for broader assistance in the future .
many families were separated during the evacuation , and we are working to help you reunite .
please call this number : 1 - 877 - 568 - 3317 -- that 's 1 - 877 - 568 - 3317 -- and we will work to bring your family back together , and pay for your travel to reach them .
in addition , we 're taking steps to ensure that evacuees do not have to travel great distances or navigate bureaucracies to get the benefits that are there for them .
the department of health and human services has sent more than 1,500 health professionals , along with over 50 tons of medical supplies -- including vaccines and antibiotics and medicines for people with chronic conditions such as diabetes .
the social security administration is delivering checks .
the department of labor is helping displaced persons apply for temporary jobs and unemployment benefits .
and the postal service is registering new addresses so that people can get their mail .
to carry out the first stages of the relief effort and begin rebuilding at once , i have asked for , and the congress has provided , more than $ 60 billion .
this is an unprecedented response to an unprecedented crisis , which demonstrates the compassion and resolve of our nation .
our second commitment is to help the citizens of the gulf coast to overcome this disaster , put their lives back together , and rebuild their communities .
along this coast , for mile after mile , the wind and water swept the land clean .
in mississippi , many thousands of houses were damaged or destroyed .
in new orleans and surrounding parishes , more than a quarter - million houses are no longer safe to live in .
hundreds of thousands of people from across this region will need to find longer - term housing .
our goal is to get people out of the shelters by the middle of october .
so we 're providing direct assistance to evacuees that allows them to rent apartments , and many already are moving into places of their own .
a number of states have taken in evacuees and shown them great compassion -- admitting children to school , and providing health care .
so i will work with the congress to ensure that states are reimbursed for these extra expenses .
in the disaster area , and in cities that have received huge numbers of displaced people , we 're beginning to bring in mobile homes and trailers for temporary use .
to relieve the burden on local health care facilities in the region , we 're sending extra doctors and nurses to these areas .
we 're also providing money that can be used to cover overtime pay for police and fire departments while the cities and towns rebuild .
near new orleans , and biloxi , and other cities , housing is urgently needed for police and firefighters , other service providers , and the many workers who are going to rebuild these cities .
right now , many are sleeping on ships we have brought to the port of new orleans -- and more ships are on their way to the region .
and we 'll provide mobile homes , and supply them with basic services , as close to construction areas as possible , so the rebuilding process can go forward as quickly as possible .
and the federal government will undertake a close partnership with the states of louisiana and mississippi , the city of new orleans , and other gulf coast cities , so they can rebuild in a sensible , well - planned way .
federal funds will cover the great majority of the costs of repairing public infrastructure in the disaster zone , from roads and bridges to schools and water systems .
our goal is to get the work done quickly .
and taxpayers expect this work to be done honestly and wisely -- so we 'll have a team of inspectors general reviewing all expenditures .
in the rebuilding process , there will be many important decisions and many details to resolve , yet we 're moving forward according to some clear principles .
the federal government will be fully engaged in the mission , but governor barbour , governor blanco , mayor nagin , and other state and local leaders will have the primary role in planning for their own future .
clearly , communities will need to move decisively to change zoning laws and building codes , in order to avoid a repeat of what we 've seen .
and in the work of rebuilding , as many jobs as possible should go to the men and women who live in louisiana , mississippi , and alabama .
our third commitment is this : when communities are rebuilt , they must be even better and stronger than before the storm .
within the gulf region are some of the most beautiful and historic places in america .
as all of us saw on television , there 's also some deep , persistent poverty in this region , as well .
that poverty has roots in a history of racial discrimination , which cut off generations from the opportunity of america .
we have a duty to confront this poverty with bold action .
so let us restore all that we have cherished from yesterday , and let us rise above the legacy of inequality .
when the streets are rebuilt , there should be many new businesses , including minority - owned businesses , along those streets .
when the houses are rebuilt , more families should own , not rent , those houses .
when the regional economy revives , local people should be prepared for the jobs being created .
americans want the gulf coast not just to survive , but to thrive ; not just to cope , but to overcome .
we want evacuees to come home , for the best of reasons -- because they have a real chance at a better life in a place they love .
when one resident of this city who lost his home was asked by a reporter if he would relocate , he said , " naw , i will rebuild -- but i will build higher . "
that is our vision for the future , in this city and beyond : we 'll not just rebuild , we 'll build higher and better .
to meet this goal , i will listen to good ideas from congress , and state and local officials , and the private sector .
i believe we should start with three initiatives that the congress should pass .
tonight i propose the creation of a gulf opportunity zone , encompassing the region of the disaster in louisiana and mississippi and alabama .
within this zone , we should provide immediate incentives for job - creating investment , tax relief for small businesses , incentives to companies that create jobs , and loans and loan guarantees for small businesses , including minority - owned enterprises , to get them up and running again .
it is entrepreneurship that creates jobs and opportunity ; it is entrepreneurship that helps break the cycle of poverty ; and we will take the side of entrepreneurs as they lead the economic revival of the gulf region .
i propose the creation of worker recovery accounts to help those evacuees who need extra help finding work .
under this plan , the federal government would provide accounts of up to $ 5,000 , which these evacuees could draw upon for job training and education to help them get a good job , and for child care expenses during their job search .
and to help lower - income citizens in the hurricane region build new and better lives , i also propose that congress pass an urban homesteading act .
under this approach , we will identify property in the region owned by the federal government , and provide building sites to low - income citizens free of charge , through a lottery .
in return , they would pledge to build on the lot , with either a mortgage or help from a charitable organization like habitat for humanity .
home ownership is one of the great strengths of any community , and it must be a central part of our vision for the revival of this region .
in the long run , the new orleans area has a particular challenge , because much of the city lies below sea level .
the people who call it home need to have reassurance that their lives will be safer in the years to come .
protecting a city that sits lower than the water around it is not easy , but it can , and has been done .
city and parish officials in new orleans , and state officials in louisiana will have a large part in the engineering decisions to come .
and the army corps of engineers will work at their side to make the flood protection system stronger than it has ever been .
the work that has begun in the gulf coast region will be one of the largest reconstruction efforts the world has ever seen .
when that job is done , all americans will have something to be very proud of -- and all americans are needed in this common effort .
it is the armies of compassion -- charities and houses of worship , and idealistic men and women -- that give our reconstruction effort its humanity .
they offer to those who hurt a friendly face , an arm around the shoulder , and the reassurance that in hard times , they can count on someone who cares .
by land , by sea , and by air , good people wanting to make a difference deployed to the gulf coast , and they 've been working around the clock ever since .
the cash needed to support the armies of compassion is great , and americans have given generously .
for example , the private fundraising effort led by former presidents bush and clinton has already received pledges of more than $ 100 million .
some of that money is going to the governors to be used for immediate needs within their states .
a portion will also be sent to local houses of worship to help reimburse them for the expense of helping others .
this evening the need is still urgent , and i ask the american people to continue donating to the salvation army , the red cross , other good charities , and religious congregations in the region .
it 's also essential for the many organizations of our country to reach out to your fellow citizens in the gulf area .
so i 've asked usa freedom corps to create an information clearinghouse , available at usafreedomcorps .
gov , so that families anywhere in the country can find opportunities to help families in the region , or a school can support a school .
and i challenge existing organizations -- churches , and scout troops , or labor union locals to get in touch with their counterparts in mississippi , louisiana , or alabama , and learn what they can do to help .
in this great national enterprise , important work can be done by everyone , and everyone should find their role and do their part .
the government of this nation will do its part , as well .
our cities must have clear and up - to - date plans for responding to natural disasters , and disease outbreaks , or a terrorist attack , for evacuating large numbers of people in an emergency , and for providing the food and water and security they would need .
in a time of terror threats and weapons of mass destruction , the danger to our citizens reaches much wider than a fault line or a flood plain .
i consider detailed emergency planning to be a national security priority , and therefore , i 've ordered the department of homeland security to undertake an immediate review , in cooperation with local counterparts , of emergency plans in every major city in america .
i also want to know all the facts about the government response to hurricane katrina .
the storm involved a massive flood , a major supply and security operation , and an evacuation order affecting more than a million people .
it was not a normal hurricane -- and the normal disaster relief system was not equal to it .
many of the men and women of the coast guard , the federal emergency management agency , the united states military , the national guard , homeland security , and state and local governments performed skillfully under the worst conditions .
yet the system , at every level of government , was not well - coordinated , and was overwhelmed in the first few days .
it is now clear that a challenge on this scale requires greater federal authority and a broader role for the armed forces -- the institution of our government most capable of massive logistical operations on a moment 's notice .
four years after the frightening experience of september the 11th , americans have every right to expect a more effective response in a time of emergency .
when the federal government fails to meet such an obligation , i , as president , am responsible for the problem , and for the solution .
so i 've ordered every cabinet secretary to participate in a comprehensive review of the government response to the hurricane .
this government will learn the lessons of hurricane katrina .
we 're going to review every action and make necessary changes , so that we are better prepared for any challenge of nature , or act of evil men , that could threaten our people .
the united states congress also has an important oversight function to perform .
congress is preparing an investigation , and i will work with members of both parties to make sure this effort is thorough .
in the life of this nation , we have often been reminded that nature is an awesome force , and that all life is fragile .
we 're the heirs of men and women who lived through those first terrible winters at jamestown and plymouth , who rebuilt chicago after a great fire , and san francisco after a great earthquake , who reclaimed the prairie from the dust bowl of the 1930s .
every time , the people of this land have come back from fire , flood , and storm to build anew -- and to build better than what we had before .
americans have never left our destiny to the whims of nature -- and we will not start now .
these trials have also reminded us that we are often stronger than we know -- with the help of grace and one another .
they remind us of a hope beyond all pain and death , a god who welcomes the lost to a house not made with hands .
and they remind us that we 're tied together in this life , in this nation -- and that the despair of any touches us all .
i know that when you sit on the steps of a porch where a home once stood , or sleep on a cot in a crowded shelter , it is hard to imagine a bright future .
but that future will come .
the streets of biloxi and gulfport will again be filled with lovely homes and the sound of children playing .
the churches of alabama will have their broken steeples mended and their congregations whole .
and here in new orleans , the street cars will once again rumble down st. charles , and the passionate soul of a great city will return .
in this place , there 's a custom for the funerals of jazz musicians .
the funeral procession parades slowly through the streets , followed by a band playing a mournful dirge as it moves to the cemetery .
once the casket has been laid in place , the band breaks into a joyful " second line " -- symbolizing the triumph of the spirit over death .
tonight the gulf coast is still coming through the dirge -- yet we will live to see the second line .
thank you , and may god bless america .

madam speaker , vice president cheney , members of congress , distinguished guests , and fellow citizens : 
 seven years have passed since i first stood before you at this rostrum .
in that time , our country has been tested in ways none of us could have imagined .
we faced hard decisions about peace and war , rising competition in the world economy , and the health and welfare of our citizens .
these issues call for vigorous debate , and i think it 's fair to say , we 've answered the call .
yet history will record that amid our differences , we acted with purpose , and together we showed the world the power and resilience of american self - government .
all of us were sent to washington to carry out the people 's business .
that is the purpose of this body .
it is the meaning of our oath .
it remains our charge to keep .
the actions of the 110th congress will affect the security and prosperity of our nation long after this session has ended .
in this election year , let us show our fellow americans that we recognize our responsibilities and are determined to meet them .
let us show them that republicans and democrats can compete for votes and cooperate for results at the same time .
from expanding opportunity to protecting our country , we 've made good progress .
yet we have unfinished business before us , and the american people expect us to get it done .
in the work ahead , we must be guided by the philosophy that made our nation great .
as americans , we believe in the power of individuals to determine their destiny and shape the course of history .
we believe that the most reliable guide for our country is the collective wisdom of ordinary citizens .
and so in all we do , we must trust in the ability of free peoples to make wise decisions and empower them to improve their lives for their futures .
to build a prosperous future , we must trust people with their own money and empower them to grow our economy .
as we meet tonight , our economy is undergoing a period of uncertainty .
america has added jobs for a record 52 straight months , but jobs are now growing at a slower pace .
wages are up , but so are prices for food and gas .
exports are rising , but the housing market has declined .
at kitchen tables across our country , there is a concern about our economic future .
in the long run , americans can be confident about our economic growth .
but in the short run , we can all see that that growth is slowing .
so last week , my administration reached agreement with speaker pelosi and republican leader boehner on a robust growth package that includes tax relief for individuals and families and incentives for business investment .
the temptation will be to load up the bill .
that would delay it or derail it , and neither option is acceptable .
this is a good agreement that will keep our economy growing and our people working , and this congress must pass it as soon as possible .
we have other work to do on taxes .
unless congress acts , most of the tax relief we 've delivered over the past seven years will be taken away .
some in washington argue that letting tax relief expire is not a tax increase .
try explaining that to 116 million american taxpayers who would see their taxes rise by an average of $ 1,800 .
others have said they would personally be happy to pay higher taxes .
i welcome their enthusiasm .
i 'm pleased to report that the irs accepts both checks and money orders .
most americans think their taxes are high enough .
with all the other pressures on their finances , american families should not have to worry about their federal government taking a bigger bite out of their paychecks .
there 's only one way to eliminate this uncertainty : make the tax relief permanent .
and members of congress should know , if any bill raises taxes reaches my desk , i will veto it .
just as we trust americans with their own money , we need to earn their trust by spending their tax dollars wisely .
next week , i 'll send you a budget that terminates or substantially reduces 151 wasteful or bloated programs , totaling more than $ 18 billion .
the budget that i will submit will keep america on track for a surplus in 2012 .
american families have to balance their budgets ; so should their government .
the people 's trust in their government is undermined by congressional earmarks , special interest projects that are often snuck in at the last minute , without discussion or debate .
last year , i asked you to voluntarily cut the number and cost of earmarks in half .
i also asked you to stop slipping earmarks into committee reports that never even come to a vote .
unfortunately , neither goal was met .
so this time , if you send me an appropriations bill that does not cut the number and cost of earmarks in half , i 'll send it back to you with my veto .
and tomorrow i will issue an executive order that directs federal agencies to ignore any future earmark that is not voted on by congress .
if these items are truly worth funding , congress should debate them in the open and hold a public vote .
our shared responsibilities extend beyond matters of taxes and spending .
on housing , we must trust americans with the responsibility of homeownership and empower them to weather turbulent times in the housing market .
my administration brought together the hope now alliance , which is helping many struggling homeowners avoid foreclosure .
and congress can help even more .
tonight i ask you to pass legislation to reform fannie mae and freddie mac , modernize the federal housing administration , and allow state housing agencies to issue tax - free bonds to help homeowners refinance their mortgages .
these are difficult times for many american families , and by taking these steps , we can help more of them keep their homes .
to build a future of quality health care , we must trust patients and doctors to make medical decisions and empower them with better information and better options .
we share a common goal : making health care more affordable and accessible for all americans .
the best way to achieve that goal is by expanding consumer choice , not government control .
so i have proposed ending the bias in the tax code against those who do not get their health insurance through their employer .
this one reform would put private coverage within reach for millions , and i call on the congress to pass it this year .
the congress must also expand health savings accounts , create association health plans for small businesses , promote health information technology , and confront the epidemic of junk medical lawsuits .
with all these steps , we will ensure that decisions about your medical care are made in the privacy of your doctor 's office , not in the halls of congress .
on education , we must trust students to learn , if given the chance , and empower parents to demand results from our schools .
in neighborhoods across our country , there are boys and girls with dreams , and a decent education is their only hope of achieving them .
six years ago , we came together to pass the no child left behind act , and today , no one can deny its results .
last year , fourth and eighth graders achieved the highest math scores on record .
reading scores are on the rise .
african - american and hispanic students posted alltime highs .
now we must work together to increase accountability , add flexibilities for states and districts , reduce the number of high school dropouts , provide extra help for struggling schools .
members of congress , the no child left behind act is a bipartisan achievement .
it is succeeding .
and we owe it to america 's children , their parents , and their teachers to strengthen this good law .
we must also do more to help children when their schools do not measure up .
thanks to the dc opportunity scholarships you approved , more than 2,600 of the poorest children in our nation 's capital have found new hope at a faith - based or other non - public school .
sadly , these schools are disappearing at an alarming rate in many of america 's inner cities .
so i will convene a white house summit aimed at strengthening these lifelines of learning .
and to open the doors of these schools to more children , i ask you to support a new $ 300 million program called pell grants for kids .
we have seen how pell grants help low - income college students realize their full potential .
together we 've expanded the size and reach of these grants .
now let us apply the same spirit to help liberate poor children trapped in failing public schools .
on trade , we must trust american workers to compete with anyone in the world and empower them by opening up new markets overseas .
today , our economic growth increasingly depends on our ability to sell american goods and crops and services all over the world .
so we 're working to break down barriers to trade and investment wherever we can .
we 're working for a successful doha round of trade talks , and we must complete a good agreement this year .
at the same time , we 're pursuing opportunities to open up new markets by passing free trade agreements .
i thank the congress for approving a good agreement with peru .
and now i ask you to approve agreements with colombia and panama and south korea .
many products from these nations now enter america duty free , yet many of our products face steep tariffs in their markets .
these agreements will level the playing field .
they will give us better access to nearly 100 million customers .
they will support good jobs for the finest workers in the world , those whose products say " made in the usa . "
these agreements also promote america 's strategic interests .
the first agreement that will come before you is with colombia , a friend of america that is confronting violence and terror and fighting drug traffickers .
if we fail to pass this agreement , we will embolden the purveyors of false populism in our hemisphere .
so we must come together , pass this agreement , and show our neighbors in the region that democracy leads to a better life .
trade brings better jobs and better choices and better prices .
yet for some americans , trade can mean losing a job , and the federal government has a responsibility to help .
i ask congress to reauthorize and reform trade adjustment assistance so we can help these displaced workers learn new skills and find new jobs .
to build a future of energy security , we must trust in the creative genius of american researchers and entrepreneurs and empower them to pioneer a new generation of clean energy technology .
our security , our prosperity , and our environment all require reducing our dependence on oil .
last year , i asked you to pass legislation to reduce oil consumption over the next decade , and you responded .
together we should take the next steps .
let us fund new technologies that can generate coal power while capturing carbon emissions .
let us increase the use of renewable power and emissions - free nuclear power .
let us continue investing in advanced battery technology and renewable fuels to power the cars and trucks of the future .
let us create a new international clean technology fund , which will help developing nations like india and china make a greater use of clean energy sources .
and let us complete an international agreement that has the potential to slow , stop , and eventually reverse the growth of greenhouse gases .
this agreement will be effective only if it includes commitments by every major economy and gives none a free ride .
the united states is committed to strengthening our energy security and confronting global climate change .
and the best way to meet these goals is for america to continue leading the way toward the development of cleaner and more energy efficient technology .
to keep america competitive into the future , we must trust in the skill of our scientists and engineers and empower them to pursue the breakthroughs of tomorrow .
last year , congress passed legislation supporting the american competitiveness initiative , but never followed through with the funding .
this funding is essential to keeping our scientific edge .
so i ask congress to double federal support for critical basic research in the physical sciences and ensure america remains the most dynamic nation on earth .
on matters of life and science , we must trust in the innovative spirit of medical researchers and empower them to discover new treatments while respecting moral boundaries .
in november , we witnessed a landmark achievement when scientists discovered a way to reprogram adult skin cells to act like embryonic stem cells .
this breakthrough has the potential to move us beyond the divisive debates of the past by extending the frontiers of medicine without the destruction of human life .
so we 're expanding funding for this type of ethical medical research .
and as we explore promising avenues of research , we must also ensure that all life is treated with the dignity it deserves .
and so i call on congress to pass legislation that bans unethical practices , such as the buying , selling , patenting , or cloning of human life .
on matters of justice , we must trust in the wisdom of our founders and empower judges who understand that the constitution means what it says .
i 've submitted judicial nominees who will rule by the letter of the law , not the whim of the gavel .
many of these nominees are being unfairly delayed .
they are worthy of confirmation , and the senate should give each of them a prompt up - or - down vote .
in communities across our land , we must trust in the good heart of the american people and empower them to serve their neighbors in need .
over the past seven years , more of our fellow citizens have discovered that the pursuit of happiness leads to the path of service .
americans have volunteered in record numbers .
charitable donations are higher than ever .
faith - based groups are bringing hope to pockets of despair , with newfound support from the federal government .
and to help guarantee equal treatment of faith - based organizations when they compete for federal funds , i ask you to permanently extend charitable choice .
tonight the armies of compassion continue the march to a new day in the gulf coast .
america honors the strength and resilience of the people of this region .
we reaffirm our pledge to help them build stronger and better than before .
and tonight i 'm pleased to announce that in april , we will host this year 's north american summit of canada , mexico , and the united states in the great city of new orleans .
there are two other pressing challenges that i 've raised repeatedly before this body and that this body has failed to address : entitlement spending and immigration .
every member in this chamber knows that spending on entitlement programs like social security , medicare , and medicaid is growing faster than we can afford .
we all know the painful choices ahead if america stays on this path : massive tax increases , sudden and drastic cuts in benefits , or crippling deficits .
i 've laid out proposals to reform these programs .
now i ask members of congress to offer your proposals and come up with a bipartisan solution to save these vital programs for our children and our grandchildren .
the other pressing challenge is immigration .
america needs to secure our borders , and with your help , my administration is taking steps to do so .
we 're increasing worksite enforcement , deploying fences and advanced technologies to stop illegal crossings .
we 've effectively ended the policy of catch - and - release at the border , and by the end of this year , we will have doubled the number of border patrol agents .
yet we also need to acknowledge that we will never fully secure our border until we create a lawful way for foreign workers to come here and support our economy .
this will take pressure off the border and allow law enforcement to concentrate on those who mean us harm .
we must also find a sensible and humane way to deal with people here illegally .
illegal immigration is complicated , but it can be resolved .
and it must be resolved in a way that upholds both our laws and our highest ideals .
this is the business of our nation here at home .
yet building a prosperous future for our citizen also depends on confronting enemies abroad and advancing liberty in troubled regions of the world .
our foreign policy is based on a clear premise : we trust that people , when given the chance , will choose a future of freedom and peace .
in the last seven years , we have witnessed stirring moments in the history of liberty .
we 've seen citizens in georgia and ukraine stand up for their right to free and fair elections .
we 've seen people in lebanon take to the streets to demand their independence .
we 've seen afghans emerge from the tyranny of the taliban and choose a new president and a new parliament .
we 've seen jubilant iraqis holding up ink - stained fingers and celebrating their freedom .
these images of liberty have inspired us .
in the past seven years , we 've also seen the images that have sobered us .
we 've watched throngs of mourners in lebanon and pakistan carrying the caskets of beloved leaders taken by the assassin 's hand .
we 've seen wedding guests in blood - soaked finery staggering from a hotel in jordan , afghans and iraqis blown up in mosques and markets , and trains in london and madrid ripped apart by bombs .
on a clear september day , we saw thousands of our fellow citizens taken from us in an instant .
these horrific images serve as a grim reminder : the advance of liberty is opposed by terrorists and extremists , evil men who despise freedom , despise america , and aim to subject millions to their violent rule .
since 9/11 , we have taken the fight to these terrorists and extremists .
we will stay on the offense ; we will keep up the pressure ; and we will deliver justice to our enemies .
we are engaged in the defining ideological struggle of the 21st century .
the terrorists oppose every principle of humanity and decency that we hold dear .
yet in this war on terror , there is one thing we and our enemies agree on : in the long run , men and women who are free to determine their own destinies will reject terror and refuse to live in tyranny .
and that is why the terrorists are fighting to deny this choice to the people in lebanon , iraq , afghanistan , pakistan , and the palestinian territories .
and that is why , for the security of america and the peace of the world , we are spreading the hope of freedom .
in afghanistan , america , our 25 nato allies , and 15 partner nations are helping the afghan people defend their freedom and rebuild their country .
thanks to the courage of these military and civilian personnel , a nation that was once a safe haven for al qaeda is now a young democracy where boys and girls are going to school , new roads and hospitals are being built , and people are looking to the future with new hope .
these successes must continue , so we 're adding 3,200 marines to our forces in afghanistan , where they will fight the terrorists and train the afghan army and police .
defeating the taliban and al qaeda is critical to our security , and i thank the congress for supporting america 's vital mission in afghanistan .
in iraq , the terrorists and extremists are fighting to deny a proud people their liberty and fighting to establish safe havens for attacks across the world .
one year ago , our enemies were succeeding in their efforts to plunge iraq into chaos .
so we reviewed our strategy and changed course .
we launched a surge of american forces into iraq .
we gave our troops a new mission : work with the iraqi forces to protect the iraqi people ; pursue the enemy in its strongholds ; and deny the terrorists sanctuary anywhere in the country .
the iraqi people quickly realized that something dramatic had happened .
those who had worried that america was preparing to abandon them instead saw tens of thousands of american forces flowing into their country .
they saw our forces moving into neighborhoods , clearing out the terrorists , and staying behind to ensure the enemy did not return .
and they saw our troops , along with provincial reconstruction teams that include foreign service officers and other skilled public servants , coming in to ensure that improved security was followed by improvements in daily life .
our military and civilians in iraq are performing with courage and distinction , and they have the gratitude of our whole nation .
the iraqis launched a surge of their own .
in the fall of 2006 , sunni tribal leaders grew tired of al qaeda 's brutality , started a popular uprising called the " anbar awakening . "
over the past year , similar movements have spread across the country .
and today , the grassroots surge includes more than 80,000 iraqi citizens who are fighting the terrorists .
the government in baghdad has stepped forward as well , adding more than 100,000 new iraqi soldiers and police during the past year .
while the enemy is still dangerous and more work remains , the american and iraqi surges have achieved results few of us could have imagined just one year ago .
when we met last year , many said that containing the violence was impossible .
a year later , high - profile terrorist attacks are down , civilian deaths are down , sectarian killings are down .
when we met last year , militia extremists -- some armed and trained by iran -- were wreaking havoc in large areas of iraq .
a year later , coalition and iraqi forces have killed or captured hundreds of militia fighters .
and iraqis of all backgrounds increasingly realize that defeating these militia fighters is critical to the future of their country .
when we met last year , al qaeda had sanctuaries in many areas of iraq , and their leaders had just offered american forces safe passage out of the country .
today , it is al qaeda that is searching for safe passage .
they have been driven from many of the strongholds they once held .
and over the past year , we 've captured or killed thousands of extremists in iraq , including hundreds of key al qaeda leaders and operatives .
last month , osama bin laden released a tape in which he railed against iraqi tribal leaders who have turned on al qaeda and admitted that coalition forces are growing stronger in iraq .
ladies and gentlemen , some may deny the surge is working , but among the terrorists there is no doubt .
al qaeda is on the run in iraq , and this enemy will be defeated .
when we met last year , our troop levels in iraq were on the rise .
today , because of the progress just described , we are implementing a policy of return on success , and the surge forces we sent to iraq are beginning to come home .
this progress is a credit to the valor of our troops and the brilliance of their commanders .
this evening i want to speak directly to our men and women on the frontlines .
soldiers and sailors , airmen , marines , and coast guardsmen : in the past year , you have done everything we 've asked of you and more .
our nation is grateful for your courage .
we are proud of your accomplishments .
and tonight in this hallowed chamber , with the american people as our witness , we make you a solemn pledge : in the fight ahead , you will have all you need to protect our nation .
and i ask congress to meet its responsibilities to these brave men and women by fully funding our troops .
our enemies in iraq have been hit hard .
they are not yet defeated , and we can still expect tough fighting ahead .
our objective in the coming year is to sustain and build on the gains we made in 2007 while transitioning to the next phase of our strategy .
american troops are shifting from leading operations to partnering with iraqi forces and , eventually , to a protective overwatch mission .
as part of this transition , one army brigade combat team and one marine expeditionary unit have already come home and will not be replaced .
in the coming months , four additional brigades and two marine battalions will follow suit .
taken together , this means more than 20,000 of our troops are coming home .
any further drawdown of u. s. troops will be based on conditions in iraq and the recommendations of our commanders .
general petraeus has warned that too fast a drawdown could result in , quote , " the disintegration of the iraqi security forces , al qaeda - iraq regaining lost ground , and a marked increase in violence . "
members of congress , having come so far and achieved so much , we must not allow this to happen .
in the coming year , we will work with iraqi leaders as they build on the progress they 're making toward political reconciliation .
at the local level , sunnis , shi'a , and kurds are beginning to come together to reclaim their communities and rebuild their lives .
progress in the provinces must be matched by progress in baghdad .
we 're seeing some encouraging signs .
the national government is sharing oil revenues with the provinces .
the parliament recently passed both a pension law and de - ba'athification reform .
they 're now debating a provincial powers law .
the iraqis still have a distance to travel , but after decades of dictatorship and the pain of sectarian violence , reconciliation is taking place , and the iraqi people are taking control of their future .
the mission in iraq has been difficult and trying for our nation .
but it is in the vital interest of the united states that we succeed .
a free iraq will deny al qaeda a safe haven .
a free iraq will show millions across the middle east that a future of liberty is possible .
a free iraq will be a friend of america , a partner in fighting terror , and a source of stability in a dangerous part of the world .
by contrast , a failed iraq would embolden the extremists , strengthen iran , and give terrorists a base from which to launch new attacks on our friends , our allies , and our homeland .
the enemy has made its intentions clear .
at a time when the momentum seemed to favor them , al qaeda 's top commander in iraq declared that they will not rest until they have attacked us here in washington .
my fellow americans , we will not rest either .
we will not rest until this enemy has been defeated .
we must do the difficult work today so that years from now , people will look back and say that this generation rose to the moment , prevailed in a tough fight , and left behind a more hopeful region and a safer america .
we 're also standing against the forces of extremism in the holy land , where we have new cause for hope .
palestinians have elected a president who recognizes that confronting terror is essential to achieving a state where his people can live in dignity and at peace with israel .
israelis have leaders who recognize that a peaceful , democratic palestinian state will be a source of lasting security .
this month in ramallah and jerusalem , i assured leaders from both sides that america will do , and i will do , everything we can to help them achieve a peace agreement that defines a palestinian state by the end of this year .
the time has come for a holy land where a democratic israel and a democratic palestine live side by side in peace .
we 're also standing against the forces of extremism embodied by the regime in tehran .
iran 's rulers oppress a good and talented people .
and wherever freedom advances in the middle east , it seems the iranian regime is there to oppose it .
iran is funding and training militia groups in iraq , supporting hizballah terrorists in lebanon , and backing hamas efforts to undermine peace in the holy land .
tehran is also developing ballistic missiles of increasing range and continues to develop its capability to enrich uranium , which could be used to create a nuclear weapon .
our message to the people of iran is clear : we have no quarrel with you .
we respect your traditions and your history .
we look forward to the day when you have your freedom .
our message to the leaders of iran is also clear : verifiably suspend your nuclear enrichment so negotiations can begin .
and to rejoin the community of nations , come clean about your nuclear intentions and past actions , stop your oppression at home , cease your support for terror abroad .
but above all , know this : america will confront those who threaten our troops ; we will stand by our allies ; and we will defend our vital interests in the persian gulf .
on the homefront , we will continue to take every lawful and effective measure to protect our country .
this is our most solemn duty .
we are grateful that there has not been another attack on our soil since 9/11 .
this is not for the lack of desire or effort on the part of the enemy .
in the past six years , we 've stopped numerous attacks , including a plot to fly a plane into the tallest building in los angeles and another to blow up passenger jets bound for america over the atlantic .
dedicated men and women in our government toil day and night to stop the terrorists from carrying out their plans .
these good citizens are saving american lives , and everyone in this chamber owes them our thanks .
and we owe them something more ; we owe them the tools they need to keep our people safe .
and one of the most important tools we can give them is the ability to monitor terrorist communications .
to protect america , we need to know who the terrorists are talking to , what they are saying , and what they 're planning .
last year , congress passed legislation to help us do that .
unfortunately , congress set the legislations to expire on february 1 .
that means if you do n't act by friday , our ability to track terrorist threats would be weakened and our citizens will be in greater danger .
congress must ensure the flow of vital intelligence is not disrupted .
congress must pass liability protection for companies believed to have assisted in the efforts to defend america .
we 've had ample time for debate .
the time to act is now .
protecting our nation from the dangers of a new century requires more than good intelligence and a strong military .
it also requires changing the conditions that breed resentment and allow extremists to prey on despair .
so america is using its influence to build a freer , more hopeful , and more compassionate world .
this is a reflection of our national interests ; it is the calling of our conscience .
america opposes genocide in sudan .
we support freedom in countries from cuba and zimbabwe to belarus and burma .
america is leading the fight against global poverty with strong education initiatives and humanitarian assistance .
we 've also changed the way we deliver aid by launching the millennium challenge account .
this program strengthens democracy , transparency , and the rule of law in developing nations , and i ask you to fully fund this important initiative .
america is leading the fight against global hunger .
today , more than half the world 's food aid comes from the united states .
and tonight i ask congress to support an innovative proposal to provide food assistance by purchasing crops directly from farmers in the developing world , so we can build up local agriculture and help break the cycle of famine .
america is leading the fight against disease .
with your help , we 're working to cut by half the number of malaria - related deaths in 15 african nations .
and our emergency plan for aids relief is treating 1.4 million people .
we can bring healing and hope to many more .
so i ask you to maintain the principles that have changed behavior and made this program a success .
and i call on you to double our initial commitment to fighting hiv / aids by approving an additional $ 30 billion over the next five years .
america is a force for hope in the world because we are a compassionate people , and some of the most compassionate americans are those who have stepped forward to protect us .
we must keep faith with all who have risked life and limb so that we might live in freedom and peace .
over the past seven years , we 've increased funding for veterans by more than 95 percent .
and as we increase funding , we must also reform our veterans system to meet the needs of a new war and a new generation .
i call on congress to enact the reforms recommended by senator bob dole and secretary donna shalala , so we can improve the system of care for our wounded warriors and help them build lives of hope and promise and dignity .
our military families also sacrifice for america .
they endure sleepless nights and the daily struggle of providing for children while a loved one is serving far from home .
we have a responsibility to provide for them .
so i ask you to join me in expanding their access to child care , creating new hiring preferences for military spouses across the federal government , and allowing our troops to transfer their unused education benefits to their spouses or children .
our military families serve our nation ; they inspire our nation ; and tonight our nation honors them .
the strength -- the secret of our strength , the miracle of america is that our greatness lies not in our government , but in the spirit and determination of our people .
when the federal convention met in philadelphia in 1787 , our nation was bound by the articles of confederation , which began with the words , " we the undersigned delegates . "
when governor morris was asked to draft the preamble to our new constitution , he offered an important revision and opened with words that changed the course of our nation and the history of the world : " we the people . "
by trusting the people , our founders wagered that a great and noble nation could be built on the liberty that resides in the hearts of all men and women .
by trusting the people , succeeding generations transformed our fragile young democracy into the most powerful nation on earth and a beacon of hope for millions .
and so long as we continue to trust the people , our nation will prosper , our liberty will be secure , and the state of our union will remain strong .
so tonight , with confidence in freedom 's power and trust in the people , let us set forth to do their business .
god bless america .

