my countrymen , the chief trouble today is that the world war wrought the destruction of healthful competition , left our storehouses empty , and there is a minimum production when our need is maximal .
maximum , not minimum , is the call of america .
war never fails to leave depleted storehouses , and always impairs the efficiency of production .
war also establishes its higher standards for wages and they abide .
i wish the higher wage to abide on one explicit condition-- that the wage earner will give full return for the wage received .
it is the best assurance we can have for a reduced cost of living .
i am ready to acclaim the highest standard of pay , but i would be blind to the responsibilities that mark this fateful hour if i did not caution the wage earners of america that mounting wages and decreased production can lead only to industrial and economic ruin .
i want somehow to appeal to the sons and daughters of the republic , to every producer , to join hand and brain in production , honest production , patriotic production .
profiteering is a crime of commission .
underproduction is a crime of omission .
we must work our most and best , else the inevitable reaction will bring its train of suffering , disappointment , and reversals .
we want to forestall such reactions .
we want to hold all advanced ground , and fortify it with general good fortune .
let us return to the necessity for understanding , particularly that understanding that concerns ourselves at home .
i decline to recognize any conflict of interest among the participants in industry .
the destruction of one is the ruin of the other .
the suspicion or rebellion of one unavoidably involves the other .
in conflict is disaster , in understanding there is triumph .
there is no issue relating to the foundation on which industry is builded because industry is bigger than any element in its modern making .
the insistent call is for labor , management , and capital to reach understanding .
the human element comes first .
i want the employers in industry to understand the aspirations , the convictions , the yearnings of the millions of american wage earners .
i want the wage earners to understand the problems , the anxieties , the obligations of management and capital , and all of them must understand their relationship to the people and their obligation to the republic .
out of this understanding will come the unanimous committal to economic justice ; and in economic justice lies that social justice which is the highest essential to human happiness .
i am speaking as one who has counted the contents of the pay envelope from the viewpoint of the earner , as well as the employer .
no one pretends to deny the inequalities which are manifest in modern industrial life .
they are less , in fact , than they were before organization and grouping on either side revealed the inequality ; and conscience has brought more justice than statutes have compelled .
but the ferment of the world rivets our thoughts on the necessity of progressive solutions -- else our generation will suffer the experiments , which means chaos for our day -- to reestablish god 's plan for the great tomorrow .

gentlemen of the conference , the united states welcomes you with unselfish hands .
we harbor no fears ; we have no sordid ends to serve ; we suspect no enemy ; we contemplate or apprehend no conquest .
content with what we have , we seek nothing which is another 's .
we only wish to do with you that finer , nobler thing which no nation can do alone .
we wish to sit with you at the table of international understanding and good will .
in good conscience we are eager to meet you frankly , and invite and offer cooperation .
the world demands a sober contemplation of the existing order and the realization that there can be no cure without sacrifice , not by one of us , but by all of us .
i do not mean surrendered rights , or narrowed freedom , or denied aspirations , or ignored national necessities .
our republic would no more ask for these than it would give .
no pride need be humbled , no nationality submerged , but i would have a mergence of minds committing all of us to less preparation for war and more enjoyment of fortunate peace .
the higher hopes come of the spirit of our coming together .
it is but just to recognize varying needs and peculiar positions .
nothing can be accomplished in disregard of national apprehensions .
rather , we should act together to remove the causes of apprehensions .
this is not to be done in intrigue .
greater assurance is found in the exchange of simple honesty and directness among men resolved to accomplish as becomes leaders among nations , when civilization itself has come to its crucial test .
it is not to be challenged that government fails when the excess of its cost robs the people of the way to happiness and the opportunity to achieve .
if the finer sentiments were not urging , the cold , hard facts of excessive cost and the eloquence of economics would urge us to reduce our armaments .
if the concept of a better order does not appeal , then let us ponder the burden and the blight of continued competition .
it is not to be denied that the world has swung along throughout the ages without heeding this call from the kindlier hearts of men .
but the same world never before was so tragically brought to realization of the utter futility of passion 's sway when reason and conscience and fellowship point a nobler way .
i can speak officially only for our united states .
our hundred millions frankly want less of armament and none of war .
wholly free from guile , sure in our own minds that we harbor no unworthy designs , we accredit the world with the same good intent .
so i welcome you , not alone in good will and high purpose , but with high faith .
we are met for a service to mankind .
in all simplicity , in all honesty and all honor , there may be written here the avowals of world conscience refined by the consuming fires of war , and made more sensitive by the anxious aftermath .
i hope for that understanding which will emphasize the guarantees of peace , and for commitments to less burdens and a better order which will tranquilize the world .
in such an accomplishment there will be added glory to your flags and ours , and the rejoicing of mankind will make the transcending music of all succeeding time .

nationality is the call of the hearts of liberated people , and the dream of those to whom freedom becomes an undying cause .
it 's the guiding light , the psalm , the prayer , the confirmation for our own people , although we were never assured indivisible union until the civil war was fought .
can any red - blooded american consent -- now when we have come to understand its priceless value -- to merge our nationality into internationality , merely because brotherhood and fraternity and fellowship and peace are soothing and appealing terms ?
out of the ferment , the turmoil , the debts , and echoing sorrows , out of the appalling waste and far reaching disorder , out of the threats against orderly government and the assault on our present day civilization , i think , sirs , i can see the opening way for america .
we must preserve the inheritance and cling to just government .
we do not need , and we do not mean to live within and for ourselves alone , but we do mean to hold our ideals safe from foreign incursion .
we have commanded respect and confidence ; commanded them in the friendships and the associations of peace ; commanded them in the conflicts and comradeships of war .
it 's easily possible to hold the world 's high estimate through righteous relationships if our ideals of civilization are the best in the world .
and i proudly believe that they are .
then we ought to send the american torch bearers leading on to fulfillment .
america aided in saving civilization .
americans will not fail civilization in the deliberate advancement of peace .
we 're willing to give , but we resent demand .
i do not believe , senators , that it 's going to break the heart of the world to make this covenant right , or at least free it from perils which would endanger our own independence .
but it were better to witness this rhetorical tragedy , than to destroy the soul of this great republic .
it 's a very alluring thing , senators , to do what the world has never done before .
no republic has ever permanently survived .
they have flashed , illumined , and advanced the world , and then faded or crumbled .
i want to be a contributor to the abiding republic .
none of us today can be sure that it shall abide for generations to come .
but we may hold it unshaken for our day , and pass it on to the next generation preserved in its integrity .
this is the unending call of duty to men of every civilization .
it is distinctly the american call to duty , to every man who believes we have come the nearest to dependable , popular government the world has yet witnessed .
let us have our america walking erect , unafraid , concerned about its rights and ready to defend them .
proud of its citizens and committed to defend them .
and sure of its ideals and strong to support them .
we 're a hundred million or more today , and if the miracle of the first century of national life may be repeated in the second , the millions of today will be the myriads of the future .
i like to think , sirs , that out of the discovered soul of the republic , and through our preservative actions in this supreme moment of human progress , we shall hold the word american the proudest boast of citizenship in all the world .

my countrymen , we believe the unspeakable sorrows , the immeasurable sacrifices , the awakened convictions , and the aspiring conscience of humankind must commit the nations of the earth to a new and better relationship .
it need not be discussed now what motives plunged the world into war .
it need not be inquired whether we asked the sons of this republic to defend our national rights , as i believe we did , or to purge the old world of the accumulated ills of rivalry and greed .
the sacrifices will be in vain if we can not acclaim a new order with added security to civilization and peace maintained .
one may readily sense the conscience of our america .
i am sure i understand the purpose of the dominant group of the senate .
we were not seeking to defeat a world aspiration .
we were resolved to safeguard america .
we were resolved then even as we are today , and will be tomorrow , to preserve this free and independent republic .
let those now responsible or seeking responsibility propose the surrender -- whether with interpretations , apologies , or reluctant reservations -- from which our rights are to be omitted .
we welcome the referendum to the american people on the preservation of america , and the republican party pledges its defense of the preserved inheritance of national freedom .
in the call of the conscience of america is peace .
peace that closes the gaping wound of world war and silences the impassioned voices of international envy and distrust .
heeding this call , and knowing as i do the disposition of congress , i promise you formal and effective peace so quickly as the republican congress can pass its declaration for a republican executive to sign .
then we may turn to our readjustment at home and proceed deliberately and reflectively to that hoped for world relationship which shall satisfy both conscience and aspirations , and still hold us free from menacing involvement .
i can hear in the call of conscience an insistent voice for the largely reduced armaments throughout the world , with attending reduction of burdens upon peace - loving humanity .
we wish to give of american influence and example .
we must give of american leadership to that invaluable accomplishment .
i can speak unreservedly of the american aspirations and the republican committal for an association of nations cooperating in sublime accord to attain and preserve peace through justice rather than force , determined to add to security through international law , so clarified that no misconstruction can be possible without affronting world honor .
it is better to be the free and disinterested agents of international justice and advancing civilization with the covenant of conscience , than to be shackled by a written compact which surrenders our freedom of action and gives the military alliance the right to proclaim america 's duty to the world .
no surrender of rights to a world council or its military alliance , no assumed mandatory , however appealing , ever shall summon the sons of this republic to war*. their supreme sacrifice shall be only asked for america and its call of honor .
there is sanctity in that right which we will not surrender to any other power on earth .

i greet you in a spirit of rejoicing .
not a rejoicing in the narrow partisan or personal sense , not in the gratifying prospect of party triumph , but i rejoice that america is still free and independent and in a position of self - reliance , opposed to the right of self - determination .
let us take stock for a moment of america in the world , aye , and of america at home .
the end of the war found our unselfishness emphasized to all mankind .
the garlands of world leadership were bestowed from every direction .
we had only to follow the path of america , rejoicing in the inheritance which led to our eminence , to rivet the gaze of all peoples upon our standards of national righteousness and our conception of international justice .
moreover , the world was ready to give us its confidence .
it was the beckoning opportunity of the century , not for the glorification of this new world republic , but for america to hold every outpost of advancing civilization and invite all nations to join the further advance to heights dreamed of , but never before approached .
but force of example was slung aside for force of armed alliance .
we neglected our restorations at home , and the sacrifice of millions of lives left us and the world groping in anxiety , instead of revealing us in the sunlight of a new day with lines formed , ready for the onward march of peace and all its triumphs .
mindful of our splendid examples , and renewing every obligation of association in war , i want america to be the rock of security at home , resolute in righteousness and supremacy of the law .
our moral leadership in the world was lost when ambition sought to superimpose a reactionary theory of discredited autocracy upon the progressive principle of living , glowing democracy .
my deep aspiration , my countrymen , if clothed with power , will be to regain that lost leadership , not for myself , not even for my party , though honoring and trusting it as i do , but for the country that i love from the bottom of my heart , with every fiber of my being , above all else in the world .

my countrymen , the first flaming torch of americanism was lighted in framing the federal constitution in 1787 .
the pilgrims signed their simple and majestic covenant a full century and a half before , and set aflame their beacon of liberty on the coast of massachusetts .
other pioneers of new world 's freedom were rearing their new standards of liberty from jamestown to plymouth for five generations before lexington and concord heralded the new era .
it is all american in the destined result , yet all of it lacked the soul of nationality .
in simple truth , there was no thought of nationality in the revolution for american independence .
the colonists were resisting a wrong , and freedom was their solace .
once it was achieved , nationality was the only agency suited to its preservation .
americanism really began when robed in nationality .
the american republic began the blazed trail of representative popular government .
representative democracy was proclaimed the safe agency of highest human freedom .
america headed the forward procession of civil , human , and religious liberty , which ultimately will affect the liberation of all mankind .
the federal constitution is the very base of all americanism , the " ark of the covenant " of american liberty , the very temple of equal rights .
the constitution does abide and ever will , so long as the republic survives .
let us hesitate before we surrender the nationality which is the very soul of highest americanism .
this republic has never failed humanity , or endangered civilization .
we have been tardy sometimes -- like when we were proclaiming democracy and neutrality , and yet ignored our national rights -- but the ultimate and helpful part we played in the great war will be the pride of americans so long as the world recites the story .
we do not mean to hold aloof , we choose no isolation , we shun no duty .
i like to rejoice in an american conscience ; and in a big conception of our obligation to liberty , justice , and civilization -- aye , and more .
i like to think of columbia 's helping hand to new republics which are seeking the blessings portrayed in our example .
but i have a confidence in our america that requires no council of foreign powers to point the way of american duty .
we wish to counsel , cooperate , and contribute , but we arrogate to ourselves the keeping of the american conscience , and every concept of our moral obligation .
it is time to idealize , but it 's very practical to make sure our own house is in perfect order before we attempt the miracle of old world stabilization .
call it selfishness of nationality if you will , i think it an inspiration to patriotic devotion-- to safeguard america first , to stabilize america first , to prosper america first , to think of america first , to exalt america first , to live for and revere america first .
let the internationalist dream and the bolshevist destroy .
god pity him for whom no minstrel raptures swell .
in the spirit of the republic we proclaim americanism and acclaim america .

mr. chairman * , the message which you have formally conveyed brings me to a realization of responsibility which is not underestimated .
it is a supreme task to interpret the covenant of a great political party , the activities of which are so woven into the history of this republic .
i believe in party government , as distinguished from personal government — individual , dictatorial , autocratic , or what not .
it was the intent of the founding fathers to give this republic a dependable and enduring popular government , representative in form , and it was designed to make political parties the effective agencies through which hopes and aspirations and convictions and conscience may be translated into public performance .
popular government has been an inspiration of liberty since the dawn of civilization .
republics have risen and fallen , and a transition from party to personal government has preceded every failure since the world began .
under the constitution we have the charted the way to security in perpetuity .
we know it gave to us the safe path to a developing eminence which no people in the world ever rivaled .
it has guaranteed the rule of intelligent , deliberate public opinion expressed through parties .
the american achievement under the plan of the fathers is nowhere disputed .
the american example has been the model of every republic which glorifies the progress of liberty , and is everywhere the leaven of representative democracy which has expanded human freedom .
no one man is big enough to run this great republic**. there never has been one .
such domination was never intended .
tranquility , stability , dependability -- all are assured in party sponsorship , and we mean to renew the assurances which were rended in the cataclysmal war .
our first committal is the restoration of representative popular government under the constitution through the agency of the republican party .
it is not difficult to make ourselves clear on the question of international relationships .
we republicans of the senate -- conscious of our solemn oaths and mindful of our constitutional obligations , when we saw the structure of a world supergovernment taking visionary form -- joined in a becoming warning [ out ] of our devotion to this republic .
if the torch of constitutionalism had not been dimmed , the delayed peace of the world and the tragedy of disappointment and europe ’s misunderstanding of america easily might have been avoided .
the republicans of the senate halted the barter of independent american eminence and influence -- which it was proposed to exchange for an obscure and unequal place in the merged governments of the world .
our party means to hold the heritage of american nationality unimpaired and unsurrendered .
the world will not misconstrue .
we do not mean to hold aloof , we do not mean to shun a single responsibility of this republic to world civilization .
there is no hate in the american heart .
we have no envy , no suspicion , no aversion for any people in the world .
we hold to our rights , and mean to defend -- aye , we mean to sustain the rights of this nation and our citizens alike everywhere under the shining sun .
yet there is the concord of amity and sympathy and fraternity in every resolution .
there is a genuine aspiration in every american breast for a tranquil friendship with all the world .

it is a very gratifying privilege to come to the congress with the republic at peace with all the nations of the world .
more , it is equally gratifying to report that our country is not only free from every impending , menace of war , but there are growing assurances of the permanency of the peace which we so deeply cherish .
for approximately ten years we have dwelt amid menaces of war or as participants in war 's actualities , and the inevitable aftermath , with its disordered conditions , bits added to the difficulties of government which adequately can not be appraised except by , those who are in immediate contact and know the responsibilities .
our tasks would be less difficult if we had only ourselves to consider , but so much of the world was involved , the disordered conditions are so well - nigh universal , even among nations not engaged in actual warfare , that no permanent readjustments can be effected without consideration of our inescapable relationship to world affairs in finance and trade .
indeed , we should be unworthy of our best traditions if we were unmindful of social , moral , and political conditions which are not of direct concern to us , but which do appeal to the human sympathies and the very becoming interest of a people blest with our national good fortune .
it is not my purpose to bring to you a program of world restoration .
in the main such a program must be worked out by the nations more directly concerned .
they must themselves turn to the heroic remedies for the menacing conditions under which they are struggling , then we can help , and we mean to help .
we shall do so unselfishly because there is compensation in the consciousness of assisting , selfishly because the commerce and international exchanges in trade , which marked our high tide of fortunate advancement , are possible only when the nations of all continents are restored to stable order and normal relationship .
in the main the contribution of this republic to restored normalcy in the world must come through the initiative of the executive branch of the government , but the best of intentions and most carefully considered purposes would fail utterly if the sanction and the cooperation of congress were not cheerfully accorded .
i am very sure we shall have no conflict of opinion about constitutional duties or authority .
during the anxieties of war , when necessity seemed compelling there were excessive grants of authority and all extraordinary concentration of powers in the chief executive .
the repeal of war - time legislation and the automatic expirations which attended the peace proclamations have put an end to these emergency excesses but i have the wish to go further than that .
i want to join you in restoring , in the most cordial way , the spirit of coordination and cooperation , and that mutuality of confidence and respect which is necessary ill representative popular government .
encroachment upon the functions of congress or attempted dictation of its policy are not to be thought of , much less attempted , but there is all insistent call for harmony of purpose and concord of action to speed the solution of the difficult problems confronting both the legislative and executive branches of the government .
it is worth while to make allusion here to the character of our government , mindful as one must be that an address to you is no less a message to all our people , for whom you speak most intimately .
ours is it popular government through political parties .
we divide along political lines , and i would ever have it so .
i do not mean that partisan preferences should hinder any public servant in the performance of a conscientious and patriotic official duty .
we saw partisan lines utterly obliterated when war imperiled , and our faith in the republic was riveted anew .
we ought not to find these partisan lines obstructing the expeditious solution of the urgent problems of peace .
granting that we are fundamentally a representative popular government , with political parties the governing agencies , i believe the political party in power should assume responsibility , determine upon policies ill the conference which supplements conventions and election campaigns , and then strive for achievement through adherence to the accepted policy .
there is vastly greater security , immensely more of the national viewpoint , much larger and prompter accomplishment where our divisions are along party lines , in the broader and loftier sense , than to divide geographically , or according to pursuits , or personal following .
for a century and a third , parties have been charged with responsibility and held to strict accounting .
when they fail , they are relieved of authority ; and the system has brought its to a national eminence no less than a world example .
necessarily legislation is a matter of compromise .
the full ideal is seldom attained .
in that meeting of minds necessary to insure results , there must and will be accommodations and compromises , but in the estimate of convictions and sincere purposes the supreme responsibility to national interest must not be ignored .
the shield to the high - minded public servant who adheres to party policy is manifest , but the higher purpose is the good of the republic as a whole .
it would be ungracious to withhold acknowledgment of the really large volume and excellent quality of work accomplished by the extraordinary session of congress which so recently adjourned .
i am not unmindful of the very difficult tasks with which you were called to deal , and no one can ignore the insistent conditions which , during recent years , have called for the continued and almost exclusive attention of your membership to public work .
it would suggest insincerity if i expressed complete accord with every expression recorded in your roll calls , but we are all agreed about the difficulties and the inevitable divergence of opinion in seeking the reduction , amelioration and readjustment of the burdens of taxation .
later on , when other problems are solved , i shall make some recommendations about renewed consideration of our tax program , but for the immediate time before us we must be content with the billion dollar reduction in the tax draft upon the people , and diminished irritations , banished uncertainty and improved methods of collection .
by your sustainment of the rigid economies already inaugurated , with hoped - for extension of these economies and added efficiencies in administration , i believe further reductions may be enacted and hindering burdens abolished .
in these urgent economies we shall be immensely assisted by the budget system for which you made provision in the extraordinary session .
the first budget is before you .
its preparation is a signal achievement , and the perfection of the system , a thing impossible in the few months available for its initial trial , will mark its enactment as the beginning of the greatest reformation in governmental practices since the beginning of the republic .
there is pending a grant of authority to the administrative branch of the government for the funding and settlement of our vast foreign loans growing out of our grant of war credits .
with the hands of the executive branch held impotent to deal with these debts we are hindering urgent readjustments among our debtors and accomplishing nothing for ourselves .
i think it is fair for the congress to assume that the executive branch of the government would adopt no major policy in dealing with these matters which would conflict with the purpose of congress in authorizing the loans , certainly not without asking congressional approval , but there are minor problems incident to prudent loan transactions and the safeguarding of our interests which can not even be attempted without this authorization .
it will be helpful to ourselves and it will improve conditions among our debtors if funding and the settlement of defaulted interest may be negotiated .
the previous congress , deeply concerned in behalf of our merchant marine , in 1920 enacted the existing shipping law , designed for the upbuilding of the american merchant marine .
among other things provided to encourage our shipping on the world 's seas , the executive was directed to give notice of the termination of all existing commercial treaties in order to admit of reduced duties on imports carried in american bottoms .
during the life of the act no executive has complied with this order of the congress .
when the present administration came into responsibility it began an early inquiry into the failure to execute the expressed purpose of the jones act .
only one conclusion has been possible .
frankly , members of house and senate , eager as i am to join you in the making of an american merchant marine commensurate with our commerce , the denouncement of out - commercial treaties would involve us in a chaos of trade relationships and add indescribably to the confusion of the already disordered commercial world .
our power to do so is not disputed , but power and ships , without comity of relationship , will not give us the expanded trade which is inseparably linked with a great merchant marine .
moreover , the applied reduction of duty , for which the treaty denouncements were necessary , encouraged only the carrying of dutiable imports to our shores , while the tonnage which unfurls the flag on the seas is both free and dutiable , and the cargoes which make it nation eminent in trade are outgoing , rather than incoming .
it is not my thought to lay the problem before you in detail today .
it is desired only to say to you that the executive branch of the government , uninfluenced by the protest of any nation , for none has been made , is well convinced that your proposal , highly intended and heartily supported here , is so fraught with difficulties and so marked by tendencies to discourage trade expansion , that i invite your tolerance of noncompliance for only a few weeks until a plan may be presented which contemplates no greater draft upon the public treasury , and which , though yet too crude to offer it to - day , gives such promise of expanding our merchant marine , that it will argue its own approval .
it is enough to say to - day that we are so possessed of ships , and the american intention to establish it merchant marine is so unalterable , that a plain of reimbursement , at no other cost than is contemplated in the existing act , will appeal to the pride and encourage the hope of all the american people .
there is before you the completion of the enactment of what has been termed a " permanent " tariff law , the word " permanent " being used to distinguish it from the emergency act which the congress expedited early in the extraordinary session , and which is the law today .
i can not too strongly urge in early completion of this necessary legislation .
it is needed to stabilize our industry at home ; it is essential to make more definite our trade relations abroad .
more , it is vital to the preservation of many of our own industries which contribute so notably to the very lifeblood of our nation .
there is now , and there always will be , a storm of conflicting opinion about any tariff revision .
we can not go far wrong when we base our tariffs on the policy of preserving the productive activities which enhance employment and add to our national prosperity .
again comes the reminder that we must not be unmindful of world conditions , that peoples are struggling for industrial rehabilitation and that we can not dwell in industrial and commercial exclusion and at the same time do the just thing in aiding world reconstruction and readjustment .
we do not seek a selfish aloofness , and we could not profit by it , were it possible .
we recognize the necessity of buying wherever we sell , and the permanency of trade lies in its acceptable exchanges .
in our pursuit of markets we must give as well as receive .
we can not sell to others who do not produce , nor can we buy unless we produce at home .
sensible of every obligation of humanity , commerce and finance , linked as they are in the present world condition , it is not to be argued that we need destroy ourselves to be helpful to others .
with all my heart i wish restoration to the peoples blighted by the awful world war , but the process of restoration does not lie in our acceptance of like conditions .
it were better to remain on firm ground , strive for ample employment and high standards of wage at home , and point the way to balanced budgets , rigid economies , and resolute , efficient work as the necessary remedies to cure disaster .
everything relating to trade , among ourselves and among nations , has been expanded , excessive , inflated , abnormal , and there is a madness in finance which no american policy alone will cure .
we are a creditor nation , not by normal processes , but made so by war .
it is not an unworthy selfishness to seek to save ourselves , when the processes of that salvation are not only not denied to others , but commended to them .
we seek to undermine for others no industry by which they subsist ; we are obligated to permit the undermining of none of our own which make for employment and maintained activities .
every contemplation , it little matters in which direction one turns , magnifies the difficulty of tariff legislation , but the necessity of the revision is magnified with it .
doubtless we are justified in seeking .1 more flexible policy than we have provided heretofore .
i hope a way will be found to make for flexibility and elasticity , so that rates may be adjusted to meet unusual and changing conditions which can not be accurately anticipated .
there are problems incident to unfair practices , and to exchanges which madness in money have made almost unsolvable .
i know of no manner in which to effect this flexibility other than the extension of the powers of the tariff commission so that it can adapt itself to it scientific and wholly just administration of the law .
i am not unmindful of the constitutional difficulties .
these can be met by giving authority to the chief executive , who could proclaim additional duties to meet conditions which the congress may designate .
at this point i must disavow any desire to enlarge the executive 's powers or add to the responsibilities of the office .
they are already too large .
if there were any other plan i would prefer it .
the grant of authority to proclaim would necessarily bring the tariff commission into new and enlarged activities , because no executive could discharge such a duty except upon the information acquired and recommendations made by this commission .
but the plan is feasible , and the proper functioning of the board would give its it better administration of a defined policy than ever can be made possible by tariff duties prescribed without flexibility .
there is a manifest difference of opinion about the merits of american valuation .
many nations have adopted delivery valuation as the basis for collecting duties ; that is , they take the cost of the imports delivered at the port of entry as the basis for levying duty .
it is no radical departure , in view of varying conditions and the disordered state of money values , to provide for american valuation , but there can not be ignored the danger of such a valuation , brought to the level of our own production costs , making our tariffs prohibitive .
it might do so in many instances where imports ought to be encouraged .
i believe congress ought well consider the desirability of the only promising alternative , namely , a provision authorizing proclaimed american valuation , under prescribed conditions , on any given list of articles imported .
in this proposed flexibility , authorizing increases to meet conditions so likely to change , there should also be provision for decreases .
a rate may be just to - day , and entirely out of proportion six months from to - day .
if our tariffs are to be made equitable , and not necessarily burden our imports and hinder our trade abroad , frequent adjustment will be necessary for years to come .
knowing the impossibility of modification by act of congress for any one or a score of lines without involving a long array of schedules , i think we shall go a long ways toward stabilization , if there is recognition of the tariff commission 's fitness to recommend urgent changes by proclamation .
i am sure about public opinion favoring the early determination of our tariff policy .
there have been reassuring signs of a business revival from the deep slump which all the world has been experiencing .
our unemployment , which gave its deep concern only a few weeks ago , has grown encouragingly less , and new assurances and renewed confidence will attend the congressional declaration that american industry will be held secure .
much has been said about the protective policy for ourselves making it impossible for our debtors to discharge their obligations to us .
this is a contention not now pressing for decision .
if we must choose between a people in idleness pressing for the payment of indebtedness , or a people resuming the normal ways of employment and carrying the credit , let us choose the latter .
sometimes we appraise largest the human ill most vivid in our minds .
we have been giving , and are giving now , of our influence and appeals to minimize the likelihood of war and throw off the crushing burdens of armament .
it is all very earnest , with a national soul impelling .
but a people unemployed , and gaunt with hunger , face a situation quite as disheartening as war , and our greater obligation to - day is to do the government 's part toward resuming productivity and promoting fortunate and remunerative employment .
something more than tariff protection is required by american agriculture .
to the farmer has come the earlier and the heavier burdens of readjustment .
there is actual depression in our agricultural industry , while agricultural prosperity is absolutely essential to the general prosperity of the country .
congress has sought very earnestly to provide relief .
it has promptly given such temporary relief as has been possible , but the call is insistent for the permanent solution .
it is inevitable that large crops lower the prices and short crops advance them .
no legislation can cure that fundamental law .
but there must be some economic solution for the excessive variation in returns for agricultural production .
it is rather shocking to be told , and to have the statement strongly supported , that 9,000,000 bales of cotton , raised on american plantations in a given year , will actually be worth more to the producers than 13,000,000 bales would have been .
equally shocking is the statement that 700,000,000 bushels of wheat , raised by american farmers , would bring them more money than a billion bushels .
yet these are not exaggerated statements .
in a world where there are tens of millions who need food and clothing which they can not get , such a condition is sure to indict the social system which makes it possible .
in the main the remedy lies in distribution and marketing .
every proper encouragement should be given to the cooperative marketing programs .
these have proven very helpful to the cooperating communities in europe .
in russia the cooperative community has become the recognized bulwark of law and order , and saved individualism from engulfment in social paralysis .
ultimately they will be accredited with the salvation of the russian state .
there is the appeal for this experiment .
why not try it ?
no one challenges the right of the farmer to a larger share of the consumer 's pay for his product , no one disputes that we can not live without the farmer .
he is justified in rebelling against the transportation cost .
given a fair return for his labor , he will have less occasion to appeal for financial aid ; and given assurance that his labors shall not be in vain , we reassure all the people of a production sufficient to meet our national requirement and guard against disaster .
the base of the pyramid of civilization which rests upon the soil is shrinking through the drift of population from farm to city .
for a generation we have been expressing more or less concern about this tendency .
economists have warned and statesmen have deplored .
we thought for at time that modern conveniences and the more intimate contact would halt the movement , but it has gone steadily on .
perhaps only grim necessity will correct it , but we ought to find a less drastic remedy .
the existing scheme of adjusting freight rates has been favoring the basing points , until industries are attracted to some centers and repelled from others .
a great volume of uneconomic and wasteful transportation has attended , and the cost increased accordingly .
the grain - milling and meat - packing industries afford ample illustration , and the attending concentration is readily apparent .
the menaces in concentration are not limited to the retardingly influences on agriculture .
manifestly the conditions and terms of railway transportation ought not be permitted to increase this undesirable tendency .
we have a just pride in our great cities , but we shall find a greater pride in the nation , which has it larger distribution of its population into the country , where comparatively self - sufficient smaller communities may blend agricultural and manufacturing interests in harmonious helpfulness and enhanced good fortune .
such a movement contemplates no destruction of things wrought , of investments made , or wealth involved .
it only looks to a general policy of transportation of distributed industry , and of highway construction , to encourage the spread of our population and restore the proper balance between city and country .
the problem may well have your earnest attention .
it has been perhaps the proudest claim of our american civilization that in dealing with human relationships it has constantly moved toward such justice in distributing the product of human energy that it has improved continuously the economic status of the mass of people .
ours has been a highly productive social organization .
on the way up from the elemental stages of society we have eliminated slavery and serfdom and are now far on the way to the elimination of poverty .
through the eradication of illiteracy and the diffussion of education mankind has reached a stage where we may fairly say that in the united states equality of opportunity has been attained , though all are not prepared to embrace it .
there is , indeed , a too great divergence between the economic conditions of the most and the least favored classes in the community .
but even that divergence has now come to the point where we bracket the very poor and the very rich together as the least fortunate classes .
our efforts may well be directed to improving the status of both .
while this set of problems is commonly comprehended under the general phrase " capital and labor , " it is really vastly broader .
it is a question of social and economic organization .
labor has become a large contributor , through its savings , to the stock of capital ; while the people who own the largest individual aggregates of capital are themselves often hard and earnest laborers .
very often it is extremely difficult to draw the line of demarcation between the two groups ; to determine whether a particular individual is entitled to be set down as laborer or as capitalist .
in a very large proportion of cases he is both , and when he is both he is the most useful citizen .
the right of labor to organize is just as fundamental and necessary as is the right of capital to organize .
the right of labor to negotiate , to deal with and solve its particular problems in an organized way , through its chosen agents , is just as essential as is the right of capital to organize , to maintain corporations , to limit the liabilities of stockholders .
indeed , we have come to recognize that the limited liability of the citizen as a member of a labor organization closely parallels the limitation of liability of the citizen as a stockholder in a corporation for profit .
along this line of reasoning we shall make the greatest progress toward solution of our problem of capital and labor .
in the case of the corporation which enjoys the privilege of limited liability of stockholders , particularly when engaged in in the public service , it is recognized that the outside public has a large concern which must be protected ; and so we provide regulations , restrictions , and in some cases detailed supervision .
likewise in the case of labor organizations , we might well apply similar and equally well - defined principles of regulation and supervision in order to conserve the public 's interests as affected by their operations .
just as it is not desirable that a corporation shall be allowed to impose undue exactions upon the public , so it is not desirable that a labor organization shall be permitted to exact unfair terms of employment or subject the public to actual distresses in order to enforce its terms .
finally , just as we are earnestly seeking for procedures whereby to adjust and settle political differences between nations without resort to war , so we may well look about for means to settle the differences between organized capital and organized labor without resort to those forms of warfare which we recognize under the name of strikes , lockouts , boycotts , and the like .
as we have great bodies of law carefully regulating the organization and operations of industrial and financial corporations , as we have treaties and compacts among nations which look to the settlement of differences without the necessity of conflict in arms , so we might well have plans of conference , of common counsel , of mediation , arbitration , and judicial determination in controversies between labor and capital .
to accomplish this would involve the necessity to develop a thoroughgoing code of practice in dealing with such affairs it might be well to frankly set forth the superior interest of the community as a whole to either the labor group or the capital group .
with rights , privileges , immunities , and modes of organization thus carefully defined , it should be possible to set up judicial or quasi judicial tribunals for the consideration and determination of all disputes which menace the public welfare .
in an industrial society such as ours the strike , the lockout , and the boycott are as much out of place and as disastrous in their results as is war or armed revolution in the domain of politics .
the same disposition to reasonableness , to conciliation , to recognition of the other side 's point of view , the same provision of fair and recognized tribunals and processes , ought to make it possible to solve the one set of questions aseasily as the other .
i believe the solution is possible .
the consideration of such a policy would necessitate the exercise of care and deliberation in the construction of a code and a charter of elemental rights , dealing with the relations of employer and employee .
this foundation in the law , dealing with the modern conditions of social and economic life , would hasten the building of the temple of peace in industry which a rejoicing nation would acclaim .
after each war , until the last , the government has been enabled to give homes to its returned soldiers , and a large part of our settlement and development has attended this generous provision of land for the nation 's defenders .
there is yet unreserved approximately 200,000,000 acres in the public domain , 20,000,000 acres of which are known to be susceptible of reclamation and made fit for homes by provision for irrigation .
the government has been assisting in the development of its remaining lands , until the estimated increase in land values in the irrigated sections is full $ 500,000,000 and the crops of 1920 alone on these lands are estimated to exceed $ 100,000,000 .
under the law authorization these expenditures for development the advances are to be returned and it would be good business for the government to provide lor the reclamation of the remaining 20,000,000 acres , in addition to expediting the completion of projects long under way .
under what is known as the coal and gas lease law , applicable also to deposits of phosphates and other minerals on the public domain , leases are now being made on the royalty basis , and are producing large revenues to the government .
under this legislation , 10 per centum of all royalties is to be paid directly to the federal treasury , and of the remainder 50 per centum is to be used for reclamation of arid lands by irrigation , and 40 per centum is to be paid to the states , in which the operations are located , to be used by them for school and road purposes .
these resources are so vast , and the development is affording so reliable a basis of estimate , that the interior department expresses the belief that ultimately the present law will add in royalties and payments to the treasuries of the federal government and the states containing these public lands a total of $ 12,000,000,000 .
this means , of course , an added wealth of many times that sum .
these prospects seem to afford every justification of government advances in reclamation and irrigation .
contemplating the inevitable and desirable increase of population , there is another phase of reclamation full worthy of consideration .
there are 79,000,000 acres of swamp and cut - over lands which may be reclaimed and made as valuable as any farm lands we possess .
these acres are largely located in southern states , and the greater proportion is owned by the states or by private citizens .
congress has a report of the survey of this field for reclamation , and the feasibility is established .
i gladly commend federal aid , by way of advances , where state and private participation is assured .
home making is one of the greater benefits which government can bestow .
measures are pending embodying this sound policy to which we may well adhere .
it is easily possible to make available permanent homes which will provide , in turn , for prosperous american families , without injurious competition with established activities , or imposition on wealth already acquired .
while we are thinking of promoting the fortunes of our own people , i am sure there is room in the sympathetic thought of america for fellow human beings who are suffering and dying of starvation in russia .
a severe drought in the valley of the volga has plunged 15,000,000 people into grievous famine .
our voluntary agencies are exerting themselves to the utmost to save the lives of children in this area , but it is now evident that unless relief is afforded the loss of life will extend into many millions .
america can not be deaf to such a call as that .
we do not recognize the government of russia , nor tolerate the propaganda which emanates therefrom , but we do not forget the traditions of russian friendship .
we may put aside our consideration of all international politics and fundamental differences in government .
the big thing is the call of the suffering and the dying .
unreservedly i recommend the appropriation necessary to supply the american relief administration with 10,000,000 bushels of corn and 1,000,000 bushels of seed grains , not alone to halt the wave of death through starvation , but to enable spring planting in areas where the seed grains have been exhausted temporarily to stem starvation .
the american relief administration is directed in russia by former officers of our own armies , and has fully demonstrated its ability to transport and distribute relief through american hands without hindrance or loss .
the time has come to add the government 's support to the wonderful relief already wrought out of the generosity of the american private purse .
i am not unaware that we have suffering and privation at home .
when it exceeds the capacity for the relief within the states concerned , it will have federal consideration .
it seems to me we should be indifferent to our own heart promptings , and out of accord with the spirit which acclaims the christmastide , if we do not give out of our national abundance to lighten this burden of woe upon a people blameless and helpless in famine 's peril .
there are a full score of topics concerning which it would be becoming to address you , and on which i hope to make report at a later time .
i have alluded to the things requiring your earlier attention .
however , i can not end this limited address without a suggested amendment to the organic law .
many of us belong to that school of thought which is hesitant about altering the fundamental law .
i think our tax problems , the tendency of wealth to seek nontaxable investment , and the menacing increase of public debt , federal , state and municipal - all justify a proposal to change the constitution so as to end the issue of nontaxable bonds .
no action can change the status of the many billions outstanding , but we can guard against future encouragement of capital 's paralysis , while a halt in the growth of public indebtedness would be beneficial throughout our whole land .
such a change in the constitution must be very thoroughly considered before submission .
there ought to be known what influence it will have on the inevitable refunding of our vast national debt , how it will operate on the necessary refunding of state and municipal debt , how the advantages of nation over state and municipality , or the contrary , may be avoided .
clearly the states would not ratify to their own apparent disadvantage .
i suggest the consideration because the drift of wealth into nontaxable securities is hindering the flow of large capital to our industries , manufacturing , agricultural , and carrying , until we are discouraging the very activities which make our wealth .
agreeable to your expressed desire and in complete accord with the purposes of the executive branch of the government , there is in washington , as you happily know , an international conference now most earnestly at work on plans for the limitation of armament , a naval holiday , and the just settlement of problems which might develop into causes of international disagreement .
it is easy to believe a world - hope is centered on this capital city .
a most gratifying world - accomplishment is not improbable .

my countrymen , the pioneers to whom i have [ oftentimes ] alluded , these stalwart makers of america , could have no conception of our present day attainment .
hamilton , who conceived , and washington , who sponsored , little dreamed of either a development or a solution like ours of today .
but they were right in fundamentals .
they knew what was safe and preached security .
one may doubt if either of them , if any of the founders , would wish america to hold aloof from the world .
but there has come to us lately a new realization of the menace to our america in european entanglements which emphasizes the prudence of washington , though he could little have dreamed the thought which is in my mind .
when i sat on the senate committee on foreign relations * and listened to american delegations appealing in behalf of kinsman or old home folks across the seas , i caught the aspirations of nationality , and the perfectly natural sympathy among kindred in this republic .
but i little realized then how we might rend the concord of american citizenship in our seeking to solve old world problems .
there have come to me , not at all unbecomingly , the expressed anxieties of americans foreign born who are asking our country 's future attitude on territorial awards in the adjustment of peace .
they are americans all , but they have a proper and a natural interest in the fortunes of kinsfolk and native lands .
one can not blame them .
if our land is to settle the envies , rivalries , jealousies , and hatreds of all civilization , these adopted sons of the republic want the settlement favorable to the land from which they came .
the misfortune is not alone that it rends the concord of nations .
the greater pity is that it rends the concord of our citizenship at home .
it 's folly to think of blending greek and bulgar , italian and slovak , or making any of them rejoicingly american , when the land of adoption sits in judgement on the land from which he came .
we need to be rescued from divisionary and fruitless pursuit of peace through supergovernment .
i do not want americans of foreign birth making their party alignments on what we mean to do for some nation in the old world .
we want them to be republican because of what we mean to do for the united states of america .
our call is for unison , not rivaling sympathies .
our need is concord , not the antipathies of long inheritance .
surely no one stopped to think where the great world experiment was leading .
frankly , no one could know .
we 're only learning now .
it would be a sorry day for this republic if we allowed our activities in seeking for peace in the old world to blind us to the essentials of peace at home .
we want a free america again .
we want america free at home , and free in the world .
we want to silence the outcry of nation against nation , in the fullness of understanding .
and we wish to silence the cry of class against class , and stifle the party appeal to class , so that we may ensure tranquility in our own freedom .
if i could choose but one , i had rather have industrial and social peace at home , than command the international peace of all the world .

there grows on me the realization of the unusual character of this occasion .
our republic has been at war before , it has asked and received the supreme sacrifices of its sons and daughters , and faith in america has been justified .
many sons and daughters made the sublime offering and went to hallowed graves as the nation 's defenders .
but we never before sent so many to battle under the flag in foreign land , never before was there the impressive spectacle of thousands of dead returned to find eternal resting place in the beloved homeland .
the incident is without parallel in history that i know .
these dead know nothing of our ceremony today .
they sense nothing of the sentiment or the tenderness which brings their wasted bodies to the homeland for burial close to kin and friends and cherished associations .
these poor bodies are but the clay tenements once possessed of souls which flamed in patriotic devotion , lighted new hopes on the battle grounds of civilization , and in their sacrifices sped on to accuse autocracy before the court of eternal justice .
we are not met for them , though we love and honor and speak a grateful tribute .
it would be futile to speak to those who do not hear or to sorrow for those who can not sense it or to exalt those who can not know .
but we can speak for country , we can reach those who sorrowed and sacrificed through their service , who suffered through their going , who glory with the republic through their heroic achievements , who rejoice in the civilization , their heroism preserved .
every funeral , every memorial , every tribute is for the living -- an offering in compensation of sorrow .
when the light of life goes out there is a new radiance in eternity , and somehow the glow of it relieves the darkness which is left behind .
never a death but somewhere a new life ; never a sacrifice but somewhere an atonement ; never a service but somewhere and somehow an achievement .
these had served , which is the supreme inspiration in living .
they have earned everlasting gratitude , which is the supreme solace in dying .
no one may measure the vast and varied affections and sorrows centering on this priceless cargo of bodies-- once living , fighting for , and finally dying for the republic .
one 's words fail , his understanding is halted , his emotions are stirred beyond control when contemplating these thousands of beloved dead .
i find a hundred thousand sorrows touching my heart , and there is ringing in my ears , like an admonition eternal , an insistent call , " it must not be again !
it must not be again ! "
god grant that it will not be , and let a practical people join in cooperation with god to the end that it shall not be .
i would not wish a nation for which men are not willing to fight and , if need be , to die , but i do wish for a nation where it is not necessary to ask that sacrifice .
i do not pretend that millennial days have come , but i can believe in the possibility of a nation being so righteous as never to make a war of conquest and a nation so powerful in righteousness that none will dare invoke her wrath .
i wish for us such an america .
these heroes were sacrificed in the supreme conflict of all human history .
they saw democracy challenged and defended it .
they saw civilization threatened and rescued it .
they saw america affronted and resented it .
they saw our nation 's rights imperiled and stamped those rights with a new sanctity and renewed security .

the republican party has justified the confidence the country reposed in it .
when in october 1918 the president made his most partisan appeal for a congress to do his bidding , it was the shocking partisanship of a century .
the patriotic people of the nation remembered that the republicans generously supported every request of the president for power and authority .
they remembered that it was representative kahn * , a republican , and a minority member , who carried through the bill for the enlargement of our army and navy .
the republican party never has been found requisite in its patriotic duty , and no clearer or more positive proof of its earnestness , its disinterestedness , and its patriotic devotion but be given during the days of its minority in the 65th congress**. as the party kept faith then , so will it continue to do in the days to come and restore us to tranquility and security .
and now a word that may be regarded as personal to my friends of wyandot county [ ohio ] .
two sons of wyandot are here today , who have made the greatest sacrifice for their country which men may offer short of life itself .
they were blinded under the flag , our flag , in the argonne***. 
 i want publicly to pledge to them and to those of their comrades who suffered such impairment as must deprive them of a full part in life , the republic 's unfailing and grateful consideration .
i want to pledge them something more .
i know what inspired their heroism .
i know what made them proud soldiers of the republic .
they fought for america and for american rights .
they answered the challenge of american rights .
they fought to defend american lives , american freedom on the seas , and american ideals of international relationships .
if it had been for democracy alone , they would have gone when belgium was invaded .
if it had been for humanity alone , they would have answered the lusitania 's sinking .
their hearts were stirred , their supreme offering was made , only when america was in peril .
they can never see old glory , sublime at home , and signaling our concepts of freedom and justice throughout the world , but i pledge to them this afternoon that , though their eyes may never see it again , they may know in their hearts that there shall never be a substitute for the stars and stripes they last beheld .

chairman lodge , members of the notification committee , members of the national committee , ladies and gentlemen : 
 the message which you have formally conveyed brings to me a realization of responsibility which is not underestimated .
it is a supreme task to interpret the covenant of a great political party , the activities of which are so woven into the history of this republic , and a very sacred and solemn undertaking to utter the faith and aspirations of the many millions who adhere to that party .
the party platform has charted the way , yet , somehow , we have come to expect that interpretation which voices the faith of nominees who must assume specific tasks .
let me be understood clearly from the very beginning : i believe in party sponsorship in government .
i believe in party government as distinguished from personal government , individual , dictatorial , autocratic or what not .
in a citizenship of more than a hundred millions it is impossible to reach agreement upon all questions .
parties are formed by those who reach a consensus of opinion .
it was the intent of the founding fathers to give to this republic a dependable and enduring popular government , representative in form , and it was designed to make political parties , not only the preserving sponsors , but the effective agencies through which hopes and aspirations and convictions and conscience may be translated into public performance .
popular government has been an inspiration of liberty since the dawn of civilizations .
republics have risen and fallen , and a transition from party to personal government has preceded every failure since the world began .
under the constitution we have the charted way to security and perpetuity .
we know it gave to us the safe path to a developing eminence which no people in the world ever rivalled .
it has guaranteed the rule of intelligent , deliberate public opinion expressed through parties .
under this plan , a masterful leadership becomingly may manifest its influence , but a people 's will still remains the supreme authority .
the american achievement under the plan of the fathers is nowhere disputed .
on the contrary , the american example has been the model of every republic which glorifies the progress of liberty , and is everywhere the leaven of representative democracy which has expanded human freedom .
it has been wrought through party government .
no man is big enough to run this great republic .
there never has been one .
such domination was never intended .
tranquillity , stability , dependability -- all are assured in party sponsorship , and we mean to renew the assurances which were rendered in the cataclysmal war .
it was not surprising that we went far afield from safe and prescribed paths amid the war anxieties .
there was the unfortunate tendency before ; there was the surrender of congress to the growing assumption of the executive before the world - war imperilled all the practices we had learned to believe in ; and in the war emergency every safeguard was swept away .
in the name of democracy we established autocracy .
we are not complaining at this extraordinary bestowal or assumption in war , it seemed temporarily necessary ; our alarm is over the failure to restore the constitutional methods when the war emergency ended .
our first committal is the restoration of representative popular government , under the constitution , through the agency of the republican party .
our vision includes more than a chief executive ; we believe in a cabinet of highest capacity , equal to the responsibilities which our system contemplates , in whose councils the vice president , second official of the republic , shall be asked to participate .
the same vision includes a cordial understanding and coordinated activities with a house of congress , fresh from the people , voicing the convictions which members bring from direct contact with the electorate , and cordial co - operation along with the restored functions of the senate , fit to be the greatest deliberative body of the world .
its members are the designated sentinels on the towers of constitutional government .
the resumption of the senate 's authority saved to this republic its independent nationality , when autocracy misinterpreted the dream of a world experiment to be the vision of a world ideal .
it is not difficult , chairman lodge , to make ourselves clear on the question of international relationship .
we republicans of the senate , conscious of our solemn oaths and mindful of our constitutional obligations , when we saw the structure of a world super - government taking visionary form , joined in a becoming warning of our devotion to this republic .
if the torch of constitutionalism had not been dimmed , the delayed peace of the world and the tragedy of disappointment and europe 's misunderstanding of america easily might have been avoided .
the republicans of the senate halted the barter of independent american eminence and influence , which it was proposed to exchange for an obscure and unequal place in the merged government of the world .
our party means to hold the heritage of american nationality unimpaired and unsurrendered .
the world will not misconstrue .
we do not mean to hold aloof .
we do not mean to shun a single responsibility of this republic to world civilization .
there is no hate in the american heart .
we have no envy , no suspicion , no aversion for any people in the world .
we hold to our rights , and mean to defend , aye , we mean to sustain the rights of this nation and our citizens alike , everywhere under the shining sun .
yet there is the concord of amity and sympathy and fraternity in every resolution .
there is a genuine aspiration in every american breast for a tranquil friendship with all the world .
more we believe the unspeakable sorrows , the immeasurable sacrifices , the awakened convictions and the aspiring conscience of human kind must commit the nations of the earth to a new and better relationship .
it need not be discussed now what motives plunged the world into war ; it need not be inquired whether we asked the sons of this republic to defend our national rights , as i believe we did , or to purge the old world of the accumulated ills of rivalry and greed , the sacrifices will be in vain if we can not acclaim a new order , with added security to civilization and peace maintained .
one may readily sense the conscience of our america .
i am sure i understand the purpose of the dominant group of the senate .
we were not seeking to defeat a world aspiration , we were resolved to safeguard america .
we were resolved then , even as we are today , and will be tomorrow , to preserve this free and independent republic .
let those now responsible , or seeking responsibility , propose the surrender , whether with interpretations , apologies or reluctant reservations -- from which our rights are to be omitted -- we welcome the referendum to the american people on the preservation of america , and the republican party pledges its defense of the preserved inheritance of national freedom .
in the call of the conscience of america is peace , peace that closes the gaping wound of world war , and silences the impassioned voices of international envy and distrust .
heeding this call and knowing as i do the disposition of congress , i promise you formal and effective peace so quickly as a republican congress can pass its declaration for a republican executive to sign .
then we may turn to our readjustment at home and proceed deliberately and reflectively to that hoped - for world relationship which shall satisfy both conscience and aspirations and still hold us free from menacing involvement .
i can hear in the call of conscience an insistent voice for the largely reduced armaments throughout the world , with attending reduction of burdens upon peace - loving humanity .
we wish to give of american influence and example ; we must give of american leadership to that invaluable accomplishment .
i can speak unreservedly of the american aspirations and the republican committal for an association of nations , co - operating in sublime accord , to attain and preserve peace through justice rather than force , determined to add to security through international law , so clarified that no misconstruction can be possible without affronting world honor .
this republic can never be unmindful of its power , and must never forget the force of its example .
possessor of might that admits no fear , america must stand foremost for the right .
if the mistaken voice of america , spoken in unheeding haste , led europe , in the hour of deepest anxiety , into a military alliance which menaces peace and threatens all freedom , instead of adding to their security , then we must speak the truth for america and express our hope for the fraternized conscience of nations .
it will avail nothing to discuss in detail the league covenant , which was conceived for world super - government , negotiated in misunderstanding , and intolerantly urged and demanded by its administration sponsors , who resisted every effort to safeguard america , and who finally rejected it when such safeguards were inserted .
if the supreme blunder has left european relationships inextricably interwoven in the league compact , our sympathy for europe only magnifies our own good fortune in resisting involvement .
it is better to be the free and disinterested agent of international justice and advancing civilization , with the covenant of conscience , than be shackled by a written compact which surrenders our freedom of action and gives a military alliance the right to proclaim america 's duty to the world .
no surrender of rights to a world council or its military alliance , no assumed mandatory , however appealing , ever shall summon the sons of this republic to war .
their supreme sacrifice shall only be asked for america and its call of honor .
there is a sanctity in that right we will not delegate .
when the compact was being written , i do not know whether europe asked or ambition insistently bestowed .
it was so good to rejoice in the world 's confidence in our unselfishness that i can believe our evident disinterestedness inspired europe 's wish for our association , quite as much as the selfish thought of enlisting american power and resources .
ours is an outstanding , influential example to the world , whether we cloak it in spoken modesty or magnify it in exaltation .
we want to help ; we mean to help ; but we hold to our own interpretation of the american conscience as the very soul of our nationality .
disposed as we are , the way is very simple .
let the failure attending assumption , obstinacy , impracticability and delay be recognized , and let us find the big , practical , unselfish way to do our part , neither covetous because of ambition nor hesitant through fear , but ready to serve ourselves , humanity and god .
with a senate advising as the constitution contemplates , i would hopefully approach the nations of europe and of the earth , proposing that understanding which makes us a willing participant in the consecration of nations to a new relationship , to commit the moral forces of the world , america included , to peace and international justice , still leaving america free , independent and self - reliant but offering friendship to all the world .
if men call for more specific details , i remind them that moral committals are broad and all - inclusive , and we are contemplating peoples in the concord of humanity 's advancement .
from our own viewpoint the program is specifically american , and we mean to be american first , to all the world .
appraising preserved nationality as the first essential to the continued progress of the republic , there is linked with it the supreme necessity of the restoration -- let us say the revealment -- of the constitution , and our reconstruction as an industrial nation .
here is the transcending task .
it concerns our common weal at home and will decide our future eminence in the world .
more than these , this republic , under constitutional liberties , has given to mankind the most fortunate conditions for human activity and attainment the world has ever noted , and we are today the world 's reserve force in the great contest for liberty through security , and maintained equality of opportunity and its righteous rewards .
it is folly to close our eyes to outstanding facts .
humanity is restive , much of the world is in revolution , the agents of discord and destruction have wrought their tragedy in pathetic russia , have lighted their torches among other peoples , and hope to see america as a part of the great red conflagration .
ours is the temple of liberty under the law , and it is ours to call the sons of opportunity to its defense .
america must not only save herself , but ours must be the appealing voice to sober the world .
more than all else the present - day world needs understanding .
there can be no peace save through composed differences , and the submission of the individual to the will and weal of the many .
any other plan means anarchy and its rule of force .
it must be understood that toil alone makes for accomplishment and advancement , and righteous possession is the reward of toil , and its incentive .
there is no progress except in the stimulus of competition .
when competition -- natural , fair , impelling competition -- is suppressed , whether by law , compact or conspiracy , we halt the march of progress , silence the voice of inspiration , and paralyze the will for achievement .
these are but common sense truths of human development .
the chief trouble today is that the world war wrought the destruction of healthful competition , left our storehouses empty , and there is a minimum production when our need is maximum .
maximums , not minimums , is the call of america .
it is n't a new story , because war never fails to leave depleted storehouses and always impairs the efficiency of production .
war also establishes its higher standards for wages , and they abide .
i wish the higher wage to abide , on one explicit condition -- that the wage - earner will give full return for the wage received .
it is the best assurance we can have for a reduced cost of living .
mark you , i am ready to acclaim the highest standard of pay , but i would be blind to the responsibilities that mark this fateful hour if i did not caution the wage - earners of america that mounting wages and decreased production can lead only to industrial and economic ruin .
i want , somehow , to appeal to the sons and daughters of the republic , to every producer , to join hand and brain in production , more production , honest production , patriotic production , because patriotic production is no less a defense of our best civilization than that of armed force .
profiteering is a crime of commission , underproduction is a crime of omission .
we must work our most and best , else the destructive reaction will come .
we must stabilize and strive for normalcy , else the inevitable reaction will bring its train of sufferings , disappointments and reversals .
we want to forestall such reaction , we want to hold all advanced ground , and fortify it with general good - fortune .
let us return for a moment to the necessity for understanding , particularly that understanding which concerns ourselves at home .
i decline to recognize any conflict of interest among the participants in industry .
the destruction of one is the ruin of the other , the suspicion or rebellion of one unavoidably involves the other .
in conflict is disaster , in understanding there is triumph .
there is no issue relating to the foundation on which industry is builded , because industry is bigger than any element in its modern making .
but the insistent call is for labor , management and capital to reach understanding .
the human element comes first , and i want the employers in industry to understand the aspirations , the convictions , the yearnings of the millions of american wage - earners , and i want the wage earners to understand the problems , the anxieties , the obligations of management and capital , and all of them must understand their relationship to the people and their obligation to the republic .
out of this understanding will come the unanimous committal to economic justice , and in economic justice lies that social justice which is the highest essential to human happiness .
i am speaking as one who has counted the contents of the pay envelope from the viewpoint of the earner as well as the employer .
no one pretends to deny the inequalities which are manifest in modern industrial life .
they are less , in fact , than they were before organization and grouping on either side revealed the inequalities , and conscience has wrought more justice than statutes have compelled , but the ferment of the world rivets our thoughts on the necessity of progressive solution , else our generation will suffer the experiment which means chaos for our day to re - establish god 's plan for the great tomorrow .
speaking our sympathies , uttering the conscience of all the people , mindful of our right to dwell amid the good fortunes of rational , conscience - impelled advancement , we hold the majesty of righteous government , with liberty under the law , to be our avoidance of chaos , and we call upon every citizen of the republic to hold fast to that which made us what we are , and we will have orderly government safeguard the onward march to all we ought to be .
the menacing tendency of the present day is not chargeable wholly to the unsettled and fevered conditions caused by the war .
the manifest weakness in popular government lies in the temptation to appeal to grouped citizenship for political advantage .
there is no greater peril .
the constitution contemplates no class and recognizes no group .
it broadly includes all the people , with specific recognition for none , and the highest consecration we can make today is a committal of the republican party to that saving constitutionalism which contemplates all america as one people , and holds just government free from influence on the one hand and unmoved by intimidation on the other .
it would be the blindness of folly to ignore the activities in our own country which are aimed to destroy our economic system , and to commit us to the colossal tragedy which has both destroyed all freedom and made russia impotent .
this movement is not to be halted in throttled liberties .
we must not abridge the freedom of speech , the freedom of press , or the freedom of assembly , because there is no promise in repression .
these liberties are as sacred as the freedom of religious belief , as inviolable as the rights of life and the pursuit of happiness .
we do hold to the right to crush sedition , to stifle a menacing contempt for law , to stamp out a peril to the safety of the republic or its people , when emergency calls , because security and the majesty of the law are the first essentials of liberty .
he who threatens destruction of the government by force or flaunts his contempt for lawful authority , ceases to be a loyal citizen and forfeits his rights to the freedom of the republic .
let it be said to all of america that our plan of popular government contemplates such orderly changes as the crystallized intelligence of the majority of our people think best .
there can be no modification of this underlying rule , but no majority shall abridge the rights of a minority .
men have a right to question our system in fullest freedom , but they must always remember that the rights of freedom impose the obligations which maintain it .
our policy is not of repression , but we make appeal today to american intelligence and patriotism , when the republic is menaced from within , just as we trusted american patriotism when our rights were threatened from without .
we call on all america for steadiness , so that we may proceed deliberately to the readjustment which concerns all the people .
our party platform fairly expresses the conscience of republicans on industrial relations .
no party is indifferent to the welfare of the wage - earner .
to us his good fortune is of deepest concern , and we seek to make that good fortune permanent .
we do not oppose but approve collective bargaining , because that is an outstanding right , but we are unalterably insistent that its exercise must not destroy the equally sacred right of the individual , in his necessary pursuit of livelihood .
any american has the right to quit his employment , so has every american the right to seek employment .
the group must not endanger the individual , and we must discourage groups preying upon one another , and none shall be allowed to forget that government 's obligations are alike to all the people .
i hope we may do more than merely discourage the losses and sufferings attending industrial conflict .
the strike against the government is properly denied , for government service involves none of the elements of profit which relate to competitive enterprise .
there is progress in the establishment of official revealment of issues and conditions which lead to conflict , so that unerring public sentiment may speed the adjustment , but i hope for that concord of purpose , not forced but inspired by the common weal , which will give a regulated public service the fullest guaranty of continuity .
i am thinking of the railroads .
in modern life they are the very base of all our activities and interchanges .
for public protection we have enacted laws providing for a regulation of the charge for service , a limitation on the capital invested and a limitation on capital 's earnings .
there remains only competition of service , on which to base our hopes for an efficiency and expansion which meet our modern requirements .
the railway workmen ought to be the best paid and know the best working conditions in the world .
theirs is an exceptional responsibility .
they are not only essential to the life and health and all productive activities of the people , but they are directly responsible for the safety of traveling millions .
the government which has assumed so much authority for the public good might well stamp railway employment with the sanctity of public service and guarantee to the railway employees that justice which voices the american conception of righteousness on the one hand , and assures continuity of service on the other .
the importance of the railway rehabilitation is so obvious that reference seems uncalled for .
we are so confident that much of the present - day insufficiency and inefficiency of transportation are due to the withering hand of government operation that we emphasize anew our opposition to government ownership ; we want to expedite the reparation , and make sure the mistake is not repeated .
it is little use to recite the story of development , exploitation , government experiment and its neglect , government operation and its failures .
the inadequacy of trackage and terminal facilities , the insufficiency of equipment and the inefficiency of operation -- all bear the blighting stamp of governmental incapacity during federal operation .
the work of rehabilitation under the restoration of private ownership deserves our best encouragement .
billions are needed in new equipment , not alone to meet the growing demand for service , but to restore the extraordinary depreciation due to the strained service of war .
with restricted earnings , and with speculative profits removed , railway activities have come to the realm of conservative and constructive service , and the government which impaired must play its part in restoration .
manifestly the returns must be so gauged that necessary capital may so be enlisted , and we must foster as well as restrain .
we have no more pressing problem .
a state of inadequate transportation facilities , mainly chargeable to the failure of governmental experiment , is losing millions to agriculture , it is hindering industry , it is menacing the american people with a fuel shortage little less than a peril .
it emphasizes the present - day problem , and suggests that spirit of encouragement and assistance which commits all america to relieve such an emergency .
the one compensation amid attending anxieties is our new and needed realization of the vital part transportation plays in the complexities of modern life .
we are not to think of rails alone , but highways from farm to market , from railway to farm , arteries of life - blood to present - day life , the quickened ways to communication and exchange , the answer of our people to the motor age .
we believe in generous federal cooperation in construction , linked with assurances of maintenance that will put an end to criminal waste of public funds on the one hand and give a guaranty of upkept highways on the other .
water transportation is inseparably linked with adequacy of facilities , and we favor american eminence on the seas , the practical development of inland waterways , the upbuilding and co - ordination of all to make them equal to and ready for every call of developing and widening american commerce .
i like that recommittal to thoughts of america first which pledges the panama canal , and american creation , to the free use of american shipping .
it will add to the american reawakening .
one can not speak of industry and commerce , and the transportation on which they are dependent , without an earnest thought of the abnormal cost of living and the problems in its wake .
it is easy to inveigh , but that avails nothing .
and it is far too serious to dismiss with flaming but futile promises .
eight years ago , in times of peace , the democratic party made it an issue , and when clothed with power that party came near to its accomplishment by destroying the people 's capacity to buy .
but that was a cure worse than the ailment .
it is easy to understand the real causes , after which the patient must help to effect his own cure .
gross expansion of currency and credit have depreciated the dollar just as expansion and inflation have discredited the coins of the world .
we inflated in haste , we must deflate in deliberation .
we debased the dollar in reckless finance , we must restore in honesty .
deflation on the one hand and restoration of the 100-cent dollar on the other ought to have begun on the day after the armistice , but plans were lacking or courage failed .
the unpreparedness for peace was little less costly than unpreparedness for war .
we can promise no one remedy which will cure an ill of such wide proportions , but we do pledge that earnest and consistent attack which the party platform covenants .
we will attempt intelligent and courageous deflation , and strike at government borrowing which enlarges the evil , and we will attack high cost of government with every energy and facility which attend republican capacity .
we promise that relief which will attend the halting of waste and extravagance , and the renewal of the practice of public economy , not alone because it will relieve tax burdens , but because it will be an example to stimulate thrift and economy in private life .
i have already alluded to the necessity for the fullness of production , and we need the fullness of service which attends the exchange of products .
let us speak the irrefutable truth -- high wages and reduced cost of living are in utter contradiction unless we have the height of efficiency for wages received .
in all sincerity we promise the prevention of unreasonable profits , we challenge profiteering with all the moral force and the legal powers of government and people , but it is fair , aye , it is timely , to give reminder that law is not the sole corrective of our economic ills .
let us call to all the people for thrift and economy , for denial and sacrifice , if need be , for a nation - wide drive against extravagance and luxury , to a recommittal to simplicity of living , to that prudent and normal plan of life which is the health of the republic .
there has n't been a recovery from the waste and abnormalities of war since the story of mankind was first written , except through work and saving , through industry and denial , while needless spending and heedless extravagance have marked every decay in the history of nations .
give the assurance of that rugged simplicity of american life which marked the first century of amazing development , and this generation may underwrite a second century of surpassing accomplishment .
the republican party was founded by farmers , with the sensitive conscience born of their freedom and their simple lives .
these founders sprang from the farms of the then middle west .
our party has never failed in its realization that agriculture is essentially the foundation of our very existence , and it has ever been our policy purpose and performance , to protect and promote that essential industry .
new conditions , which attend amazing growth and extraordinary industrial development , call for a new and forward - looking program .
the american farmer had a hundred and twenty millions to feed in the home market , and heard the cry of the world for food and answered it , though he faced an appalling task , amid handicaps never encountered before .
in the rise of price levels there have come increased appraisal , to his acres without adding to their value in fact , but which do add to his taxes and expenses without enhancing his returns .
his helpers have yielded to the lure of shop and city , until , almost alone , he has met and borne the burden of the only insistent attempts to force down prices .
it challenges both the wisdom and the justice of artificial drives on prices to recall that they were effective almost solely against his products in the hands of the producer , and never effective against the same products in passing to the consumer .
contemplating the defenselessness of the individual farmer to meet the organized buyers of his products , and the distributors of the things the farmer buys i hold that farmers should not only be permitted but encouraged to join in co - operative association to reap the just measure of reward merited by their arduous toil .
let us facilitate cooperation to insure against the risks attending agriculture , which the urban world so little understands , and a like co - operation to market their products as directly as possible with the consumer , in the interests of all .
upon such association and co - operation should be laid only such restrictions as will prevent arbitrary control of our food supply and the fixing of extortionate price upon it .
our platform is an earnest pledge of renewed concern for this most essential and elemental industry , and in both appreciation and interest we pledge effective expression in law and practice .
we will hail that co - operation which again will make profitable and desirable the ownership and operation of comparatively small farms intensively cultivated , and which will facilitate the caring for the products of farm and orchard without the lamentable waste under present conditions .
america would look with anxiety on the discouragement of farming activity , either through the government 's neglect or its paralysis by socialistic practices .
a republican administration will be committed to renewed regard for agriculture , and seek the participation of farmers in curing the ills justly complained of , and aim to place the american farm where it ought to be -- highly ranked in american activities and fully sharing the highest good fortunes of american life .
becomingly associated with this subject are the policies of irrigation and reclamation , so essential to agricultural expansion , and the continued development of the great and wonderful west .
it is our purpose to continue and enlarge federal aid , not in sectional partiality , but for the good of all america .
we hold to that harmony of relationship between conservation and development which fittingly appraises our natural resources and makes them available to developing america of today , and still holds to the conserving thought for the america of tomorrow .
the federal government 's relation to reclamation and development is too important to admit of ample discussion today .
alaska , alone , is rich in resources beyond all imagination , and needs only closer linking , through the lines of transportation , and a government policy that both safeguards and encourages development , to speed it to a foremost position as a commonwealth , rugged in citizenship and rich in materialized resources .
these things i can only mention .
within becoming limits one can not say more .
indeed , for the present , many questions of vast importance must be hastily passed , reserving a fuller discussion to suitable occasion as the campaign advances .
i believe the budget system will effect a necessary , helpful reformation , and reveal business methods to government business .
i believe federal department should be made more business - like and send back to productive effort thousands of federal employees , who are either duplicating work or not essential at all .
i believe in the protective tariff policy and know we will be calling for its saving americanism again .
i believe in a great merchant marine -- i would have this republic the leading maritime nation of the world .
i believe in a navy ample to protect it , and able to assure us dependable defense .
i believe in a small army , but best in the world , with a mindfulness for preparedness which will avoid the unutterable cost of our previous neglect .
i believe in our eminence in trade abroad , which the government should aid in expanding , both in revealing markets and speeding cargoes .
i believe in established standards for immigration , which are concerned with the future citizenship of the republic , not with mere manpower in industry .
i believe that every man who dons the garb of american citizenship and walks in the light of american opportunity , must become american in heart and soul .
i believe in holding fast to every forward step in unshackling child - labor and elevating conditions of woman 's employment .
i believe the federal government should stamp out lynching and remove that stain from the fair name of america .
i believe the federal government should give its effective aid in solving the problem of ample and becoming housing of its citizenship .
i believe this government should make its liberty and victory bonds worth all that its patriotic citizens paid in purchasing them .
i believe the tax burdens imposed for the war emergency must be revised to the needs of peace , and in the interest of equity in distribution of the burden .
i believe the negro citizens of america should be guaranteed the enjoyment of all their rights , that they have earned the full measure of citizenship bestowed , that their sacrifices in blood on the battlefields of the republic have entitled them to all of freedom and opportunity , all of sympathy and aid that the american spirit of fairness and justice demands .
i believe there is an easy and open path to righteous relationship with mexico .
it has seemed to me that our undeveloped , uncertain and infirm policy has made us a culpable party to the governmental misfortunes in that land .
our relations ought to be both friendly and sympathetic ; we would like to acclaim a stable government there , and offer a neighborly hand in pointing the way to greater progress .
it will be simple to have a plain and neighborly understanding , merely an understanding about respecting our borders , about protecting the lives and possessions of americans citizens lawfully within the mexican dominions .
there must be that understanding , else there can be no recognition , and then the understanding must be faithfully kept .
many of these declarations deserve a fuller expression , with some suggestions of plans to emphasize the faith .
such expression will follow in due time , i promise you .
i believe in law - enforcement .
if elected i mean to be a constitutional president , and it is impossible to ignore the constitution , unthinkable to evade the law , when our every committal is to orderly government .
people ever will differ about the wisdom of the enactment of a law -- there is divided opinion respecting the eighteenth amendment and the laws enacted to make it operative -- but there can be no difference of opinion about honest law - enforcement .
neither government nor party can afford to cheat the american people .
the laws of congress must harmonize with the constitution , else they soon are adjudged to be void ; congress enacts the laws , and the executive branch of the government is charged with enforcement .
we can not nullify because of divided opinion , we can not jeopardize orderly government with contempt for law - enforcement .
modification or repeal is the right of a free people whenever the deliberate and intelligent public sentiment commands , but perversion and evasion mark the paths to the failure of government itself .
though not in any partisan sense , i must speak of the services of the men and women who rallied to the colors of the republic in the world war .
america realizes and appreciates the services rendered , the sacrifices made and the sufferings endured .
there shall be no distinction between those who knew the perils and glories of the battle - front or the dangers of the sea , and those who were compelled to serve behind the lines , or those who constituted the great reserve of a grand army which awaited the call in camps at home .
all were brave , all were sacrificing , all were sharers of those ideals which sent our boys thrice - armed to war .
worthy sons and daughters , these , fit successors to those who christened our banners in the immortal beginning , worthy sons of those who saved the union and nationality when civil war wiped the ambiguity from the constitution , ready sons of those who drew the sword for humanity 's sake the first time in the world , in 1898 .
the four million defenders on land and sea were worthy of the best traditions of a people never warlike in peace and never pacifist in war .
they commanded our pride , they have our gratitude , which must have genuine expression .
it is not only a duty , it is a privilege , to see that the sacrifices made shall be requited , and that those still suffering from casualties and disabilities shall be abundantly aided , and restored to the highest capabilities of citizenship and its enjoyment .
the womanhood of america , always its glory , its inspiration , and the potent uplifting force in its social and spiritual development , is about to be enfranchised .
insofar as congress can go , the fact is already accomplished .
by party edict , by my recorded vote , by personal conviction , i am committed to this measure of justice .
it is my earnest hope , my sincere desire that the one needed state vote be quickly recorded in the affirmation of the right of equal suffrage and that the vote of every citizen shall be cast and counted in the approaching election .
let us not share the apprehensions of many men and women as to the danger of this momentous extension of the franchise .
women have never been without influence in our political life .
enfranchisement will bring to the polls the votes of citizens who have been born upon our soil , or who have sought in faith and assurance the freedom and opportunities of our land .
it will bring the women educated in our schools , trained in our customs and habits of thought , and sharers of our problems .
it will bring the alert mind , the awakened conscience , the sure intuition , the abhorrence of tyranny or oppression , the wide and tender sympathy that distinguish the women of america .
surely there can be no danger there .
and to the great number of noble women who have opposed in conviction this tremendous change in the ancient relation of the sexes as applied to government , i venture to plead that they will accept the full responsibility of enlarged citizenship , and give to the best in the republic their suffrage and support .
much has been said of late about world ideals , but i prefer to think of the ideal for america .
i like to think there is something more than the patriotism and practical wisdom of the founding fathers .
it is good to believe that maybe destiny held this new world republic to be the supreme example of representative democracy and orderly liberty by which humanity is inspired to higher achievement .
it is idle to think we have attained perfection , but there is the satisfying knowledge that we hold orderly processes for making our government reflect the heart and mind of the republic .
ours is not only a fortunate people but a very common - sensical people , with vision high , but their feet on the earth , with belief in themselves and faith in god .
whether enemies threaten from without or menaces arise from within , there is some indefinable voice saying , " have confidence in the republic !
america will go on ! "
here is a temple of liberty no storms may shake , here are the altars of freedom no passions shall destroy .
it was american in conception , american in its building , it shall be american in the fulfillment .
sectional once , we are all american now , and we mean to be all americans to all the world .
mr. chairman , members of the committee , my countrymen all : i would not be my natural self if i did not utter my consciousness of my limited ability to meet your full expectations , or to realize the aspirations within my own breast , but i will gladly give all that is in me , all of heart , soul and mind and abiding love of country , to service in our common cause .
i can only pray to the omnipotent god that i may be as worthy in service as i know myself to be faithful in thought and purpose .
one can not give more .
mindful of the vast responsibilities , i must be frankly humble , but i have that confidence in the consideration and support of all true americans which makes me wholly unafraid .
with an unalterable faith and in a hopeful spirit , with a hymn of service in my heart , i pledge fidelity to our country and to god , and accept the nominations of the republican party for the presidency of the united states .

members of the congress : 
 so many problems are calling for solution that a recital of all of them , in the face of the known limitations of a short session of congress , would seem to lack sincerity of purpose .
it is four years since the world war ended , but the inevitable readjustment of the social and economic order is not more than barely begun .
there is no acceptance of pre - war conditions anywhere in the world .
in a very general way humanity harbors individual wishes to go on with war - time compensation for production , with pre - war requirements in expenditure .
in short , everyone , speaking broadly , craves readjustment for everybody except himself , while there can be no just and permanent readjustment except when all participate .
the civilization which measured its strength of genius and the power of science and the resources of industries , in addition to testing the limits of man power and the endurance and heroism of men and women -- that same civilization is brought to its severest test in restoring a tranquil order and committing humanity to the stable ways of peace .
if the sober and deliberate appraisal of pre - war civilization makes it seem a worth - while inheritance , then with patience and good courage it will be preserved .
there never again will be precisely the old order ; indeed , i know of no one who thinks it to be desirable .
for out of the old order came the war itself , and the new order , established and made secure , never will permit its recurrence .
it is no figure of speech to say we have come to the test of our civilization .
the world has been passing -- is today passing through of a great crisis .
the conduct of war itself is not more difficult than the solution of the problems which necessarily follow .
i am not speaking at this moment of the problem in its wider aspect of world rehabilitation or of international relationships .
the reference is to our own social , financial , and economic problems at home .
these things are not to be considered solely as problems apart from all international relationship , but every nation must be able to carry on for itself , else its international relationship will have scant importance .
doubtless our own people have emerged from the world war tumult less impaired than most belligerent powers ; probably we have made larger progress toward reconstruction .
surely we have been fortunate in diminishing unemployment , and our industrial and business activities , which are the lifeblood of our material existence , have been restored as in no other reconstruction period of like length in the history of the world .
had we escaped the coal and railway strikes , which had no excuse for their beginning and less justification for their delayed settlement , we should have done infinitely better .
but labor was insistent on holding to the war heights , and heedless forces of reaction sought the pre - war levels , and both were wrong .
in the folly of conflict our progress was hindered , and the heavy cost has not yet been fully estimated .
there can be neither adjustment nor the penalty of the failure to readjust in which all do not somehow participate .
the railway strike accentuated the difficulty of the american farmer .
the first distress of readjustment came to the farmer , and it will not lie a readjustment fit to abide until he is relieved .
the distress brought to the farmer does not affect him alone .
agricultural ill fortune is a national ill fortune .
that one - fourth of our population which produces the food of the republic and adds so largely to our export commerce must participate in the good fortunes of the nation , else there is none worth retaining .
agriculture is a vital activity in our national life .
in it we had our beginning , and its westward march with the star of the empire has reflected the growth of the republic .
it has its vicissitudes which no legislation will prevent , its hardships for which no law can provide escape .
but the congress can make available to the farmer the financial facilities which have been built up under government aid and supervision for other commercial and industrial enterprises .
it may be done on the same solid fundamentals and make the vitally important agricultural industry more secure , and it must be done .
this congress already has taken cognizance of the misfortune which precipitate deflation brought to american agriculture .
your measures of relief and the reduction of the federal reserve discount rate undoubtedly saved the country from widespread disaster .
the very proof of helpfulness already given is the strongest argument for the permanent establishment of widened credits , heretofore temporarily extended through the war finance corporation .
the farm loan bureau , which already has proven its usefulness through the federal land banks , may well have its powers enlarged to provide ample farm production credits as well as enlarged land credits .
it is entirely practical to create a division in the federal land banks to deal with production credits , with the limitations of time so adjusted to the farm turnover as the federal reserve system provides for the turnover in the manufacturing and mercantile world .
special provision must be made for live - stock production credits , and the limit of land loans may be safely enlarged .
various measures are pending before you , and the best judgment of congress ought to be expressed in a prompt enactment at the present session .
but american agriculture needs more than added credit facilities .
the credits will help to solve the pressing problems growing out of war - inflated land values and the drastic deflation of three years ago , but permanent and deserved agricultural good fortune depends on better and cheaper transportation .
here is an outstanding problem , demanding the most rigorous consideration of the congress and the country .
it has to do with more than agriculture .
it provides the channel for the flow of the country 's commerce .
but the farmer is particularly hard hit .
his market , so affected by the world consumption , does not admit of the price adjustment to meet carrying charges .
in the last half of the year now closing the railways , broken in carrying capacity because of motive power and rolling stock out of order , though insistently declaring to the contrary , embargoed his shipments or denied him cars when fortunate markets were calling .
too frequently transportation failed while perishable products were turning from possible profit to losses counted in tens of millions .
i know of no problem exceeding in importance this one of transportation .
in our complex and interdependent modern life transportation is essential to our very existence .
let us pass for the moment the menace in the possible paralysis of such service as we have and note the failure , for whatever reason , to expand our transportation to meet the nation 's needs .
the census of 1880 recorded a population of 50,000,000 .
in two decades more we may reasonably expect to count thrice that number .
in the three decades ending in 1920 the country 's freight by rail increased from 631,000,000 tons to 2,234,000,000 tons ; that is to say , while our population was increasing , less than 70 per cent , the freight movement increased over 250 per cent .
we have built 40 per cent of the world 's railroad mileage , and yet find it inadequate to our present requirements .
when we contemplate the inadequacy of to - day it is easy to believe that the next few decades will witness the paralysis of our transportation - using social scheme or a complete reorganization on some new basis .
mindful of the tremendous costs of betterments , extensions , and expansions , and mindful of the staggering debts of the world to - day , the difficulty is magnified .
here is a problem demanding wide vision and the avoidance of mere makeshifts .
no matter what the errors of the past , no matter how we acclaimed construction and then condemned operations in the past , we have the transportation and the honest investment in the transportation which sped us on to what we are , and we face conditions which reflect its inadequacy to - day , its greater inadequacy to - morrow , and we contemplate transportation costs which much of the traffic can not and will not continue to pay .
manifestly , we have need to begin on plans to coordinate all transportation facilities .
we should more effectively connect up our rail lines with our carriers by sea .
we ought to reap some benefit from the hundreds of millions expended on inland waterways , proving our capacity to utilize as well as expend .
we ought to turn the motor truck into a railway feeder and distributor instead of a destroying competitor .
it would be folly to ignore that we live in a motor age .
the motor car reflects our standard of living and gauges the speed of our present - day life .
it long ago ran down simple living , and never halted to inquire about the prostrate figure which fell as its victim .
with full recognition of motor - car transportation we must turn it to the most practical use .
it can not supersede the railway lines , no matter how generously we afford it highways out of the public treasury .
if freight traffic by motor were charged with its proper and proportionate share of highway construction , we should find much of it wasteful and more costly than like service by rail .
yet we have paralleled the railways , a most natural line of construction , and thereby taken away from the agency of expected service much of its profitable traffic , which the taxpayers have been providing the highways , whose cost of maintenance is not yet realized .
the federal government has a right to inquire into the wisdom of this policy , because the national treasury is contributing largely to this highway construction .
costly highways ought to be made to serve as feeders rather than competitors of the railroads , and the motor truck should become a coordinate factor in our great distributing system .
this transportation problem can not be waived aside .
the demand for lowered costs on farm products and basic materials can not be ignored .
rates horizontally increased , to meet increased wage outlays during the war inflation , are not easily reduced .
when some very moderate wage reductions were effected last summer there was a 5 per cent horizontal reduction in rates .
i sought at that time , in a very informal way , to have the railway managers go before the interstate commerce commission and agree to a heavier reduction on farm products and coal and other basic commodities , and leave unchanged the freight tariffs which a very large portion of the traffic was able to bear .
neither the managers nor the commission tile suggestion , so we had the horizontal reduction saw fit to adopt too slight to be felt by the higher class cargoes and too little to benefit the heavy tonnage calling most loudly for relief .
railways are not to be expected to render the most essential service in our social organization without a fair return on capital invested , but the government has gone so far in the regulation of rates and rules of operation that it has the responsibility of pointing the way to the reduced freight costs so essential to our national welfare .
government operation does not afford the cure .
it was government operation which brought us to the very order of things against which we now rebel , and we are still liquidating the costs of that supreme folly .
surely the genius of the railway builders has not become extinct among the railway managers .
new economies , new efficiencies in cooperation must be found .
the fact that labor takes 50 to 60 per cent of total railway earnings makes limitations within which to effect economies very difficult , but the demand is no less insistent on that account .
clearly the managers are without that intercarrier , cooperative relationship so highly essential to the best and most economical operation .
they could not function in harmony when the strike threatened the paralysis of all railway transportation .
the relationship of rail service to public welfare , so intimately affected by state and federal regulation , demands the effective correlation and a concerted drive to meet an insistent and justified public demand .
the merger of lines into systems , a facilitated interchange of freight cars , the economic use of terminals , and the consolidation of facilities are suggested ways of economy and efficiency .
i remind you that congress provided a joint commission of agricultural inquiry which made an exhaustive investigation of car service and transportation , and unanimously recommended in its report of october 15 , 1921 , the pooling of freight cars under a central agency .
this report well deserves your serious consideration .
i think well of the central agency , which shall be a creation of the railways themselves , to provide , under the jurisdiction of the interstate commerce commission , the means for financing equipment for carriers which are otherwise unable to provide their proportion of car equipment adequate to transportation needs .
this same agency ought to point the way to every possible economy in maintained equipment and the necessary interchanges in railway commerce .
in a previous address to the congress i called to your attention the insufficiency of power to enforce the decisions of the railroad labor board .
carriers have ignored its decisions , on the one hand , railway workmen have challenged its decisions by a strike , on the other hand .
the intent of congress to establish a tribunal to which railway labor and managers may appeal respecting questions of wages and working conditions can not be too strongly commended .
it is vitally important that some such agency should be a guaranty against suspended operation .
the public must be spared even the threat of discontinued service .
sponsoring the railroads as we do , it is an obligation that labor shall be assured the highest justice and every proper consideration of wage and working conditions , but it is an equal obligation to see that no concerted action in forcing demands shall deprive the public of the transportation service essential to its very existence .
it is now impossible to safeguard public interest , because the decrees of the board are unenforceable against either employer or employee .
the labor board itself is not so constituted as best to serve the public interest .
with six partisan members on a board of nine , three partisans nominated by the employees and three by the railway managers , it is inevitable that the partisan viewpoint is maintained throughout hearings and in decisions handed down .
indeed , the few exceptions to a strictly partisan expression in decisions thus far rendered have been followed by accusations of betrayal of the partisan interests represented .
only the public group of three is free to function in unbiased decisions .
therefore the partisan membership may well be abolished , and decisions should be made by an impartial tribunal .
i am well convinced that the functions of this tribunal could be much better carried on here in washington .
even were it to be continued as a separate tribunal , there ought to be contact with the interstate commerce commission , which has supreme authority in the rate making to which wage cost bears an indissoluble relationship .
theoretically , a fair and living wage must be determined quite apart from the employer 's earning capacity , but in practice , in the railway service , they are inseparable .
the record of advanced rates to meet increased wages , both determined by the government , is proof enough .
the substitution of a labor division in the interstate commerce commission made up from its membership , to hear and decide disputes relating to wages and working conditions which have failed of adjustment by proper committees created by the railways and their employees , offers a more effective plan .
it need not be surprising that there is dissatisfaction over delayed hearings and decisions by the present board when every trivial dispute is carried to that tribunal .
the law should require the railroads and their employees to institute means and methods to negotiate between themselves their constantly arising differences , limiting appeals to the government tribunal to disputes of such character as are likely to affect the public welfare .
this suggested substitution will involve a necessary increase in the membership of the commission , probably four , to constitute the labor division .
if the suggestion appeals to the congress , it will be well to specify that the labor division shall be constituted of representatives of the four rate - making territories , thereby assuring a tribunal conversant with the conditions which obtain in the different ratemaking sections of the country .
i wish i could bring to you the precise recommendation for the prevention of strikes which threaten the welfare of the people and menace public safety .
it is an impotent civilization and an inadequate government which lacks the genius and the courage to guard against such a menace to public welfare as we experienced last summer .
you were aware of the government 's great concern and its futile attempt to aid in an adjustment .
it will reveal the inexcusable obstinacy which was responsible for so much distress to the country to recall now that , though all disputes are not yet adjusted , the many settlements which have been made were on the terms which the government proposed in mediation .
public interest demands that ample power shall be conferred upon the .
labor tribunal , whether it is the present board or the suggested substitute , to require its rulings to be accepted by both parties to a disputed question .
let there be no confusion about the purpose of the suggested conferment of power to make decisions effective .
there can be no denial of constitutional rights of either railway workmen or railway managers .
no man can be denied his right to labor when and how he chooses , or cease to labor when he so elects , but , since the government assumes to safeguard his interests while employed in an essential public service , the security of society itself demands his retirement from the service shall not be so timed and related as to effect the destruction of that service .
this vitally essential public transportation service , demanding so much of brain and brawn , so much for efficiency and security , ought to offer the most attractive working conditions and the highest of wages paid to workmen in any employment .
in essentially every branch , from track repairer to the man at the locomotive throttle , the railroad worker is responsible for the safety of human lives and the care of vast property .
his high responsibility might well rate high his pay within the limits the traffic will bear ; but the same responsibility , plus grovernmental protection , may justly deny him and his associates a withdrawal from service without a warning or under circumstances which involve the paralysis of necessary transportation .
we have assumed so great a responsibility in necessary regulation that we unconsciously have assumed the responsibility for maintained service ; therefore the lawful power for the enforcement of decisions is necessary to sustain the majesty of government and to administer to the public welfare .
during its longer session the present congress enacted a new tariff law .
the protection of the american standards of living demanded the insurance it provides against the distorted conditions of world commerce the framers of the law made provision for a certain flexibility of customs duties , whereby it is possible to readjust them as developing conditions may require .
the enactment has imposed a large responsibility upon the executive , but that responsibility will be discharged with a broad mindfulness of the whole business situation .
the provision itself admits either the possible fallibility of rates or their unsuitableness to changing conditions .
i believe the grant of authority may be promptly and discreetly exercised , ever mindful of the intent and purpose to safeguard american industrial activity , and at the same time prevent the exploitation of the american consumer and keep open the paths of such liberal exchanges as do not endanger our own productivity .
no one contemplates commercial aloofness nor any other aloofness contradictory to the best american traditions or loftiest human purposes .
our fortunate capacity for comparative self - containment affords the firm foundation on which to build for our own security , and a like foundation on which to build for a future of influence and importance in world commerce .
our trade expansion must come of capacity and of policies of righteousness and reasonableness in till our commercial relations .
let no one assume that our provision for maintained good fortune at home , and our unwillingness to assume the correction of all the ills of the world , means a reluctance to cooperate with other peoples or to assume every just obligation to promote human advancement anywhere in the world .
war made us a creditor nation .
we did not seek an excess possession of the world 's gold , and we have neither desire to profit unduly by its possession nor permanently retain it .
we do not seek to become an international dictator because of its power .
the voice of the united states has a respectful hearing in international councils , because we have convinced the world that we have no selfish ends to serve , no old grievances to avenge , no territorial or other greed to satisfy .
but the voice being heard is that of good counsel , not of dictation .
it is the voice of sympathy and fraternity and helpfulness , seeking to assist but not assume for the united states burdens which nations must bear for themselves .
we would rejoice to help rehabilitate currency systems and facilitate all commerce which does not drag us to the very levels of those we seek to lift up .
while i have everlasting faith in our republic , it would be folly , indeed , to blind ourselves to our problems at home .
abusing the hospitality of our shores are the advocates of revolution , finding their deluded followers among those who take on the habiliments of an american without knowing an american soul .
there is the recrudescence of hyphenated americanism which we thought to have been stamped out when we committed the nation , life and soul , to the world war .
there is a call to make the alien respect our institutions while he accepts our hospitality .
there is need to magnify the american viewpoint to the alien who seeks a citizenship among us .
there is need to magnify the national viewpoint to americans throughout the land .
more there is a demand for every living being in the united states to respect and abide by the laws of the republic .
let men who are rending the moral fiber of the republic through easy contempt for the prohibition law , because they think it restricts their personal liberty , remember that they set the example and breed a contempt for law which will ultimately destroy the republic .
constitutional prohibition has been adopted by the nation .
it is the supreme law of the land .
in plain speaking , there are conditions relating to its enforcement which savor of nation - wide scandal .
it is the most demoralizing factor in our public life .
most of our people assumed that the adoption of the eighteenth amendment meant the elimination of the question from our politics .
on the contrary , it has been so intensified as an issue that many voters are disposed to make all political decisions with reference to this single question .
it is distracting the public mind and prejudicing the judgment of the electorate .
the day is unlikely to come when the eighteenth amendment will be repealed .
the fact may as well be recognized and our course adapted accordingly .
if the statutory provisions for its enforcement are contrary to deliberate public opinion , which i do not believe the rigorous and literal enforcement will concentrate public attention on any requisite modification .
such a course , conforms with the law and saves the humiliation of the government and the humiliation of our people before the world , and challenges the destructive forces engaged in widespread violation , official corruption and individual demoralization .
the eighteenth amendment involves the concurrent authority of state and federal governments , for the enforcement of the policy it defines .
a certain lack of definiteness , through division of responsibility is thus introduced .
in order to bring about a full understanding of duties and responsibilities as thus distributed , i purpose to invite the governors of the states and territories , at an early opportunity , to a conference with the federal executive authority .
out of the full and free considerations which will thus be possible , it is confidently believed , will emerge a more adequate , comprehension of the whole problem , and definite policies of national and state cooperation in administering the laws .
there are pending bills for the registration of the alien who has come to our shores .
i wish the passage of such an act might be expedited .
life amid american opportunities is worth the cost of registration if it is worth the seeking , and the nation has the right to know who are citizens in the making or who live among us and share our advantages while seeking to undermine our cherished institutions .
this provision will enable us to guard against the abuses in immigration , checking the undesirable whose irregular willing is his first violation of our laws .
more , it will facilitate the needed americanizing of those who mean to enroll as fellow citizens .
before enlarging the immigration quotas we had better provide registration for aliens , those now here or continually pressing for admission , and establish our examination boards abroad , to make sure of desirables only .
by the examination abroad we could end the pathos at our ports , when men and women find our doors closed , after long voyages and wasted savings , because they are unfit for admission .
it would be kindlier and safer to tell them before they embarkour program of admission and treatment of immigrants is very intimately related to the educational policy of the republic with illiteracy estimated at from two - tenths of 1 percent to less than 2 percent in 10 of the foremost nations of europe it rivets our attention to it serious problem when we are reminded of a 6 per cent illiteracy in the united states .
the figures are based on the test which defines an illiterate as one having no schoollng whatever .
remembering the wide freedom of our public schools with compulsory attendance in many states in the union , one is convinced that much of our excessive illiteracy comes to us from abroad , and the education of the immigrant becomes it requisite to his americanization .
it must be done if he is fittingly to exercise the duties as well as enjoy the privileges of american citizenship .
here is revealed the special field for federal cooperation in furthering educationfrom the very beginning public education has been left mainly in the hands of the states .
so far as schooling youth is concerned the policy has been justified , because no responsibility can be so effective as that of the local community alive to its task .
i believe in the cooperation of the national authority to stimulate , encourage , and broaden the work of tile local authorities but it is the especial obligation of the federal government to devise means and effectively assist in the education of the newcomer from foreign lands , so that the level of american education may be made the highest that is humanly possible .
closely related to this problem of education is the abolition of child labor .
twice congress has attempted the correction of the evils incident to child employment .
the decision of the supreme court has put this problem outside the proper domain of federal regulation until the constitution is so amended as to give the congress indubitable authority .
i recommend the submission of such an amendment .
we have two schools of thought relating to amendment of the constitution .
one need not be committed to the belief that amendment is weakening the fundamental law , or that excessive amendment is essential to meet every ephemeral whim .
we ought to amend to meet the demands of the people when sanctioned by deliberate public opinion .
one year ago i suggested the submission of an amendment so that we may lawfully restrict the issues of tax exempt securities , and i renew that recommendation now .
tax - exempt securities are drying up the sources of federal taxation and they are encouraging unproductive and extravagant expenditures by states and municipalities .
there is more than the menace in mounting public debt , there is the dissipation of capital which should be made available to the needs of productive industry .
the proposed amendment will place the state and federal governments and all political subdivisions on an exact equality , and will correct the growing menace of public borrowing , which if left unchecked may soon threaten the stability of our institutions .
we are so vast and so varied in our national interests that scores of problems are pressing for attention .
i must not risk the wearying of your patience with detailed reference .
reclamation and irrigation projects , where waste land may be made available for settlement and productivity , are worthy of your favorable consideration .
when it is realized that we are consuming our timber four times as rapidly as we are growing it , we must encourage the greatest possible cooperation between the federal government , the various states , and the owners of forest lands , to the end that protection from fire shall be made more effective and replanting encouraged .
the fuel problem is under study now by a very capable fact - finding commission , and any attempt to deal with the coal problem , of such deep concern to the entire nation , must await the report of the commission .
there are necessary studies of great problems which congress might well initiate .
the wide spread between production costs and prices which consumers pay concerns every citizen of the republic .
it contributes very largely to the unrest in agriculture and must stand sponsor for much against which we inveigh in that familiar term -- the high cost of living .
no one doubts the excess is traceable to the levy of the middleman , but it would be unfair to charge him with all responsibility before we appraise what is exacted of him by our modernly complex life .
we have attacked the problem on one side by the promotion of cooperative marketing , and we might well inquire into the benefits of cooperative buying .
admittedly , the consumer is much to blame himself , because of his prodigal expenditure and his exaction of service , but government might well serve to point the way of narrowing the spread of price , especially between the production of food and its consumption .
a superpower survey of the eastern industrial region has recently been completed , looking to unification of steam , water , and electric powers , and to a unified scheme of power distribution .
the survey proved that vast economies in tonnage movement of freights , and in the efficiency of the railroads , would be effected if the superpower program were adopted .
i am convinced that constructive measures calculated to promote such an industrial development -- i am tempted to say , such an industrial revolution -- would be well worthy the careful attention and fostering interest of the national government .
the proposed survey of a plan to draft all the resources of the republic , human and material , for national defense may well have your approval .
i commended such a program in case of future war , in the inaugural address .
of march 4 , 1921 , and every experience in the adjustment and liquidation of war claims and the settlement of war obligations persuades me we ought to be prepared for such universal call to armed defense .
i bring you no apprehension of war .
the world is abhorrent of it , and our own relations are not only free from every threatening cloud , but we have contributed our larger influence toward making armed conflict less likely .
those who assume that we played our part in the world war and later took ourselves aloof and apart , unmindful of world obligations , give scant credit to the helpful part we assume in international relationships .
whether all nations signatory ratify all the treaties growing out of the washington conference on limitation of armament or some withhold approval , the underlying policy of limiting naval armament has the sanction of the larger naval powers , and naval competition is suspended .
of course , unanimous ratification is much to be desired .
the four - power pact , which abolishes every probability of war on the pacific , has brought new confidence in a maintained peace , and i can well believe it might be made a model for like assurances wherever in the world any common interests are concerned .
we have had expressed the hostility of the american people to a supergovernment or to any commitment where either a council or an assembly of leagued powers may chart our course .
treaties of armed alliance can have no likelihood of american sanction , but we believe in respecting the rights of nations , in the value of conference and consultation , in the effectiveness of leaders of nations looking each other in the face before resorting to the arbitrament of arms .
it has been our fortune both to preach and promote international understanding .
the influence of the united states in bringing near the settlement of an ancient dispute between south american nations is added proof of the glow of peace in ample understanding .
in washington to - day are met the delegates of the central american nations , gathered at the table of international understanding , to stabilize their republics and remove every vestige of disagreement .
they are met here by our invitation , not in our aloofness , and they accept our hospitality because they have faith in our unselfishness and believe in our helpfulness .
perhaps we are selfish in craving their confidence and friendship , but such a selfishness we proclaim to the world , regardless of hemisphere , or seas dividing .
i would like the congress and the people of the nation to believe that in a firm and considerate way we are insistent on american rights wherever they may be questioned , and deny no rights of others in the assertion of our own .
moreover we are cognizant of the world 's struggles for full readjustment and rehabilitation , and we have shirked no duty which comes of sympathy , or fraternity , or highest fellowship among nations .
every obligation consonant with american ideals and sanctioned under our form of government is willingly met .
when we can not support we do not demand .
our constitutional limitations do not forbid the exercise of a moral influence , the measure of which is not less than the high purposes we have sought to serve .
after all there is less difference about the part this great republic shall play in furthering peace and advancing humanity than in the manner of playing it .
we ask no one to assume responsibility for us ; we assume no responsibility which others must bear for themselves , unless nationality is hopelessly swallowed up in internationalism .

my countrymen : 

 when one surveys the world about him after the great storm , noting the marks of destruction and yet rejoicing in the ruggedness of the things which withstood it , if he is an american he breathes the clarified atmosphere with a strange mingling of regret and new hope .
we have seen a world passion spend its fury , but we contemplate our republic unshaken , and hold our civilization secure .
liberty -- liberty within the law -- and civilization are inseparable , and though both were threatened we find them now secure ; and there comes to americans the profound assurance that our representative government is the highest expression and surest guaranty of both .
standing in this presence , mindful of the solemnity of this occasion , feeling the emotions which no one may know until he senses the great weight of responsibility for himself , i must utter my belief in the divine inspiration of the founding fathers .
surely there must have been god 's intent in the making of this new - world republic .
ours is an organic law which had but one ambiguity , and we saw that effaced in a baptism of sacrifice and blood , with union maintained , the nation supreme , and its concord inspiring .
we have seen the world rivet its hopeful gaze on the great truths on which the founders wrought .
we have seen civil , human , and religious liberty verified and glorified .
in the beginning the old world scoffed at our experiment ; today our foundations of political and social belief stand unshaken , a precious inheritance to ourselves , an inspiring example of freedom and civilization to all mankind .
let us express renewed and strengthened devotion , in grateful reverence for the immortal beginning , and utter our confidence in the supreme fulfillment .
the recorded progress of our republic , materially and spiritually , in itself proves the wisdom of the inherited policy of noninvolvement in old world affairs .
confident of our ability to work out our own destiny , and jealously guarding our right to do so , we seek no part in directing the destinies of the old world .
we do not mean to be entangled .
we will accept no responsibility except as our own conscience and judgment , in each instance , may determine .
our eyes never will be blind to a developing menace , our ears never deaf to the call of civilization .
we recognize the new order in the world , with the closer contacts which progress has wrought .
we sense the call of the human heart for fellowship , fraternity , and cooperation .
we crave friendship and harbor no hate .
but america , our america , the america builded on the foundation laid by the inspired fathers , can be a party to no permanent military alliance .
it can enter into no political commitments , nor assume any economic obligations which will subject our decisions to any other than our own authority .
i am sure our own people will not misunderstand , nor will the world misconstrue .
we have no thought to impede the paths to closer relationship .
we wish to promote understanding .
we want to do our part in making offensive warfare so hateful that governments and peoples who resort to it must prove the righteousness of their cause or stand as outlaws before the bar of civilization .
we are ready to associate ourselves with the nations of the world , great and small , for conference , for counsel ; to seek the expressed views of world opinion ; to recommend a way to approximate disarmament and relieve the crushing burdens of military and naval establishments .
we elect to participate in suggesting plans for mediation , conciliation , and arbitration , and would gladly join in that expressed conscience of progress , which seeks to clarify and write the laws of international relationship , and establish a world court for the disposition of such justiciable questions as nations are agreed to submit thereto .
in expressing aspirations , in seeking practical plans , in translating humanity 's new concept of righteousness and justice and its hatred of war into recommended action we are ready most heartily to unite , but every commitment must be made in the exercise of our national sovereignty .
since freedom impelled , and independence inspired , and nationality exalted , a world supergovernment is contrary to everything we cherish and can have no sanction by our republic .
this is not selfishness , it is sanctity .
it is not aloofness , it is security .
it is not suspicion of others , it is patriotic adherence to the things which made us what we are .
today , better than ever before , we know the aspirations of humankind , and share them .
we have come to a new realization of our place in the world and a new appraisal of our nation by the world .
the unselfishness of these united states is a thing proven ; our devotion to peace for ourselves and for the world is well established ; our concern for preserved civilization has had its impassioned and heroic expression .
there was no american failure to resist the attempted reversion of civilization ; there will be no failure today or tomorrow .
the success of our popular government rests wholly upon the correct interpretation of the deliberate , intelligent , dependable popular will of america .
in a deliberate questioning of a suggested change of national policy , where internationality was to supersede nationality , we turned to a referendum , to the american people .
there was ample discussion , and there is a public mandate in manifest understanding .
america is ready to encourage , eager to initiate , anxious to participate in any seemly program likely to lessen the probability of war , and promote that brotherhood of mankind which must be god 's highest conception of human relationship .
because we cherish ideals of justice and peace , because we appraise international comity and helpful relationship no less highly than any people of the world , we aspire to a high place in the moral leadership of civilization , and we hold a maintained america , the proven republic , the unshaken temple of representative democracy , to be not only an inspiration and example , but the highest agency of strengthening good will and promoting accord on both continents .
mankind needs a world - wide benediction of understanding .
it is needed among individuals , among peoples , among governments , and it will inaugurate an era of good feeling to make the birth of a new order .
in such understanding men will strive confidently for the promotion of their better relationships and nations will promote the comities so essential to peace .
we must understand that ties of trade bind nations in closest intimacy , and none may receive except as he gives .
we have not strengthened ours in accordance with our resources or our genius , notably on our own continent , where a galaxy of republics reflects the glory of new - world democracy , but in the new order of finance and trade we mean to promote enlarged activities and seek expanded confidence .
perhaps we can make no more helpful contribution by example than prove a republic 's capacity to emerge from the wreckage of war .
while the world 's embittered travail did not leave us devastated lands nor desolated cities , left no gaping wounds , no breast with hate , it did involve us in the delirium of expenditure , in expanded currency and credits , in unbalanced industry , in unspeakable waste , and disturbed relationships .
while it uncovered our portion of hateful selfishness at home , it also revealed the heart of america as sound and fearless , and beating in confidence unfailing .
amid it all we have riveted the gaze of all civilization to the unselfishness and the righteousness of representative democracy , where our freedom never has made offensive warfare , never has sought territorial aggrandizement through force , never has turned to the arbitrament of arms until reason has been exhausted .
when the governments of the earth shall have established a freedom like our own and shall have sanctioned the pursuit of peace as we have practiced it , i believe the last sorrow and the final sacrifice of international warfare will have been written .
let me speak to the maimed and wounded soldiers who are present today , and through them convey to their comrades the gratitude of the republic for their sacrifices in its defense .
a generous country will never forget the services you rendered , and you may hope for a policy under government that will relieve any maimed successors from taking your places on another such occasion as this .
our supreme task is the resumption of our onward , normal way .
reconstruction , readjustment , restoration all these must follow .
i would like to hasten them .
if it will lighten the spirit and add to the resolution with which we take up the task , let me repeat for our nation , we shall give no people just cause to make war upon us ; we hold no national prejudices ; we entertain no spirit of revenge ; we do not hate ; we do not covet ; we dream of no conquest , nor boast of armed prowess .
if , despite this attitude , war is again forced upon us , i earnestly hope a way may be found which will unify our individual and collective strength and consecrate all america , materially and spiritually , body and soul , to national defense .
i can vision the ideal republic , where every man and woman is called under the flag for assignment to duty for whatever service , military or civic , the individual is best fitted ; where we may call to universal service every plant , agency , or facility , all in the sublime sacrifice for country , and not one penny of war profit shall inure to the benefit of private individual , corporation , or combination , but all above the normal shall flow into the defense chest of the nation .
there is something inherently wrong , something out of accord with the ideals of representative democracy , when one portion of our citizenship turns its activities to private gain amid defensive war while another is fighting , sacrificing , or dying for national preservation .
out of such universal service will come a new unity of spirit and purpose , a new confidence and consecration , which would make our defense impregnable , our triumph assured .
then we should have little or no disorganization of our economic , industrial , and commercial systems at home , no staggering war debts , no swollen fortunes to flout the sacrifices of our soldiers , no excuse for sedition , no pitiable slackerism , no outrage of treason .
envy and jealousy would have no soil for their menacing development , and revolution would be without the passion which engenders it .
a regret for the mistakes of yesterday must not , however , blind us to the tasks of today .
war never left such an aftermath .
there has been staggering loss of life and measureless wastage of materials .
nations are still groping for return to stable ways .
discouraging indebtedness confronts us like all the war - torn nations , and these obligations must be provided for .
no civilization can survive repudiation .
we can reduce the abnormal expenditures , and we will .
we can strike at war taxation , and we must .
we must face the grim necessity , with full knowledge that the task is to be solved , and we must proceed with a full realization that no statute enacted by man can repeal the inexorable laws of nature .
our most dangerous tendency is to expect too much of government , and at the same time do for it too little .
we contemplate the immediate task of putting our public household in order .
we need a rigid and yet sane economy , combined with fiscal justice , and it must be attended by individual prudence and thrift , which are so essential to this trying hour and reassuring for the future .
the business world reflects the disturbance of war 's reaction .
herein flows the lifeblood of material existence .
the economic mechanism is intricate and its parts interdependent , and has suffered the shocks and jars incident to abnormal demands , credit inflations , and price upheavals .
the normal balances have been impaired , the channels of distribution have been clogged , the relations of labor and management have been strained .
we must seek the readjustment with care and courage .
our people must give and take .
prices must reflect the receding fever of war activities .
perhaps we never shall know the old levels of wages again , because war invariably readjusts compensations , and the necessaries of life will show their inseparable relationship , but we must strive for normalcy to reach stability .
all the penalties will not be light , nor evenly distributed .
there is no way of making them so .
there is no instant step from disorder to order .
we must face a condition of grim reality , charge off our losses and start afresh .
it is the oldest lesson of civilization .
i would like government to do all it can to mitigate ; then , in understanding , in mutuality of interest , in concern for the common good , our tasks will be solved .
no altered system will work a miracle .
any wild experiment will only add to the confusion .
our best assurance lies in efficient administration of our proven system .
the forward course of the business cycle is unmistakable .
peoples are turning from destruction to production .
industry has sensed the changed order and our own people are turning to resume their normal , onward way .
the call is for productive america to go on .
i know that congress and the administration will favor every wise government policy to aid the resumption and encourage continued progress .
i speak for administrative efficiency , for lightened tax burdens , for sound commercial practices , for adequate credit facilities , for sympathetic concern for all agricultural problems , for the omission of unnecessary interference of government with business , for an end to government 's experiment in business , and for more efficient business in government administration .
with all of this must attend a mindfulness of the human side of all activities , so that social , industrial , and economic justice will be squared with the purposes of a righteous people .
with the nation - wide induction of womanhood into our political life , we may count upon her intuitions , her refinements , her intelligence , and her influence to exalt the social order .
we count upon her exercise of the full privileges and the performance of the duties of citizenship to speed the attainment of the highest state .
i wish for an america no less alert in guarding against dangers from within than it is watchful against enemies from without .
our fundamental law recognizes no class , no group , no section ; there must be none in legislation or administration .
the supreme inspiration is the common weal .
humanity hungers for international peace , and we crave it with all mankind .
my most reverent prayer for america is for industrial peace , with its rewards , widely and generally distributed , amid the inspirations of equal opportunity .
no one justly may deny the equality of opportunity which made us what we are .
we have mistaken unpreparedness to embrace it to be a challenge of the reality , and due concern for making all citizens fit for participation will give added strength of citizenship and magnify our achievement .
if revolution insists upon overturning established order , let other peoples make the tragic experiment .
there is no place for it in america .
when world war threatened civilization we pledged our resources and our lives to its preservation , and when revolution threatens we unfurl the flag of law and order and renew our consecration .
ours is a constitutional freedom where the popular will is the law supreme and minorities are sacredly protected .
our revisions , reformations , and evolutions reflect a deliberate judgment and an orderly progress , and we mean to cure our ills , but never destroy or permit destruction by force .
i had rather submit our industrial controversies to the conference table in advance than to a settlement table after conflict and suffering .
the earth is thirsting for the cup of good will , understanding is its fountain source .
i would like to acclaim an era of good feeling amid dependable prosperity and all the blessings which attend .
it has been proved again and again that we can not , while throwing our markets open to the world , maintain american standards of living and opportunity , and hold our industrial eminence in such unequal competition .
there is a luring fallacy in the theory of banished barriers of trade , but preserved american standards require our higher production costs to be reflected in our tariffs on imports .
today , as never before , when peoples are seeking trade restoration and expansion , we must adjust our tariffs to the new order .
we seek participation in the world 's exchanges , because therein lies our way to widened influence and the triumphs of peace .
we know full well we can not sell where we do not buy , and we can not sell successfully where we do not carry .
opportunity is calling not alone for the restoration , but for a new era in production , transportation and trade .
we shall answer it best by meeting the demand of a surpassing home market , by promoting self- reliance in production , and by bidding enterprise , genius , and efficiency to carry our cargoes in american bottoms to the marts of the world .
we would not have an america living within and for herself alone , but we would have her self - reliant , independent , and ever nobler , stronger , and richer .
believing in our higher standards , reared through constitutional liberty and maintained opportunity , we invite the world to the same heights .
but pride in things wrought is no reflex of a completed task .
common welfare is the goal of our national endeavor .
wealth is not inimical to welfare ; it ought to be its friendliest agency .
there never can be equality of rewards or possessions so long as the human plan contains varied talents and differing degrees of industry and thrift , but ours ought to be a country free from the great blotches of distressed poverty .
we ought to find a way to guard against the perils and penalties of unemployment .
we want an america of homes , illumined with hope and happiness , where mothers , freed from the necessity for long hours of toil beyond their own doors , may preside as befits the hearthstone of american citizenship .
we want the cradle of american childhood rocked under conditions so wholesome and so hopeful that no blight may touch it in its development , and we want to provide that no selfish interest , no material necessity , no lack of opportunity shall prevent the gaining of that education so essential to best citizenship .
there is no short cut to the making of these ideals into glad realities .
the world has witnessed again and again the futility and the mischief of ill - considered remedies for social and economic disorders .
but we are mindful today as never before of the friction of modern industrialism , and we must learn its causes and reduce its evil consequences by sober and tested methods .
where genius has made for great possibilities , justice and happiness must be reflected in a greater common welfare .
service is the supreme commitment of life .
i would rejoice to acclaim the era of the golden rule and crown it with the autocracy of service .
i pledge an administration wherein all the agencies of government are called to serve , and ever promote an understanding of government purely as an expression of the popular will .
one can not stand in this presence and be unmindful of the tremendous responsibility .
the world upheaval has added heavily to our tasks .
but with the realization comes the surge of high resolve , and there is reassurance in belief in the god - given destiny of our republic .
if i felt that there is to be sole responsibility in the executive for the america of tomorrow i should shrink from the burden .
but here are a hundred millions , with common concern and shared responsibility , answerable to god and country .
the republic summons them to their duty , and i invite co - operation .
i accept my part with single - mindedness of purpose and humility of spirit , and implore the favor and guidance of god in his heaven .
with these i am unafraid , and confidently face the future .
i have taken the solemn oath of office on that passage of holy writ wherein it is asked : " what doth the lord require of thee but to do justly , and to love mercy , and to walk humbly with thy god ? "
this i plight to god and country .
my countrymen , the surpassing war of all times has involved us , and found us utterly unprepared in either a mental or military sense .
the republic must awaken .
the people must understand .
our safety lies in full realization the fate of the nation and the safety of the world will be decided on the western battlefront of europe .
primarily the american republic has entered the war in defense of its national rights .
if we did not defend we could not hope to endure .
other big issues are involved but the maintained rights and defended honor of a righteous nation includes them all .
cherishing the national rights the fathers fought to establish , and loving freedom and civilization , we should have violated every tradition and sacrificed every inheritance if we had longer held aloof from the armed conflict which is to make the world safe for civilization .
more , we are committed to sacrifice in battle in order to make america safe for americans and establish their security on every lawful mission on the high seas or under the shining sun .
we are testing popular government 's capacity for self - defense .
we are resolved to liberate the soul of american life and prove ourselves an american people in fact , spirit , and purpose , and consecrate ourselves anew and everlastingly to human freedom and humanity 's justice .
realizing our new relationship with the world , we want to make it fit to live in , and with might and fright and ruthlessness and barbarity crushed by the conscience of a real civilization .
ours is a small concern about the kind of government any people may choose , but we do mean to outlaw the nation which violates the sacred compacts of international relationships .
the decision is to be final .
if the russian failure should become the tragic impotency of nations -- if italy should yield to the pressure of military might -- if heroic france should be martyred on her flaming altars of liberty and justice and only the soul of heroism remain -- if england should starve and her sacrifices and resolute warfare should prove in vain -- if all these improbable disasters should attend , even then we should fight on and on , making the world 's cause our cause .
a republic worth living in is worth fighting for , and sacrificing for , and dying for .
in the fires of this conflict we shall wipe out the disloyalty of those who wear american garb without the faith , and establish a new concord of citizenship and a new devotion , so that we should have made a safe america the home and hope of a people who are truly american in heart and soul .

my countrymen , there is n't anything the matter with the world 's civilization except that humanity is viewing it through a vision impaired in a cataclysmal war .
poise has been disturbed , and nerves have been wracked , and fever has rendered men irrational .
sometimes there have been draughts upon the dangerous cup of barbarity .
men have wandered far from safe paths , but the human procession still marches in the right direction .
here in the united states we feel the reflex , rather than the hurting wound itself , but we still think straight ; and we mean to act straight ; we mean to hold firmly to all that was ours when war involved us and seek the higher attainments which are the only compensations that so supreme a tragedy may give mankind .
america 's present need is not heroics , but healing ; not nostrums , but normalcy ; not revolution , but restoration ; not agitation , but adjustment ; not surgery , but serenity ; not the dramatic , but the dispassionate ; not experiment , but equipoise ; not submergence in internationality but sustainment in triumphant nationality .
it 's one thing to battle successfully against the world 's domination by a military autocracy because the infinite god never intended such a program ; but it 's quite another thing to revise human nature and suspend the fundamental laws of life and all of life 's requirements .
the world calls for peace .
america demands peace , formal as well as actual , and means to have it so we may set our own house in order .
we challenged the proposal that an armed autocrat should dominate the world , and we choose for ourselves to cling to the representative democracy which made us what we are .
this republic has its ample task .
if we put an end to false economics which lure humanity to utter chaos , ours will be the commanding example of world leadership today .
if we can prove a representative popular government under which the citizenship seeks what it may do for the government and country , rather than what the country may do for individuals , we shall do more to make democracy safe for the world than all armed conflict ever recorded .
the world needs to be reminded that all human ills are not curable by legislation , and that quantity of statutory enactments and excess of government offer no substitute for quality of citizenship .
the problems of maintained civilization are not to be solved by a transfer of responsibility from citizenship to government and no eminent page in history was ever drafted to the standards of mediocrity .
nor , no government worthy of the name which is directed by influence on the one hand or moved by intimidation on the other .
my best judgement of america 's need is to steady down , to get squarely on our feet , to make sure of the right path .
let 's get out of the fevered delirium of war with the hallucination that all the money in the world is to be made in the madness of war and the wildness of its aftermath .
let us stop to consider that tranquility at home is more precious than peace abroad and that both our good fortune and our eminence are dependent on the normal forward stride of all the american people .
we want to go on , secure and unafraid , holding fast to the american inheritance , and confident of the supreme american fulfillment .

my countrymen , the menacing tendency of the present day is not chargeable wholly to the unsettled and fevered conditions caused by the war .
the manifest weakness in popular government lies in the temptation to appeal to group citizenship for political advantage .
there is no greater peril .
the constitution contemplates no class and recognizes no group .
it broadly includes all the people with specific recognition for none , and the highest consecration we can make today is a committal of the republican party to that saving constitutionalism which contemplates all america as one people and holds just government free from influence on the one hand , and unmoved by intimidation on the other .
it would be the blindness of folly to ignore the activities in our own country which are aimed to destroy our economic system and to commit us to the colossal tragedy which has both destroyed all freedom and made russia impotent .
this movement is not to be halted in throttled liberties .
we must not abridge the freedom of speech , the freedom of press , or the freedom of assembly , because there is no promise in repression .
these liberties are as sacred as the freedom of religious beliefs , as inviolable as the rights of life and the pursuit of happiness .
we do hold to the right to crush sedition , to stifle a menacing contempt for law , to stamp out a peril to the safety of the republic or its people when emergency calls , because security and the majesty of the law are the first essentials of liberty .
he who threatens destruction of the government by force , or flaunts his contempt for lawful authority , ceases to be a loyal citizen and forfeits his right to the freedom of the republic .
let it be said to all of america that our plan of popular government contemplates such orderly changes as the crystallized intelligence of the majority of our people think best .
there can be no modification of this underlying rule , but no majority shall abridge the rights of a minority .
men have a right to question our system in fullest freedom .
but they must always remember that the rights of freedom impose the obligations which maintain it .
our policy is not of repression .
but we make appeal today to american intelligence and patriotism , when the republic is menaced from within , just as we trusted american patriotism when our rights were threatened from without .
we call on all america for steadiness , so that we may proceed deliberately with the readjustment which concerns all the people .
our party platform fairly expresses the conscience of republicans on industrial relations .
no party is indifferent to the welfare of the wage earner .
to us , his good fortune is of deepest concern , and we seek to make that good fortune permanent .
we do not oppose , but approve , collective bargaining , because that is an outstanding right , but we are unalterably insistent that its exercise must not destroy the equally sacred right of the individual in his necessary pursuit of a livelihood .
any american has the right to quit his employment , so has every american the right to seek employment .
the group must not endanger the individual , and we must discourage groups preying upon one another .
and none shall be allowed to forget that government 's obligations are alike to all the people .

my countrymen , though not in any partisan sense i must speak of the services of the men and women who rallied to the colors of the republic in the world war .
america realizes and appreciates the services rendered , the sacrifices made , and the suffering endured .
there shall be no distinction between those who knew the perils and glories of the battlefront or the dangers of the sea , and those who were compelled to serve behind the lines , or those who constituted the great reserve of a grand army which awaited the call in camps at home .
all were brave .
all were self - sacrificing .
all were sharers of those ideals which sent our boys " thrice armed " to war .
worthy sons and daughters , these .
fit successors to those who christened our banners in the immortal beginning .
worthy sons of those who saved the union and nationality when civil war wiped out the ambiguity from the constitution .
ready sons of those who drew the sword for humanity 's sake the first time in the world in 1898 .
the four million defenders on land and sea were worthy of the best traditions of a people never warlike in peace and never pacifist in war .
they commanded our pride .
they have our gratitude , which must have genuine expression .
it 's not only a duty -- it 's a privilege to see that the sacrifices made shall be requited , and that those still suffering from casualties and disabilities shall be abundantly aided and restored to the highest capabilities of citizenship and its enjoyments .
much has been said of late about world ideals .
but i prefer to think of the ideal for america .
i like to think there 's something more than the patriotism and practical wisdom of the founding fathers .
it 's good to believe that maybe destiny held this new world republic to be the supreme example of representative democracy and ordered liberty by which humanity is inspired to higher achievement .
it is idle to think we have attained perfection , but there is the satisfying knowledge that we hold orderly processes for making our government reflect the heart and mind of the republic .
ours is not only a fortunate people , but a very commonsensical people , with vision high , but their feet on the earth , with belief in themselves and faith in god .
whether enemies threaten from without or menaces arise from within , there is some indefinable voice saying : " have confidence in the republic .
america will go on . "
here is the temple of liberty no storm may shake .
here are the altars of freedom no passions shall destroy .
it was american in conception , american in its building .
it shall be american in the fulfillment .
sectional once , we are all american now .
and we mean to be all americans to all the world .
i would not be my natural self if i did not utter my consciousness of my limited ability to meet your full expectations or to realize the aspirations within my own breast .
but i 'll gladly give all that is in me , all of heart , soul , and mind and the fighting love of country , to service in our common cause .
i can only pray to omnipotent god that i may be as worthy in service as i know myself to be faithful in thought and purpose .
one can not give more .

