to the senate and house of representatives of the united states in compliance with the request of the house of representatives , expressed in their resolution of the 5th instant , i proceed to give such information as is possessed , of the effect of gun - boats in the protection and defense of harbors , of the numbers thought necessary , and of the proposed distribution of them among the ports and harbors of the united states .
under the present circumstances , and governed by the intentions of the legislature , as manifested by their annual appropriations of money for the purposes of defence , it has been concluded to combine -- 1st , land batteries , furnished with heavy cannon and mortars , and established on all the points around the place favorable for preventing vessels from lying before it ; 2d , movable artillery which may be carried , as an occasion may require , to points unprovided with fixed batteries ; 3d , floating batteries ; and 4th , gun - boats , which may oppose an enemy at its entrance and co - operate with the batteries for his expulsion .
on this subject professional men were consulted as far as we had opportunity .
general wilkinson , and the late general gates , gave their opinions in writing , in favor of the system , as will be seen by their letters now communicated .
the higher officers of the navy gave the same opinions in separate conferences , as their presence at the seat of government offered occasions of consulting them , and no difference of judgment appeared on the subjects .
those of commodore barron and captain tingey , now here , are recently furnished in writing , and transmitted herewith to the legislature .
the efficacy of gun - boats for the defence of harbors , and of other smooth and enclosed waters , may be estimated in part from that of galleys , formerly much used , but less powerful , more costly in their construction and maintenance , and requiring more men .
but the gun - boat itself is believed to be in use with every modern maritime nation for the purpose of defence .
in the mediterranean , on which are several small powers , whose system like ours is peace and defence , few harbors are without this article of protection .
our own experience there of the effect of gun - boats for harbor service , is recent .
algiers is particularly known to have owed to a great provision of these vessels the safety of its city , since the epoch of their construction .
before that it had been repeatedly insulted and injured .
the effect of gun - boats at present in the neighborhood of gibraltar , is well known , and how much they were used both in the attack and defence of that place during a former war .
the extensive resort to them by the two greatest naval powers in the world , on an enterprise of invasion not long since in prospect , shows their confidence in their efficacy for the purposes for which they are suited .
by the northern powers of europe , whose seas are particularly adapted to them , they are still more used .
the remarkable action between the russian flotilla of gun - boats and galleys , and a turkish fleet of ships - of - the - line and frigates , in the liman sea , 1788 , will be readily recollected .
the latter , commanded by their most celebrated admiral , were completely defeated , and several of their ships - of - the - line destroyed .
from the opinions given as to the number of gun - boats necessary for some of the principal seaports , and from a view of all the towns and ports from orleans to maine inclusive , entitled to protection , in proportion to their situation and circumstances , it is concluded , that to give them a due measure of protection in time of war , about two hundred gun - boats will be requisite .
according to first ideas , the following would be their general distribution , liable to be varied on more mature examination , and as circumstances shall vary , that is to say : -- to the mississippi and its neighboring waters , forty gun - boats .
to savannah and charleston , and the harbors on each side , from st. mary 's to currituck , twenty - five .
to the chesapeake and its waters , twenty .
to delaware bay and river , fifteen .
to new york , the sound , and waters as far as cape cod , fifty .
to boston and the harbors north of cape cod , fifty .
the flotilla assigned to these several stations , might each be under the care of a particular commandant , and the vessels composing them would , in ordinary , be distributed among the harbors within the station in proportion to their importance .
of these boats a proper proportion would be of the larger size , such as those heretofore built , capable of navigating any seas , and of reinforcing occasionally the strength of even the most distant port when menaced with danger .
the residue would be confined to their own or the neighboring harbors , would be smaller , less furnished for accommodation , and consequently less costly .
of the number supposed necessary , seventy - three are built or building , and the hundred and twenty - seven still to be provided , would cost from five to six hundred thousand dollars .
having regard to the convenience of the treasury , as well as to the resources of building , it has been thought that one half of these might be built in the present year , and the other half the next .
with the legislature , however , it will rest to stop where we are , or at any further point , when they shall be of opinion that the number provided shall be sufficient for the object .
at times when europe as well as the united states shall be at peace , it would not be proposed that more than six or eight of these vessels should be kept afloat .
when europe is in war , treble that number might be necessary to be distributed among those particular harbors which foreign vessels of war are in the habit of frequenting , for the purpose of preserving order therein .
but they would be manned , in ordinary , with only their complement for navigation , relying on the seamen and militia of the port if called into action on sudden emergency .
it would be only when the united states should themselves be at war , that the whole number would be brought into actual service , and would be ready in the first moments of the war to co - operate with other means for covering at once the line of our seaports .
at all times , those unemployed would be withdrawn into places not exposed to sudden enterprise , hauled up under sheds from the sun and weather , and kept in preservation with little expense for repairs or maintenance .
it must be superfluous to observe , that this species of naval armament is proposed merely for defensive operation ; that it can have but little effect toward protecting our commerce in the open seas even on our coast ; and still less can it become an excitement to engage in offensive maritime war , toward which it would furnish no means .

fellow citizens of the senate and house of representatives : it is a circumstance of sincere gratification to me that on meeting the great council of our nation , i am able to announce to them , on the grounds of reasonable certainty , that the wars and troubles which have for so many years afflicted our sister nations have at length come to an end , and that the communications of peace and commerce are once more opening among them .
while we devoutly return thanks to the beneficent being who has been pleased to breathe into them the spirit of conciliation and forgiveness , we are bound with peculiar gratitude to be thankful to him that our own peace has been preserved through so perilous a season , and ourselves permitted quietly to cultivate the earth and to practice and improve those arts which tend to increase our comforts .
the assurances , indeed , of friendly disposition , received from all the powers with whom we have principal relations , had inspired a confidence that our peace with them would not have been disturbed .
but a cessation of the irregularities which had effected the commerce of neutral nations , and of the irritations and injuries produced by them , can not but add to this confidence ; and strengthens , at the same time , the hope , that wrongs committed on offending friends , under a pressure of circumstances , will now be reviewed with candor , and will be considered as founding just claims of retribution for the past and new assurances for the future .
among our indian neighbors , also , a spirit of peace and friendship generally prevailing and i am happy to inform you that the continued efforts to introduce among them the implements and the practice of husbandry , and of the household arts , have not been without success ; that they are becoming more and more sensible of the superiority of this dependence for clothing and subsistence over the precarious resources of hunting and fishing ; and already we are able to announce , that instead of that constant diminution of their numbers , produced by their wars and their wants , some of them begin to experience an increase of population .
to this state of general peace with which we have been blessed , one only exception exists .
tripoli , the least considerable of the barbary states , had come forward with demands unfounded either in right or in compact , and had permitted itself to denounce war , on our failure to comply before a given day .
the style of the demand admitted but one answer .
i sent a small squadron of frigates into the mediterranean , with assurances to that power of our sincere desire to remain in peace , but with orders to protect our commerce against the threatened attack .
the measure was seasonable and salutary .
the bey had already declared war in form .
his cruisers were out .
two had arrived at gibraltar .
our commerce in the mediterranean was blockaded , and that of the atlantic in peril .
the arrival of our squadron dispelled the danger .
one of the tripolitan cruisers having fallen in with , and engaged the small schooner enterprise , commanded by lieutenant sterret , which had gone as a tender to our larger vessels , was captured , after a heavy slaughter of her men , without the loss of a single one on our part .
the bravery exhibited by our citizens on that element , will , i trust , be a testimony to the world that it is not the want of that virtue which makes us seek their peace , but a conscientious desire to direct the energies of our nation to the multiplication of the human race , and not to its destruction .
unauthorized by the constitution , without the sanction of congress , to go out beyond the line of defence , the vessel being disabled from committing further hostilities , was liberated with its crew .
the legislature will doubtless consider whether , by authorizing measures of offence , also , they will place our force on an equal footing with that of its adversaries .
i communicate all material information on this subject , that in the exercise of the important function considered by the constitution to the legislature exclusively , their judgment may form itself on a knowledge and consideration of every circumstance of weight .
i wish i could say that our situation with all the other barbary states was entirely satisfactory .
discovering that some delays had taken place in the performance of certain articles stipulated by us , i thought it my duty , by immediate measures for fulfilling them , to vindicate to ourselves the right of considering the effect of departure from stipulation on their side .
from the papers which will be laid before you , you will be enabled to judge whether our treaties are regarded by them as fixing at all the measure of their demands , or as guarding from the exercise of force our vessels within their power ; and to consider how far it will be safe and expedient to leave our affairs with them in their present posture .
i lay before you the result of the census lately taken of our inhabitants , to a conformity with which we are to reduce the ensuing rates of representation and taxation .
you will perceive that the increase of numbers during the last ten years , proceeding in geometrical ratio , promises a duplication in little more than twenty - two years .
we contemplate this rapid growth , and the prospect it holds up to us , not with a view to the injuries it may enable us to do to others in some future day , but to the settlement of the extensive country still remaining vacant within our limits , to the multiplications of men susceptible of happiness , educated in the love of order , habituated to self - government , and value its blessings above all price .
other circumstances , combined with the increase of numbers , have produced an augmentation of revenue arising from consumption , in a ratio far beyond that of population alone , and though the changes of foreign relations now taking place so desirably for the world , may for a season affect this branch of revenue , yet , weighing all probabilities of expense , as well as of income , there is reasonable ground of confidence that we may now safely dispense with all the internal taxes , comprehending excises , stamps , auctions , licenses , carriages , and refined sugars , to which the postage on newspapers may be added , to facilitate the progress of information , and that the remaining sources of revenue will be sufficient to provide for the support of government to pay the interest on the public debts , and to discharge the principals in shorter periods than the laws or the general expectations had contemplated .
war , indeed , and untoward events , may change this prospect of things , and call for expenses which the imposts could not meet ; but sound principles will not justify our taxing the industry of our fellow citizens to accumulate treasure for wars to happen we know not when , and which might not perhaps happen but from the temptations offered by that treasure .
these views , however , of reducing our burdens , are formed on the expectation that a sensible , and at the same time a salutary reduction , may take place in our habitual expenditures .
for this purpose , those of the civil government , the army , and navy , will need revisal .
when we consider that this government is charged with the external and mutual relations only of these states ; that the states themselves have principal care of our persons , our property , and our reputation , constituting the great field of human concerns , we may well doubt whether our organization is not too complicated , too expensive ; whether offices or officers have not been multiplied unnecessarily , and sometimes injuriously to the service they were meant to promote .
i will cause to be laid before you an essay toward a statement of those who , under public employment of various kinds , draw money from the treasury or from our citizens .
time has not permitted a perfect enumeration , the ramifications of office being too multipled and remote to be completely traced in a first trial .
among those who are dependent on executive discretion , i have begun the reduction of what was deemed necessary .
the expenses of diplomatic agency have been considerably diminished .
the inspectors of internal revenue who were found to obstruct the accountability of the institution , have been discontinued .
several agencies created by executive authority , on salaries fixed by that also , have been suppressed , and should suggest the expediency of regulating that power by law , so as to subject its exercises to legislative inspection and sanction .
other reformations of the same kind will be pursued with that caution which is requisite in removing useless things , not to injure what is retained .
but the great mass of public offices is established by law , and , therefore , by law alone can be abolished .
should the legislature think it expedient to pass this roll in review , and try all its parts by the test of public utility , they may be assured of every aid and light which executive information can yield .
considering the general tendency to multiply offices and dependencies , and to increase expense to the ultimate term of burden which the citizen can bear , it behooves us to avail ourselves of every occasion which presents itself for taking off the surcharge ; that it may never be seen here that , after leaving to labor the smallest portion of its earnings on which it can subsist , government shall itself consume the residue of what it was instituted to guard .
in our care , too , of the public contributions intrusted to our direction , it would be prudent to multiply barriers against their dissipation , by appropriating specific sums to every specific purpose susceptible of definition ; by disallowing applications of money varying from the appropriation in object , or transcending it in amount ; by reducing the undefined field of contingencies , and thereby circumscribing discretionary powers over money ; and by bringing back to a single department all accountabilities for money where the examination may be prompt , efficacious , and uniform .
an account of the receipts and expenditures of the last year , as prepared by the secretary of the treasury , will as usual be laid before you .
the success which has attended the late sales of the public lands , shows that with attention they may be made an important source of receipt .
among the payments , those made in discharge of the principal and interest of the national debt , will show that the public faith has been exactly maintained .
to these will be added an estimate of appropriations necessary for the ensuing year .
this last will of course be effected by such modifications of the systems of expense , as you shall think proper to adopt .
a statement has been formed by the secretary of war , on mature consideration , of all the posts and stations where garrisons will be expedient , and of the number of men requisite for each garrison .
the whole amount is considerably short of the present military establishment .
for the surplus no particular use can be pointed out .
for defence against invasion , their number is as nothing ; nor is it conceived needful or safe that a standing army should be kept up in time of peace for that purpose .
uncertain as we must ever be of the particular point in our circumference where an enemy may choose to invade us , the only force which can be ready at every point and competent to oppose them , is the body of neighboring citizens as formed into a militia .
on these , collected from the parts most convenient , in numbers proportioned to the invading foe , it is best to rely , not only to meet the first attack , but if it threatens to be permanent , to maintain the defence until regulars may be engaged to relieve them .
these considerations render it important that we should at every session continue to amend the defects which from time to time show themselves in the laws for regulating the militia , until they are sufficiently perfect .
nor should we now or at any time separate , until we can say we have done everything for the militia which we could do were an enemy at our door .
the provisions of military stores on hand will be laid before you , that you may judge of the additions still requisite .
with respect to the extent to which our naval preparations should be carried , some difference of opinion may be expected to appear ; but just attention to the circumstances of every part of the union will doubtless reconcile all .
a small force will probably continue to be wanted for actual service in the mediterranean .
whatever annual sum beyond that you may think proper to appropriate to naval preparations , would perhaps be better employed in providing those articles which may be kept without waste or consumption , and be in readiness when any exigence calls them into use .
progress has been made , as will appear by papers now communicated , in providing materials for seventy - four gun ships as directed by law .
how far the authority given by the legislature for procuring and establishing sites for naval purposes has been perfectly understood and pursued in the execution , admits of some doubt .
a statement of the expenses already incurred on that subject , shall be laid before you .
i have in certain cases suspended or slackened these expenditures , that the legislature might determine whether so many yards are necessary as have been contemplated .
the works at this place are among those permitted to go on ; and five of the seven frigates directed to be laid up , have been brought and laid up here , where , besides the safety of their position , they are under the eye of the executive administration , as well as of its agents and where yourselves also will be guided by your own view in the legislative provisions respecting them which may from time to time be necessary .
they are preserved in such condition , as well the vessels as whatever belongs to them , as to be at all times ready for sea on a short warning .
two others are yet to be laid up so soon as they shall have reserved the repairs requisite to put them also into sound condition .
as a superintending officer will be necessary at each yard , his duties and emoluments , hitherto fixed by the executive , will be a more proper subject for legislation .
a communication will also be made of our progress in the execution of the law respecting the vessels directed to be sold .
the fortifications of our harbors , more or less advanced , present considerations of great difficulty .
while some of them are on a scale sufficiently proportioned to the advantages of their position , to the efficacy of their protection , and the importance of the points within it , others are so extensive , will cost so much in their first erection , so much in their maintenance , and require such a force to garrison them , as to make it questionable what is best now to be done .
a statement of those commenced or projected , of the expenses already incurred , and estimates of their future cost , so far as can be foreseen , shall be laid before you , that you may be enabled to judge whether any attention is necessary in the laws respecting this subject .
agriculture , manufactures , commerce , and navigation , the four pillars of our prosperity , are the most thriving when left most free to individual enterprise .
protection from casual embarrassments , however , may sometimes be seasonably interposed .
if in the course of your observations or inquiries they should appear to need any aid within the limits of our constitutional powers , your sense of their importance is a sufficient assurance they will occupy your attention .
we can not , indeed , but all feel an anxious solicitude for the difficulties under which our carrying trade will soon be placed .
how far it can be relieved , otherwise than by time , is a subject of important consideration .
the judiciary system of the united states , and especially that portion of it recently erected , will of course present itself to the contemplation of congress : and that they may be able to judge of the proportion which the institution bears to the business it has to perform , i have caused to be procured from the several states , and now lay before congress , an exact statement of all the causes decided since the first establishment of the courts , and of those which were depending when additional courts and judges were brought in to their aid .
and while on the judiciary organization , it will be worthy your consideration , whether the protection of the inestimable institution of juries has been extended to all the cases involving the security of our persons and property .
their impartial selection also being essential to their value , we ought further to consider whether that is sufficiently secured in those states where they are named by a marshal depending on executive will , or designated by the court or by officers dependent on them .
i can not omit recommending a revisal of the laws on the subject of naturalization .
considering the ordinary chances of human life , a denial of citizenship under a residence of fourteen years is a denial to a great proportion of those who ask it , and controls a policy pursued from their first settlement by many of these states , and still believed of consequence to their prosperity .
and shall we refuse the unhappy fugitives from distress that hospitality which the savages of the wilderness extended to our fathers arriving in this land ?
shall oppressed humanity find no asylum on this globe ?
the constitution , indeed , has wisely provided that , for admission to certain offices of important trust , a residence shall be required sufficient to develop character and design .
but might not the general character and capabilities of a citizen be safely communicated to every one manifesting a _ bona fide _ purpose of embarking his life and fortunes permanently with us ?
with restrictions , perhaps , to guard against the fraudulent usurpation of our flag ; an abuse which brings so much embarrassment and loss on the genuine citizen , and so much danger to the nation of being involved in war , that no endeavor should be spared to detect and suppress it .
these , fellow citizens , are the matters respecting the state of the nation , which i have thought of importance to be submitted to your consideration at this time .
some others of less moment , or not yet ready for communication , will be the subject of separate messages .
i am happy in this opportunity of committing the arduous affairs of our government to the collected wisdom of the union .
nothing shall be wanting on my part to inform , as far as in my power , the legislative judgment , nor to carry that judgment into faithful execution .
the prudence and temperance of your discussions will promote , within your own walls , that conciliation which so much befriends national conclusion ; and by its example will encourage among our constituents that progress of opinion which is tending to unite them in object and in will .
that all should be satisfied with any one order of things is not to be expected , but i indulge the pleasing persuasion that the great body of our citizens will cordially concur in honest and disinterested efforts , which have for their object to preserve the general and state governments in their constitutional form and equilibrium ; to maintain peace abroad , and order and obedience to the laws at home ; to establish principles and practices of administration favorable to the security of liberty and prosperity , and to reduce expenses to what is necessary for the useful purposes of government .

to the senate and house of representatives of the united states : the depredations which had been committed on the commerce of the united states during a preceding war by persons under the authority of spain are sufficiently known to all .
these made it a duty to require from that government indemnifications for our injured citizens .
a convention was accordingly entered into between the minister of the united states at madrid and the minister of that government for foreign affairs , by which it was agreed that spoliations committed by spanish subjects and carried into ports of spain should be paid for by that nation , and that those committed by french subjects and carried into spanish ports should remain for further discussion .
before this convention was returned to spain with our ratification the transfer of louisiana by france to the united states took place , an event as unexpected as disagreeable to spain .
from that moment she seemed to change her conduct and dispositions toward us .
it was first manifested by her protest against the right of france to alienate louisiana to us , which , however , was soon retracted and the right confirmed .
then high offense was manifested at the act of congress establishing a collection district on the mobile , although by an authentic declaration immediately made it was expressly confined to our acknowledged limits ; and she now refused to ratify the convention signed by her own minister under the eye of his sovereign unless we would consent to alterations of its terms which would have affected our claims against her for the spoliations by french subjects carried into spanish ports .
to obtain justice as well as to restore friendship i thought a special mission advisable , and accordingly appointed james monroe minister extraordinary and plenipotentiary to repair to madrid , and in conjunction with our minister resident there to endeavor to procure a ratification of the former convention and to come to an understanding with spain as to the boundaries of louisiana .
it appeared at once that her policy was to reserve herself for events , and in the meantime to keep our differences in an undetermined state .
this will be evident from the papers now communicated to you .
after nearly five months of fruitless endeavor to bring them to some definite and satisfactory result , our ministers ended the conferences without having been able to obtain indemnity for spoliations of any description or any satisfaction as to the boundaries of louisiana , other than a declaration that we had no rights eastward of the iberville , and that our line to the west was one which would have left us but a string of land on that bank of the river mississippi .
our injured citizens were thus left without any prospect of retribution from the wrongdoer , and as to boundary each party was to take its own course .
that which they have chosen to pursue will appear from the documents now communicated .
they authorize the inference that it is their intention to advance on our possessions until they shall be repressed by an opposing force .
considering that congress alone is constitutionally invested with the power of changing our condition from peace to war , i have thought it my duty to await their authority for using force in any degree which could be avoided .
i have barely instructed the officers stationed in the neighborhood of the aggressions to protect our citizens from violence , to patrol within the borders actually delivered to us , and not to go out of them but when necessary to repel an inroad or to rescue a citizen or his property ; and the spanish officers remaining at new orleans are required to depart without further delay .
it ought to be noted here that since the late change in the state of affairs in europe spain has ordered her cruisers and courts to respect our treaty with her .
the conduct of france and the part she may take in the misunderstandings between the united states and spain are too important to be unconsidered .
she was prompt and decided in her declarations that our demands on spain for french spoliations carried into spanish ports were included in the settlement between the united states and france .
she took at once the ground that she had acquired no right from spain , and had meant to deliver us none eastward of the iberville , her silence as to the western boundary leaving us to infer her opinion might be against spain in that quarter .
whatever direction she might mean to give to these differences , it does not appear that she has contemplated their proceeding to actual rupture , or that at the date of our last advices from paris her government had any suspicion of the hostile attitude spain had taken here ; on the contrary , we have reason to believe that she was disposed to effect a settlement on a plan analogous to what our ministers had proposed , and so comprehensive as to remove as far as possible the grounds of future collision and controversy on the eastern as well as western side of the mississippi .
the present crisis in europe is favorable for pressing such a settlement , and not a moment should be lost in availing ourselves of it .
should it pass unimproved , our situation would become much more difficult .
formal war is not necessary -- it is not probable it will follow ; but the protection of our citizens , the spirit and honor of our country require that force should be interposed to a certain degree it will probably contribute to advance the object of peace .
but the course to be pursued will require the command of means which it belongs to congress exclusively to yield or to deny .
to them i communicate every fact material for their information and the documents necessary to enable them to judge for themselves .
to their wisdom , then , i look for the course i am to pursue , and will pursue with sincere zeal that which they shall approve .
th : jefferson .

to the senate and house of representatives of the united states : circumstances , fellow - citizens , which seriously threatened the peace of our country have made it a duty to convene you at an earlier period than usual .
the love of peace so much cherished in the bosoms of our citizens , which has so long guided the proceedings of their public councils and induced forbearance under so many wrongs , may not insure our continuance in the quiet pursuits of industry .
the many injuries and depredations committed on our commerce and navigation upon the high seas for years past , the successive innovations on those principles of public law which have been established by the reason and usage of nations and peace , and all the circumstances which induced the extraordinary mission to london are already known to you .
the instructions given to our ministers were framed in the sincerest spirit of amity and moderation .
they accordingly proceeded , in conformity therewith , to propose arrangements which might embrace and settle all the points in difference between us to a mutual understanding on our neutral and national rights provide for a commercial intercourse on conditions of some equality .
after long and fruitless endeavors to effect the purposes of their mission and to obtain arrangements within the limits of their instructions , they concluded to sign such as could be obtained and to send them for consideration , candidly declaring to the other negotiations at the same time that they were acting against their instructions , and that their government , therefore , could not be pledged for ratification .
some of the articles proposed might have been admitted on a principle of compromise , but others were too highly disadvantageous , and no sufficient provision was made against the principle source of the irritations and collisions which were constantly endangering the peace of the two nations .
the question , therefore , whether a treaty should be accepted in that form could have admitted but of one decision , even had no declarations of the other party impaired our confidence in it .
still anxious not to close the door against friendly adjustment , new modifications were framed and further concessions authorized than could before have been supposed necessary ; and our ministers were instructed to resume their negotiations on these grounds .
on this new reference to amicable discussion we were reposing in confidence , when on the 22d day of june last by a formal order from british admiral the frigate cheapeake , leaving her port for a distant service , was attacked by one of those vessels which had been lying in our harbors under the indulgences of hospitality , was disabled from proceeding , had several of her crew killed and four taken away .
on this outrage no commentaries are necessary .
its character has been pronounced by the indignant voice of our citizens with an emphasis and unanimity never exceeded .
i immediately , by proclamation , interdicted our harbors and waters to all british armed vessels , forbade intercourse with them , and uncertain how far hostilities were intended , and the town of norfolk , indeed being threatened with immediate attack , a sufficient force was ordered for the protection of that place , and such other preparations commenced and pursued as the prospect rendered proper .
an armed vessel of the united states was dispatched with instructions to our ministers at london to call on that government for the satisfaction and security required by the outrage .
a very short interval ought now to bring the answer , which shall be communicated to you as soon as received ; then also , or as soon after as the public interests shall be found to admit ; the unratified treaty and proceedings relative to it shall be made known to you .
the aggression thus begun has been continued on the part of the british commanders by remaining within our waters in defiance of the authority of the country , by habitual violations of its jurisdiction , and at length by putting to death one of the persons whom they had forcibly taken from on board the chesapeake .
these aggravations necessarily lead to the policy either of never admitting an armed vessel into our harbors or of maintaining in every harbor such an armed force as may constrain obedience to the laws and protect the lives and property of our citizens against their armed guests ; but the expense of such a standing force and its inconsistence with our principles dispense with those courtesies which would necessarily call for it , and leave us equally free to exclude the navy , as we are the army , of a foreign power from entering our limits .
to former violations of maritime rights another is now added of very extensive effect .
the government of that nation has issued an order interdicting all trade by neutrals between ports not in amity with them ; and being now at war with nearly every nation on the atlantic and mediterranean seas , our vessels are required to sacrifice their cargos at the first port they touch or to return home without the benefit of going to any other market .
under this new law of the ocean our trade on the mediterranean has been swept away by seizures and condemnations , and that in other seas is threatened with the same fate .
our differences with spain remain still unsettled , no measure having been taken on her part since my last communications to congress to bring them to a close .
but under a state of things which may favor reconsideration they have been recently pressed , and an expectation is entertained that they may now soon be brought to an issue of some sort .
with their subjects on our borders no new collisions have taken place nor seem immediately to be apprehended .
to our former grounds of complaint has been added a very serious one , as you will see by the decree a copy of which is now communicated .
whether this decree , which professed to be conformable to that of the french government of november 21 , 1806 , heretofore communicated to congress , will also be conformed to that in its construction and application in relation to the united states had not been ascertained at the date of our last communications .
these , however , gave reason to expect such a conformity .
with the other nations of europe our harmony has ben uninterrupted , and commerce and friendly intercourse have been maintained on their usual footing .
our peace with the several states on the coast of barbary appears as firm as at any former period and as likely to continue as that of any other nation .
among our indian neighbors in the northwestern quarter some fermentation was observed soon after the late occurences , threatening the continuance of our peace .
messages were said to be interchanged and tokens to be passing , which usually denote a state of restlessness among them , and the character of the agitators pointed to the sources of excitement .
measures were immediately taken for providing against that danger ; instructions were given to require explanations , and , with assurances of our continued friendship , to admonish the tribes to remain quiet at home , taking no part in quarrels not belonging o them .
as far as we are yet informed , the tribes in our vicinity , who are most advanced in the pursuits of industry , are sincerely disposed to adhere to their friendship with us and to their peace with all others , while those more remote do not present appearances sufficiently quiet to justify the intermission of military precaution on our part .
the great tribes on our southwestern quarter , much advanced beyond the others in agriculture and household arts , appear tranquil and identifying their views with ours in proportion to their advancement .
with the whole of these people , in every quarter , i shall continue to inculcate peace and friendship with all their neighbors and perseverance in those occupations and pursuits which will best promote their own well - being .
the appropriations of the last session for the defense of our seaport towns and harbors were made under expectation that a continuance of peace would permit us to proceed in that work according to our convenience .
it has been thought better to apply the sums then given toward the defense of new york , charleston , and new orleans chiefly as most open and most likely first to need protection , and to leave places less immediately in danger to the provisions of the present session .
the gunboats , too already provided have on a like principle been chiefly assigned to new york , new orleans , and the chesapeake .
whether our movable force on th e water , so material in aid of the defensive works on the land , should be augmented in this or any other form is left to the wisdom of the legislature .
for the purpose of manning these vessels in sudden attacks on our harbors it is a matter for consideration whether the seamen of the united states may not justly be formed into a special militia , to be called on for tours of duty in defense of the harbors where they shall happen to be , the ordinary militia of the place furnishing that portion which may consist of landsmen .
the moment our peace was threatened i deemed it indispensable to secure a greater provision of those articles of military stores with which our magazines were not sufficiently furnished .
to have awaited a previous and special sanction by law would have lost occasions which might not be retrieved .
i did not hesitate , therefore to authorize engagements for such supplements to our existing stock would render it adequate to the emergencies threatening us , and i trust that the legislature , feeling the same anxiety for the safety of our country , so materially advanced by this precaution , will approve , when done , what they would have seen so important to be done if then assembled .
expenses , also unprovided for , arose out of the necessity of calling all our gunboats into actual service for the defense of our harbors ; of all which accounts will be laid before you .
when a regular army is to be raised , and to what extent , must depend on the information so shortly expected .
in the meantime i have called on the states for quotas of militia , to be in readiness for present defense , and have , moreover , encouraged the acceptance of volunteers ; and i am happy to inform you that these have offered themselves with great alacrity in every part of the union .
they are ordered to be organized and ready at a moment 's warning to proceed on any service to which they may be called , and every preparation within the executive powers has been made to insure us the benefit of earl exertions .
i informed congress at their last session of the enterprises against the public peace which were believed to be in preparation by aaron burr and his associates , of the measures taken to defeat them and to bring the offenders to justice .
their enterprises were happily defeated by the patriotic exertions of the militias whenever called into action , by the fidelity of the army , and energy of the commander in chief in promptly arranging the difficulties presenting themselves on the sabine , repairing to meet those arising on the mississippi , and dissipating before their explosion plots engendering there .
i shall think it my duty to lay before you the proceedings and the evidence publicly exhibited on the arraignment of the principle offenders before the circuit court of virginia .
you will be enabled to judge whether the defect was in the testimony , in the law , or in the administration of the law ; and whenever it shall be found , the legislation alone can apply or originate the remedy .
the framers of our constitution certainly supposed they had guarded as well their government against destruction by treason as their citizens against oppression under pretense of it , and if these ends are not attained it is of importance to inquire by what means more effectual they may be secured .
the accounts of the receipts of revenue during the year ending on the 30th day of september last being not yet made up , a correct statement will be hereafter transmitted from the treasury .
in the meantime , it is ascertained that the receipts have amounted to near $ 16,000,000which , with the five millions and a half in the treasury at the beginning of the year , have enabled us , after meeting the current demands and interest incurred , to pay more than four millions of the principle of our funded debt .
these payments , with those of the preceding five and a half years , have extinguished of the funded debt $ 25,500,000 , being the whole which could be paid or purchased within the limits of the law and of our contracts , and have left us in the treasury $ 8,500,000 .
a portion of this sum may be considered as a commencement of accumulation of the surpluses of revenue which after paying the installments of debt as they shall become payable , will remain without any specific object .
it may partly , indeed , be applied toward completing the defense of the exposed points of our country , on such a scale as shall be adapted to our principles and circumstances .
this object is doubtless among the first entitled to attention in such a state of our finances , and it is one which , whether we have peace or war , will provide security where it is due .
whether what shall remain of this , with the future surpluses , may be usefully applied to purposes already authorized or more usefully to others requiring new authorities , or how otherwise they shall be disposed of , are questions calling for the notice of congress , unless , indeed , they shall be superceded by a change in our public relations now awaiting the determination of others .
whatever be that determination , it is a great consolation that it will become known at a moment when the supreme council of the nation is assembled at its post , and ready to give the aids of its wisdom and authority to whatever course the good of our country shall then call us to pursue .
matters of minor importance will be the subjects of future communications , and nothing shall be wanting on my part which may give information or dispatch to the proceedings of the legislature in the excercise of their high duties , and at a moment so interesting to the public welfare .

to the senate and house of representatives of the united states : in calling you together , fellow citizens , at an earlier day than was contemplated by the act of the last session of congress , i have not been insensible to the personal inconveniences necessarily resulting from an unexpected change in your arrangements .
but matters of great public concernment have rendered this call necessary , and the interest you feel in these will supersede in your minds all private considerations .
congress witnessed , at their last session , the extraordinary agitation produced in the public mind by the suspension of our right of deposit at the port of new orleans , no assignment of another place having been made according to treaty .
they were sensible that the continuance of that privation would be more injurious to our nation than any consequences which could flow from any mode of redress , but reposing just confidence in the good faith of the government whose officer had committed the wrong , friendly and reasonable representations were resorted to , and the right of deposit was restored .
previous , however , to this period , we had not been unaware of the danger to which our peace would be perpetually exposed while so important a key to the commerce of the western country remained under foreign power .
difficulties , too , were presenting themselves as to the navigation of other streams , which , arising within our territories , pass through those adjacent .
propositions had , therefore , been authorized for obtaining , on fair conditions , the sovereignty of new orleans , and of other possessions in that quarter interesting to our quiet , to such extent as was deemed practicable ; and the provisional appropriation of two millions of dollars , to be applied and accounted for by the president of the united states , intended as part of the price , was considered as conveying the sanction of congress to the acquisition proposed .
the enlightened government of france saw , with just discernment , the importance to both nations of such liberal arrangements as might best and permanently promote the peace , friendship , and interests of both ; and the property and sovereignty of all louisiana , which had been restored to them , have on certain conditions been transferred to the united states by instruments bearing date the 30th of april last .
when these shall have received the constitutional sanction of the senate , they will without delay be communicated to the representatives also , for the exercise of their functions , as to those conditions which are within the powers vested by the constitution in congress .
while the property and sovereignty of the mississippi and its waters secure an independent outlet for the produce of the western states , and an uncontrolled navigation through their whole course , free from collision with other powers and the dangers to our peace from that source , the fertility of the country , its climate and extent , promise in due season important aids to our treasury , an ample provision for our posterity , and a wide - spread field for the blessings of freedom and equal laws .
with the wisdom of congress it will rest to take those ulterior measures which may be necessary for the immediate occupation and temporary government of the country ; for its incorporation into our union ; for rendering the change of government a blessing to our newly - adopted brethren ; for securing to them the rights of conscience and of property : for confirming to the indian inhabitants their occupancy and self - government , establishing friendly and commercial relations with them , and for ascertaining the geography of the country acquired .
such materials for your information , relative to its affairs in general , as the short space of time has permitted me to collect , will be laid before you when the subject shall be in a state for your consideration .
another important acquisition of territory has also been made since the last session of congress .
the friendly tribe of kaskaskia indians with which we have never had a difference , reduced by the wars and wants of savage life to a few individuals unable to defend themselves against the neighboring tribes , has transferred its country to the united states , reserving only for its members what is sufficient to maintain them in an agricultural way .
the considerations stipulated are , that we shall extend to them our patronage and protection , and give them certain annual aids in money , in implements of agriculture , and other articles of their choice .
this country , among the most fertile within our limits , extending along the mississippi from the mouth of the illinois to and up the ohio , though not so necessary as a barrier since the acquisition of the other bank , may yet be well worthy of being laid open to immediate settlement , as its inhabitants may descend with rapidity in support of the lower country should future circumstances expose that to foreign enterprise .
as the stipulations in this treaty also involve matters within the competence of both houses only , it will be laid before congress as soon as the senate shall have advised its ratification .
with many other indian tribes , improvements in agriculture and household manufacture are advancing , and with all our peace and friendship are established on grounds much firmer than heretofore .
the measure adopted of establishing trading houses among them , and of furnishing them necessaries in exchange for their commodities , at such moderated prices as leave no gain , but cover us from loss , has the most conciliatory and useful effect upon them , and is that which will best secure their peace and good will .
the small vessels authorized by congress with a view to the mediterranean service , have been sent into that sea , and will be able more effectually to confine the tripoline cruisers within their harbors , and supersede the necessity of convoy to our commerce in that quarter .
they will sensibly lessen the expenses of that service the ensuing year .
a further knowledge of the ground in the north - eastern and north - western angles of the united states has evinced that the boundaries established by the treaty of paris , between the british territories and ours in those parts , were too imperfectly described to be susceptible of execution .
it has therefore been thought worthy of attention , for preserving and cherishing the harmony and useful intercourse subsisting between the two nations , to remove by timely arrangements what unfavorable incidents might otherwise render a ground of future misunderstanding .
a convention has therefore been entered into , which provides for a practicable demarkation of those limits to the satisfaction of both parties .
an account of the receipts and expenditures of the year ending 30th september last , with the estimates for the service of the ensuing year , will be laid before you by the secretary of the treasury so soon as the receipts of the last quarter shall be returned from the more distant states .
it is already ascertained that the amount paid into the treasury for that year has been between eleven and twelve millions of dollars , and that the revenue accrued during the same term exceeds the sum counted on as sufficient for our current expenses , and to extinguish the public debt within the period heretofore proposed .
the amount of debt paid for the same year is about three millions one hundred thousand dollars , exclusive of interest , and making , with the payment of the preceding year , a discharge of more than eight millions and a half of dollars of the principal of that debt , besides the accruing interest ; and there remain in the treasury nearly six millions of dollars .
of these , eight hundred and eighty thousand have been reserved for payment of the first instalment due under the british convention of january 8th , 1802 , and two millions are what have been before mentioned as placed by congress under the power and accountability of the president , toward the price of new orleans and other territories acquired , which , remaining untouched , are still applicable to that object , and go in diminution of the sum to be funded for it .
should the acquisition of louisiana be constitutionally confirmed and carried into effect , a sum of nearly thirteen millions of dollars will then be added to our public debt , most of which is payable after fifteen years ; before which term the present existing debts will all be discharged by the established operation of the sinking fund .
when we contemplate the ordinary annual augmentation of imposts from increasing population and wealth , the augmentation of the same revenue by its extension to the new acquisition , and the economies which may still be introduced into our public expenditures , i can not but hope that congress in reviewing their resources will find means to meet the intermediate interests of this additional debt without recurring to new taxes , and applying to this object only the ordinary progression of our revenue .
its extraordinary increase in times of foreign war will be the proper and sufficient fund for any measures of safety or precaution which that state of things may render necessary in our neutral position .
remittances for the instalments of our foreign debt having been found impracticable without loss , it has not been thought expedient to use the power given by a former act of congress of continuing them by reloans , and of redeeming instead thereof equal sums of domestic debt , although no difficulty was found in obtaining that accommodation .
the sum of fifty thousand dollars appropriated by congress for providing gun - boats , remains unexpended .
the favorable and peaceful turn of affairs on the mississippi rendered an immediate execution of that law unnecessary , and time was desirable in order that the institution of that branch of our force might begin on models the most approved by experience .
the same issue of events dispensed with a resort to the appropriation of a million and a half of dollars contemplated for purposes which were effected by happier means .
we have seen with sincere concern the flames of war lighted up again in europe , and nations with which we have the most friendly and useful relations engaged in mutual destruction .
while we regret the miseries in which we see others involved let us bow with gratitude to that kind providence which , inspiring with wisdom and moderation our late legislative councils while placed under the urgency of the greatest wrongs , guarded us from hastily entering into the sanguinary contest , and left us only to look on and to pity its ravages .
these will be heaviest on those immediately engaged .
yet the nations pursuing peace will not be exempt from all evil .
in the course of this conflict , let it be our endeavor , as it is our interest and desire , to cultivate the friendship of the belligerent nations by every act of justice and of incessant kindness ; to receive their armed vessels with hospitality from the distresses of the sea , but to administer the means of annoyance to none ; to establish in our harbors such a police as may maintain law and order ; to restrain our citizens from embarking individually in a war in which their country takes no part ; to punish severely those persons , citizen or alien , who shall usurp the cover of our flag for vessels not entitled to it , infecting thereby with suspicion those of real americans , and committing us into controversies for the redress of wrongs not our own ; to exact from every nation the observance , toward our vessels and citizens , of those principles and practices which all civilized people acknowledge ; to merit the character of a just nation , and maintain that of an independent one , preferring every consequence to insult and habitual wrong .
congress will consider whether the existing laws enable us efficaciously to maintain this course with our citizens in all places , and with others while within the limits of our jurisdiction , and will give them the new modifications necessary for these objects .
some contraventions of right have already taken place , both within our jurisdictional limits and on the high seas .
the friendly disposition of the governments from whose agents they have proceeded , as well as their wisdom and regard for justice , leave us in reasonable expectation that they will be rectified and prevented in future ; and that no act will be countenanced by them which threatens to disturb our friendly intercourse .
separated by a wide ocean from the nations of europe , and from the political interests which entangle them together , with productions and wants which render our commerce and friendship useful to them and theirs to us , it can not be the interest of any to assail us , nor ours to disturb them .
we should be most unwise , indeed , were we to cast away the singular blessings of the position in which nature has placed us , the opportunity she has endowed us with of pursuing , at a distance from foreign contentions , the paths of industry , peace , and happiness ; of cultivating general friendship , and of bringing collisions of interest to the umpirage of reason rather than of force .
how desirable then must it be , in a government like ours , to see its citizens adopt individually the views , the interests , and the conduct which their country should pursue , divesting themselves of those passions and partialities which tend to lessen useful friendships , and to embarrass and embroil us in the calamitous scenes of europe .
confident , fellow citizens , that you will duly estimate the importance of neutral dispositions toward the observance of neutral conduct , that you will be sensible how much it is our duty to look on the bloody arena spread before us with commiseration indeed , but with no other wish than to see it closed , i am persuaded you will cordially cherish these dispositions in all discussions among yourselves , and in all communications with your constituents ; and i anticipate with satisfaction the measures of wisdom which the great interests now committed to _ you _ will give you an opportunity of providing , and _ myself _ that of approving and carrying into execution with the fidelity i owe to my country .

my friends and children , chiefly of the cherokee nation , having now finished our business an to mutual satisfaction , i can not take leave of you without expressing the satisfaction i have received from your visit .
i see with my own eyes that the endeavors we have been making to encourage and lead you in the way of improving your situation have not been unsuccessful ; it has been like grain sown in good ground , producing abundantly .
you are becoming farmers , learning the use of the plough and the hoe , enclosing your grounds and employing that labor in their cultivation which you formerly employed in hunting and in war ; and i see handsome specimens of cotton cloth raised , spun and wove by yourselves .
you are also raising cattle and hogs for your food , and horses to assist your labors .
go on , my children , in the same way and be assured the further you advance in it the happier and more respectable you will be .
our brethren , whom you have happened to meet here from the west and northwest , have enabled you to compare your situation now with what it was formerly .
they also make the comparison , and they see how far you are ahead of them , and seeing what you are they are encouraged to do as you have done .
you will find your next want to be mills to grind your corn , which by relieving your women from the loss of time in beating it into meal , will enable them to spin and weave more .
when a man has enclosed and improved his farm , builds a good house on it and raised plentiful stocks of animals , he will wish when he dies that these things shall go to his wife and children , whom he loves more than he does his other relations , and for whom he will work with pleasure during his life .
you will , therefore , find it necessary to establish laws for this .
when a man has property , earned by his own labor , he will not like to see another come and take it from him because he happens to be stronger , or else to defend it by spilling blood .
you will find it necessary then to appoint good men , as judges , to decide contests between man and man , according to reason and to the rules you shall establish .
if you wish to be aided by our counsel and experience in these things we shall always be ready to assist you with our advice .
my children , it is unnecessary for me to advise you against spending all your time and labor in warring with and destroying your fellow - men , and wasting your own members .
you already see the folly and iniquity of it .
your young men , however , are not yet sufficiently sensible of it .
some of them cross the mississippi to go and destroy people who have never done them an injury .
my children , this is wrong and must not be ; if we permit them to cross the mississippi to war with the indians on the other side of that river , we must let those indians cross the river to take revenge on you .
i say again , this must not be .
the mississippi now belongs to us .
it must not be a river of blood .
it is now the water - path along which all our people of natchez , st. louis , indiana , ohio , tennessee , kentucky and the western parts of pennsylvania and virginia are constantly passing with their property , to and from new orleans .
young men going to war are not easily restrained .
finding our people on the river they will rob them , perhaps kill them .
this would bring on a war between us and you .
it is better to stop this in time by forbidding your young men to go across the river to make war .
if they go to visit or to live with the cherokees on the other side of the river we shall not object to that .
that country is ours .
we will permit them to live in it .
my children , this is what i wished to say to you .
to go on in learning to cultivate the earth and to avoid war .
if any of your neighbors injure you , our beloved men whom we place with you will endeavor to obtain justice for you and we will support them in it .
if any of your bad people injure your neighbors , be ready to acknowledge it and to do them justice .
it is more honorable to repair a wrong than to persist in it .
tell all your chiefs , your men , women and children , that i take them by the hand and hold it fast .
that i am their father , wish their happiness and well - being , and am always ready to promote their good .
my children , i thank you for your visit and pray to the great spirit who made us all and planted us all in this land to live together like brothers that he will conduct you safely to your homes , and grant you to find your families and your friends in good health .

to brother handsome lake : i have received the message in writing which you sent me through captain irvine , our confidential agent , placed near you for the purpose of communicating and transacting between us , whatever may be useful for both nations .
i am happy to learn you have been so far favored by the divine spirit as to be made sensible of those things which are for your good and that of your people , and of those which are hurtful to you ; and particularly that you and they see the ruinous effects which the abuse of spirituous liquors have produced upon them .
it has weakened their bodies , enervated their minds , exposed them to hunger , cold , nakedness , and poverty , kept them in perpetual broils , and reduced their population .
i do not wonder then , brother , at your censures , not only on your own people , who have voluntarily gone into these fatal habits , but on all the nations of white people who have supplied their calls for this article .
but these nations have done to you only what they do among themselves .
they have sold what individuals wish to buy , leaving to every one to be the guardian of his own health and happiness .
spirituous liquors are not in themselves bad , they are often found to be an excellent medicine for the sick ; it is the improper and intemperate use of them , by those in health , which makes them injurious .
but as you find that your people can not refrain from an ill use of them , i greatly applaud your resolution not to use them at all .
we have too affectionate a concern for your happiness to place the paltry gain on the sale of these articles in competition with the injury they do you .
and as it is the desire of your nation , that no spirits should be sent among them , i am authorized by the great council of the united states to prohibit them .
i will sincerely cooperate with your wise men in any proper measures for this purpose , which shall be agreeable to them .
you remind me , brother , of what i said to you , when you visited me the last winter , that the lands you then held would remain yours , and shall never go from you but when you should be disposed to sell .
this i now repeat , and will ever abide by .
we , indeed , are always ready to buy land ; but we will never ask but when you wish to sell ; and our laws , in order to protect you against imposition , have forbidden individuals to purchase lands from you ; and have rendered it necessary , when you desire to sell , even to a state , that an agent from the united states should attend the sale , see that your consent is freely given , a satisfactory price paid , and report to us what has been done , for our approbation .
this was done in the late case of which you complain .
the deputies of your nation came forward , in all the forms which we have been used to consider as evidence of the will of your nation .
they proposed to sell to the state of new york certain parcels of land , of small extent , and detached from the body of your other lands ; the state of new york was desirous to buy .
i sent an agent , in whom we could trust , to see that your consent was free , and the sale fair .
all was reported to be free and fair .
the lands were your property .
the right to sell is one of the rights of property .
to forbid you the exercise of that right would be a wrong to your nation .
nor do i think , brother , that the sale of lands is , under all circumstances , injurious to your people .
while they depended on hunting , the more extensive the forest around them , the more game they would yield .
but going into a state of agriculture , it may be as advantageous to a society , as it is to an individual , who has more land than he can improve , to sell a part , and lay out the money in stocks and implements of agriculture , for the better improvement of the residue .
a little land well stocked and improved , will yield more than a great deal without stock or improvement .
i hope , therefore , that on further reflection , you will see this transaction in a more favorable light , both as it concerns the interest of your nation , and the exercise of that superintending care which i am sincerely anxious to employ for their subsistence and happiness .
go on then , brother , in the great reformation you have undertaken .
persuade our red brethren then to be sober , and to cultivate their lands ; and their women to spin and weave for their families .
you will soon see your women and children well fed and clothed , your men living happily in peace and plenty , and your numbers increasing from year to year .
it will be a great glory to you to have been the instrument of so happy a change , and your children 's children , from generation to generation , will repeat your name with love and gratitude forever .
in all your enterprises for the good of your people , you may count with confidence on the aid and protection of the united states , and on the sincerity and zeal with which i am myself animated in the furthering of this humane work .
you are our brethren of the same land ; we wish your prosperity as brethren should do .
farewell .

to the senate and house of representatives of the united states in congress assembled : it would have given me , fellow citizens , great satisfaction to announce in the moment of your meeting that the difficulties in our foreign relations , existing at the time of your last separation , had been amicably and justly terminated .
i lost no time in taking those measures which were most likely to bring them to such a termination , by special missions charged with such powers and instructions as in the event of failure could leave no imputation on either our moderation or forbearance .
the delays which have since taken place in our negotiations with the british government appears to have proceeded from causes which do not forbid the expectation that during the course of the session i may be enabled to lay before you their final issue .
what will be that of the negotiations for settling our differences with spain , nothing which had taken place at the date of the last despatches enables us to pronounce .
on the western side of the mississippi she advanced in considerable force , and took post at the settlement of bayou pierre , on the red river .
this village was originally settled by france , was held by her as long as she held louisiana , and was delivered to spain only as a part of louisiana .
being small , insulated , and distant , it was not observed , at the moment of redelivery to france and the united states , that she continued a guard of half a dozen men which had been stationed there .
a proposition , however , having been lately made by our commander - in - chief , to assume the sabine river as a temporary line of separation between the troops of the two nations until the issue of our negotiations shall be known ; this has been referred by the spanish commandant to his superior , and in the meantime , he has withdrawn his force to the western side of the sabine river .
the correspondence on this subject , now communicated , will exhibit more particularly the present state of things in that quarter .
the nature of that country requires indispensably that an unusual proportion of the force employed there should be cavalry or mounted infantry .
in order , therefore , that the commanding officer might be enabled to act with effect , i had authorized him to call on the governors of orleans and mississippi for a corps of five hundred volunteer cavalry .
the temporary arrangement he has proposed may perhaps render this unnecessary .
but i inform you with great pleasure of the promptitude with which the inhabitants of those territories have tendered their services in defence of their country .
it has done honor to themselves , entitled them to the confidence of their fellow - citizens in every part of the union , and must strengthen the general determination to protect them efficaciously under all circumstances which may occur .
having received information that in another part of the united states a great number of private individuals were combining together , arming and organizing themselves contrary to law , to carry on military expeditions against the territories of spain , i thought it necessary , by proclamations as well as by special orders , to take measures for preventing and suppressing this enterprise , for seizing the vessels , arms , and other means provided for it , and for arresting and bringing to justice its authors and abettors .
it was due to that good faith which ought ever to be the rule of action in public as well as in private transactions ; it was due to good order and regular government , that while the public force was acting strictly on the defensive and merely to protect our citizens from aggression , the criminal attempts of private individuals to decide for their country the question of peace or war , by commencing active and unauthorized hostilities , should be promptly and efficaciously suppressed .
whether it will be necessary to enlarge our regular force will depend on the result of our negotiation with spain ; but as it is uncertain when that result will be known , the provisional measures requisite for that , and to meet any pressure intervening in that quarter , will be a subject for your early consideration .
the possession of both banks of the mississippi reducing to a single point the defence of that river , its waters , and the country adjacent , it becomes highly necessary to provide for that point a more adequate security .
some position above its mouth , commanding the passage of the river , should be rendered sufficiently strong to cover the armed vessels which may be stationed there for defence , and in conjunction with them to present an insuperable obstacle to any force attempting to pass .
the approaches to the city of new orleans , from the eastern quarter also , will require to be examined , and more effectually guarded .
for the internal support of the country , the encouragement of a strong settlement on the western side of the mississippi , within reach of new orleans , will be worthy the consideration of the legislature .
the gun - boats authorized by an act of the last session are so advanced that they will be ready for service in the ensuing spring .
circumstances permitted us to allow the time necessary for their more solid construction .
as a much larger number will still be wanting to place our seaport towns and waters in that state of defence to which we are competent and they entitled , a similar appropriation for a further provision for them is recommended for the ensuing year .
a further appropriation will also be necessary for repairing fortifications already established , and the erection of such works as may have real effect in obstructing the approach of an enemy to our seaport towns , or their remaining before them .
in a country whose constitution is derived from the will of the people , directly expressed by their free suffrages ; where the principal executive functionaries , and those of the legislature , are renewed by them at short periods ; where under the characters of jurors , they exercise in person the greatest portion of the judiciary powers ; where the laws are consequently so formed and administered as to bear with equal weight and favor on all , restraining no man in the pursuits of honest industry , and securing to every one the property which that acquires , it would not be supposed that any safeguards could be needed against insurrection or enterprise on the public peace or authority .
the laws , however , aware that these should not be trusted to moral restraints only , have wisely provided punishments for these crimes when committed .
but would it not be salutary to give also the means of preventing their commission ?
where an enterprise is meditated by private individuals against a foreign nation in amity with the united states , powers of prevention to a certain extent are given by the laws ; would they not be as reasonable and useful were the enterprise preparing against the united states ?
while adverting to this branch of the law , it is proper to observe , that in enterprises meditated against foreign nations , the ordinary process of binding to the observance of the peace and good behavior , could it be extended to acts to be done out of the jurisdiction of the united states , would be effectual in some cases where the offender is able to keep out of sight every indication of his purpose which could draw on him the exercise of the powers now given by law .
the states on the coast of barbary seem generally disposed at present to respect our peace and friendship ; with tunis alone some uncertainty remains .
persuaded that it is our interest to maintain our peace with them on equal terms , or not at all , i propose to send in due time a reinforcement into the mediterranean , unless previous information shall show it to be unnecessary .
we continue to receive proofs of the growing attachment of our indian neighbors , and of their disposition to place all their interests under the patronage of the united states .
these dispositions are inspired by their confidence in our justice , and in the sincere concern we feel for their welfare ; and as long as we discharge these high and honorable functions with the integrity and good faith which alone can entitle us to their continuance , we may expect to reap the just reward in their peace and friendship .
the expedition of messrs. lewis and clarke , for exploring the river missouri , and the best communication from that to the pacific ocean , has had all the success which could have been expected .
they have traced the missouri nearly to its source , descended the columbia to the pacific ocean , ascertained with accuracy the geography of that interesting communication across our continent , learned the character of the country , of its commerce , and inhabitants ; and it is but justice to say that messrs. lewis and clarke , and their brave companions , have by this arduous service deserved well of their country .
the attempt to explore the red river , under the direction of mr. freeman , though conducted with a zeal and prudence meriting entire approbation , has not been equally successful .
after proceeding up it about six hundred miles , nearly as far as the french settlements had extended while the country was in their possession , our geographers were obliged to return without completing their work .
very useful additions have also been made to our knowledge of the mississippi by lieutenant pike , who has ascended to its source , and whose journal and map , giving the details of the journey , will shortly be ready for communication to both houses of congress .
those of messrs. lewis and clarke , and freeman , will require further time to be digested and prepared .
these important surveys , in addition to those before possessed , furnish materials for commencing an accurate map of the mississippi , and its western waters .
some principal rivers , however , remain still to be explored , toward which the authorization of congress , by moderate appropriations , will be requisite .
i congratulate you , fellow - citizens , on the approach of the period at which you may interpose your authority constitutionally , to withdraw the citizens of the united states from all further participation in those violations of human rights which have been so long continued on the unoffending inhabitants of africa , and which the morality , the reputation , and the best interests of our country , have long been eager to proscribe .
although no law you may pass can take prohibitory effect till the first day of the year one thousand eight hundred and eight , yet the intervening period is not too long to prevent , by timely notice , expeditions which can not be completed before that day .
the receipts at the treasury during the year ending on the 30th of september last , have amounted to near fifteen millions of dollars , which have enabled us , after meeting the current demands , to pay two millions seven hundred thousand dollars of the american claims , in part of the price of louisiana ; to pay of the funded debt upward of three millions of principal , and nearly four of interest ; and in addition , to reimburse , in the course of the present month , near two millions of five and a half per cent .
stock .
these payments and reimbursements of the funded debt , with those which have been made in the four years and a half preceding , will , at the close of the present year , have extinguished upwards of twenty - three millions of principal .
the duties composing the mediterranean fund will cease by law at the end of the present season .
considering , however , that they are levied chiefly on luxuries , and that we have an impost on salt , a necessary of life , the free use of which other - wise is so important , i recommend to your consideration the suppression of the duties on salt , and the continuation of the mediterranean fund , instead thereof , for a short time , after which that also will become unnecessary for any purpose now within contemplation .
when both of these branches of revenue shall in this way be relinquished , there will still ere long be an accumulation of moneys in the treasury beyond the instalments of public debt which we are permitted by contract to pay .
they can not , then , without a modification assented to by the public creditors , be applied to the extinguishment of this debt , and the complete liberation of our revenues -- the most desirable of all objects ; nor , if our peace continues , will they be wanting for any other existing purpose .
the question , therefore , now comes forward , -- to what other objects shall these surpluses be appropriated , and the whole surplus of impost , after the entire discharge of the public debt , and during those intervals when the purposes of war shall not call for them ?
shall we suppress the impost and give that advantage to foreign over domestic manufactures ?
on a few articles of more general and necessary use , the suppression in due season will doubtless be right , but the great mass of the articles on which impost is paid is foreign luxuries , purchased by those only who are rich enough to afford themselves the use of them .
their patriotism would certainly prefer its continuance and application to the great purposes of the public education , roads , rivers , canals , and such other objects of public improvement as it may be thought proper to add to the constitutional enumeration of federal powers .
by these operations new channels of communication will be opened between the states ; the lines of separation will disappear , their interests will be identified , and their union cemented by new and indissoluble ties .
education is here placed among the articles of public care , not that it would be proposed to take its ordinary branches out of the hands of private enterprise , which manages so much better all the concerns to which it is equal ; but a public institution can alone supply those sciences which , though rarely called for , are yet necessary to complete the circle , all the parts of which contribute to the improvement of the country , and some of them to its preservation .
the subject is now proposed for the consideration of congress , because , if approved by the time the state legislatures shall have deliberated on this extension of the federal trusts , and the laws shall be passed , and other arrangements made for their execution , the necessary funds will be on hand and without employment .
i suppose an amendment to the constitution , by consent of the states , necessary , because the objects now recommended are not among those enumerated in the constitution , and to which it permits the public moneys to be applied .
the present consideration of a national establishment for education , particularly , is rendered proper by this circumstance also , that if congress , approving the proposition , shall yet think it more eligible to found it on a donation of lands , they have it now in their power to endow it with those which will be among the earliest to produce the necessary income .
this foundation would have the advantage of being independent on war , which may suspend other improvements by requiring for its own purposes the resources destined for them .
this , fellow citizens , is the state of the public interest at the present moment , and according to the information now possessed .
but such is the situation of the nations of europe , and such too the predicament in which we stand with some of them , that we can not rely with certainty on the present aspect of our affairs that may change from moment to moment , during the course of your session or after you shall have separated .
our duty is , therefore , to act upon things as they are , and to make a reasonable provision for whatever they may be .
were armies to be raised whenever a speck of war is visible in our horizon , we never should have been without them .
our resources would have been exhausted on dangers which have never happened , instead of being reserved for what is really to take place .
a steady , perhaps a quickened pace in preparations for the defence of our seaport towns and waters ; an early settlement of the most exposed and vulnerable parts of our country ; a militia so organized that its effective portions can be called to any point in the union , or volunteers instead of them to serve a sufficient time , are means which may always be ready yet never preying on our resources until actually called into use .
they will maintain the public interests while a more permanent force shall be in course of preparation .
but much will depend on the promptitude with which these means can be brought into activity .
if war be forced upon us in spite of our long and vain appeals to the justice of nations , rapid and vigorous movements in its outset will go far toward securing us in its course and issue , and toward throwing its burdens on those who render necessary the resort from reason to force .
the result of our negotiations , or such incidents in their course as may enable us to infer their probable issue ; such further movements also on our western frontiers as may show whether war is to be pressed there while negotiation is protracted elsewhere , shall be communicated to you from time to time as they become known to me , with whatever other information i possess or may receive , which may aid your deliberations on the great national interests committed to your charge .

proceeding , fellow citizens , to that qualification which the constitution requires , before my entrance on the charge again conferred upon me , it is my duty to express the deep sense i entertain of this new proof of confidence from my fellow citizens at large , and the zeal with which it inspires me , so to conduct myself as may best satisfy their just expectations .
on taking this station on a former occasion , i declared the principles on which i believed it my duty to administer the affairs of our commonwealth .
my conscience tells me that i have , on every occasion , acted up to that declaration , according to its obvious import , and to the understanding of every candid mind .
in the transaction of your foreign affairs , we have endeavored to cultivate the friendship of all nations , and especially of those with which we have the most important relations .
we have done them justice on all occasions , favored where favor was lawful , and cherished mutual interests and intercourse on fair and equal terms .
we are firmly convinced , and we act on that conviction , that with nations , as with individuals , our interests soundly calculated , will ever be found inseparable from our moral duties ; and history bears witness to the fact , that a just nation is taken on its word , when recourse is had to armaments and wars to bridle others .
at home , fellow citizens , you best know whether we have done well or ill .
the suppression of unnecessary offices , of useless establishments and expenses , enabled us to discontinue our internal taxes .
these covering our land with officers , and opening our doors to their intrusions , had already begun that process of domiciliary vexation which , once entered , is scarcely to be restrained from reaching successively every article of produce and property .
if among these taxes some minor ones fell which had not been inconvenient , it was because their amount would not have paid the officers who collected them , and because , if they had any merit , the state authorities might adopt them , instead of others less approved .
the remaining revenue on the consumption of foreign articles , is paid cheerfully by those who can afford to add foreign luxuries to domestic comforts , being collected on our seaboards and frontiers only , and incorporated with the transactions of our mercantile citizens , it may be the pleasure and pride of an american to ask , what farmer , what mechanic , what laborer , ever sees a tax - gatherer of the united states ?
these contributions enable us to support the current expenses of the government , to fulfil contracts with foreign nations , to extinguish the native right of soil within our limits , to extend those limits , and to apply such a surplus to our public debts , as places at a short day their final redemption , and that redemption once effected , the revenue thereby liberated may , by a just repartition among the states , and a corresponding amendment of the constitution , be applied , _ in time of peace _ , to rivers , canals , roads , arts , manufactures , education , and other great objects within each state . _
in time of war _ , if injustice , by ourselves or others , must sometimes produce war , increased as the same revenue will be increased by population and consumption , and aided by other resources reserved for that crisis , it may meet within the year all the expenses of the year , without encroaching on the rights of future generations , by burdening them with the debts of the past .
war will then be but a suspension of useful works , and a return to a state of peace , a return to the progress of improvement .
i have said , fellow citizens , that the income reserved had enabled us to extend our limits ; but that extension may possibly pay for itself before we are called on , and in the meantime , may keep down the accruing interest ; in all events , it will repay the advances we have made .
i know that the acquisition of louisiana has been disapproved by some , from a candid apprehension that the enlargement of our territory would endanger its union .
but who can limit the extent to which the federative principle may operate effectively ?
the larger our association , the less will it be shaken by local passions ; and in any view , is it not better that the opposite bank of the mississippi should be settled by our own brethren and children , than by strangers of another family ?
with which shall we be most likely to live in harmony and friendly intercourse ?
in matters of religion , i have considered that its free exercise is placed by the constitution independent of the powers of the general government .
i have therefore undertaken , on no occasion , to prescribe the religious exercises suited to it ; but have left them , as the constitution found them , under the direction and discipline of state or church authorities acknowledged by the several religious societies .
the aboriginal inhabitants of these countries i have regarded with the commiseration their history inspires .
endowed with the faculties and the rights of men , breathing an ardent love of liberty and independence , and occupying a country which left them no desire but to be undisturbed , the stream of overflowing population from other regions directed itself on these shores ; without power to divert , or habits to contend against , they have been overwhelmed by the current , or driven before it ; now reduced within limits too narrow for the hunter 's state , humanity enjoins us to teach them agriculture and the domestic arts ; to encourage them to that industry which alone can enable them to maintain their place in existence , and to prepare them in time for that state of society , which to bodily comforts adds the improvement of the mind and morals .
we have therefore liberally furnished them with the implements of husbandry and household use ; we have placed among them instructors in the arts of first necessity ; and they are covered with the aegis of the law against aggressors from among ourselves .
but the endeavors to enlighten them on the fate which awaits their present course of life , to induce them to exercise their reason , follow its dictates , and change their pursuits with the change of circumstances , have powerful obstacles to encounter ; they are combated by the habits of their bodies , prejudice of their minds , ignorance , pride , and the influence of interested and crafty individuals among them , who feel themselves something in the present order of things , and fear to become nothing in any other .
these persons inculcate a sanctimonious reverence for the customs of their ancestors ; that whatsoever they did , must be done through all time ; that reason is a false guide , and to advance under its counsel , in their physical , moral , or political condition , is perilous innovation ; that their duty is to remain as their creator made them , ignorance being safety , and knowledge full of danger ; in short , my friends , among them is seen the action and counteraction of good sense and bigotry ; they , too , have their anti - philosophers , who find an interest in keeping things in their present state , who dread reformation , and exert all their faculties to maintain the ascendency of habit over the duty of improving our reason , and obeying its mandates .
in giving these outlines , i do not mean , fellow citizens , to arrogate to myself the merit of the measures ; that is due , in the first place , to the reflecting character of our citizens at large , who , by the weight of public opinion , influence and strengthen the public measures ; it is due to the sound discretion with which they select from among themselves those to whom they confide the legislative duties ; it is due to the zeal and wisdom of the characters thus selected , who lay the foundations of public happiness in wholesome laws , the execution of which alone remains for others ; and it is due to the able and faithful auxiliaries , whose patriotism has associated with me in the executive functions .
during this course of administration , and in order to disturb it , the artillery of the press has been levelled against us , charged with whatsoever its licentiousness could devise or dare .
these abuses of an institution so important to freedom and science , are deeply to be regretted , inasmuch as they tend to lessen its usefulness , and to sap its safety ; they might , indeed , have been corrected by the wholesome punishments reserved and provided by the laws of the several states against falsehood and defamation ; but public duties more urgent press on the time of public servants , and the offenders have therefore been left to find their punishment in the public indignation .
nor was it uninteresting to the world , that an experiment should be fairly and fully made , whether freedom of discussion , unaided by power , is not sufficient for the propagation and protection of truth -- whether a government , conducting itself in the true spirit of its constitution , with zeal and purity , and doing no act which it would be unwilling the whole world should witness , can be written down by falsehood and defamation .
the experiment has been tried ; you have witnessed the scene ; our fellow citizens have looked on , cool and collected ; they saw the latent source from which these outrages proceeded ; they gathered around their public functionaries , and when the constitution called them to the decision by suffrage , they pronounced their verdict , honorable to those who had served them , and consolatory to the friend of man , who believes he may be intrusted with his own affairs .
no inference is here intended , that the laws , provided by the state against false and defamatory publications , should not be enforced ; he who has time , renders a service to public morals and public tranquillity , in reforming these abuses by the salutary coercions of the law ; but the experiment is noted , to prove that , since truth and reason have maintained their ground against false opinions in league with false facts , the press , confined to truth , needs no other legal restraint ; the public judgment will correct false reasonings and opinions , on a full hearing of all parties ; and no other definite line can be drawn between the inestimable liberty of the press and its demoralizing licentiousness .
if there be still improprieties which this rule would not restrain , its supplement must be sought in the censorship of public opinion .
contemplating the union of sentiment now manifested so generally , as auguring harmony and happiness to our future course , i offer to our country sincere congratulations .
with those , too , not yet rallied to the same point , the disposition to do so is gaining strength ; facts are piercing through the veil drawn over them ; and our doubting brethren will at length see , that the mass of their fellow citizens , with whom they can not yet resolve to act , as to principles and measures , think as they think , and desire what they desire ; that our wish , as well as theirs , is , that the public efforts may be directed honestly to the public good , that peace be cultivated , civil and religious liberty unassailed , law and order preserved ; equality of rights maintained , and that state of property , equal or unequal , which results to every man from his own industry , or that of his fathers .
when satisfied of these views , it is not in human nature that they should not approve and support them ; in the meantime , let us cherish them with patient affection ; let us do them justice , and more than justice , in all competitions of interest ; and we need not doubt that truth , reason , and their own interests , will at length prevail , will gather them into the fold of their country , and will complete their entire union of opinion , which gives to a nation the blessing of harmony , and the benefit of all its strength .
i shall now enter on the duties to which my fellow citizens have again called me , and shall proceed in the spirit of those principles which they have approved .
i fear not that any motives of interest may lead me astray ; i am sensible of no passion which could seduce me knowingly from the path of justice ; but the weakness of human nature , and the limits of my own understanding , will produce errors of judgment sometimes injurious to your interests .
i shall need , therefore , all the indulgence i have heretofore experienced -- the want of it will certainly not lessen with increasing years .
i shall need , too , the favor of that being in whose hands we are , who led our forefathers , as israel of old , from their native land , and planted them in a country flowing with all the necessaries and comforts of life ; who has covered our infancy with his providence , and our riper years with his wisdom and power ; and to whose goodness i ask you to join with me in supplications , that he will so enlighten the minds of your servants , guide their councils , and prosper their measures , that whatsoever they do , shall result in your good , and shall secure to you the peace , friendship , and approbation of all nations .

to meriwether lewis esq .
capt .
of the 1st regimt .
of infantry of the u. s. of a.:your situation as secretary of the president of the u. s. has made you acquainted with the objects of my confidential message of jan. 18 , 1803 to the legislature ; you have seen the act they passed , which , tho ' expressed in general terms , was meant to sanction those objects , and you are appointed to carry them into execution .
instruments for ascertaining , by celestial observations , the geography of the country through which you will pass , have been already provided .
light articles for barter and presents among the indians , arms for your attendants , say for from 10 .
to 12 .
men , boats , tents , & other travelling apparatus , with ammunition , medecine , surgical instruments and provisions you will have prepared with such aids as the secretary at war can yield in his department ; & from him also you will recieve authority to engage among our troops , by voluntary agreement , the number of attendants above mentioned , over whom you , as their commanding officer , are invested with all the powers the laws give in such a case .
as your movements while within the limits of the u. s. will be better directed by occasional communications , adapted to circumstances as they arise , they will not be noticed here .
what follows will respect your proceedings after your departure from the united states .
your mission has been communicated to the ministers here from france , spain & great britain , and through them to their governments ; & such assurances given them as to its objects , as we trust will satisfy them .
the country [ of louisiana ] having been ceded by spain to france , the passport you have from the minister of france , the representative of the present sovereign of the country , will be a protection with all its subjects ; & that from the minister of england will entitle you to the friendly aid of any traders of that allegiance with whom you may happen to meet .
the object of your mission is to explore the missouri river , & such principal stream of it , as , by it 's course & communication with the waters of the pacific ocean , whether the columbia , oregan , colorado or and other river may offer the most direct & practicable water communication across this continent , for the purposes of commerce .
beginning at the mouth of the missouri , you will take careful observations of latitude & longitude , at all remarkeable points on the river , & especially at the mouths of rivers , at rapids , at islands , & other places & objects distinguished by such natural marks & characters of a durable kind , as that they may with certainty be recognised hereafter .
the courses of the river between these points of observation may be supplied by the compass the log - line & by time , corrected by the observations themselves .
the variations of the compass too , in different places , should be noticed .
the interesting points of the portage between the heads of the missouri , & of the water offering the best communication with the pacific ocean , should also be fixed by observation , & the course of that water to the ocean , in the same manner as that of the missouri .
your observations are to be taken with great pains & accuracy , to be entered distinctly & intelligibly for others as well as yourself , to comprehend all the elements necessary , with the aid of the usual tables , to fix the latitude and longitude of the places at which they were taken , and are to be rendered to the war - office , for the purpose of having the calculations made concurrently by proper persons within the u. s. several copies of these as well as of your other notes should be made at leisure times , & put into the care of the most trustworthy of your attendants , to guard , by multiplying them , against the accidental losses to which they will be exposed .
a further guard would be that one of these copies be on the paper of the birch , as less liable to injury from damp than common paper .
the commerce which may be carried on with the people inhabiting the line you will pursue , renders a knolege of those people important .
you will therefore endeavor to make yourself acquainted , as far as a diligent pursuit of your journey shall admit , with the names of the nations & their numbers;the extent & limits of their possessions ; their relations with other tribes of nations ; their language , traditions , monuments their ordinary occupations in agriculture , fishing , hunting , war , arts , & the implements for these ; their food , clothing , & domestic accommodations ; the diseases prevalent among them , & the remedies they use ; moral & physical circumstances which distinguish them from the tribes we know ; peculiarities in their laws , customs & dispositions ; and articles of commerce they may need or furnish , & to what extent .
and , considering the interest which every nation has in extending & strengthening the authority of reason & justice among the people around them , it will be useful to acquire what knolege you can of the state of morality , religion , & information among them ; as it may better enable those who endeavor to civilize & instruct them , to adapt their measure to the existing notions & practices of those on whom they are to operate .
other objects worthy of notice will be the soil & face of the country , it 's growth & vegetable productions , especially those not of the u. s. the animals of the country generally , & especially those not known in the u. s. the remains or accounts of any which may be deemed rare or extinct ; the mineral productions of every kind ; but more particularly metals , limestone , pit coal , & saltpetre ; salines & mineral waters , noting the temperature of the last , & such circumstances as may indicate their character ; volcanic appearances ; climate , as characterized by the thermometer , by the proportion of rainy , cloudy , & clear days , by lightening , hail , snow , ice , by the access & recess of frost , by the winds prevailing at different seasons , the dates at which particular plants put forth or lose their flower , or leaf , times of appearance of particular birds , reptiles or insects .
altho ' your route will be along the channel of the missouri , yet you will endeavor to inform yourself , by enquiry , of the character & extent of the country watered by it 's branches , & especially on it 's southern side .
the north river or rio bravo which runs into the gulph of mexico , and the north river , or rio colorado which runs into the gulph of california , are understood to be the principal streams heading opposite to the waters of the missouri , and running southwardly .
whether the dividing grounds between the missouri & them are mountains or flatlands , what are their distance from the missouri , the character of the intermediate country , & the people inhabiting it , are worthy of particular enquiry .
the northern waters of the missouri are less to be enquired after , becaue they have been ascertained to a considerable degree , & are still in a course of ascertainment by english traders , and travellers .
but if you can learn any thing certain of the most northern source of the missisipi , & of its position relatively to the lake of the woods , it will be interesting to us .
some account too of the path of the canadian traders from the missisipi , at the mouth of the ouisconsin to where it strikes the missouri , & of the soil and rivers in it 's course , is desireable .
in all your intercourse with the natives , treat them in the most friendly & conciliatory manner which their own conduct will admit ; allay all jealousies as to the object of your journey , satisfy them of its innocence , make them acquainted with the position , extent , character , peaceable & commercial dispositions of the u. s. of our wish to be neighborly , friendly & useful to them , & of our dispositions to a commercial intercourse with them ; confer with them on the points most convenient as mutual emporiums , and the articles of most desireable interchange for them & us .
if a few of their influential chiefs , within practicable distance , wish to visit us , arrange such a visit with them , and furnish them with authority to call on our officers , on their entering the u. s to have them conveyed to this place at the public expense .
if any of them should wish to have some of their young people brought up with us , & taught such arts as may be useful to them , we will receive , instruct & take care of them .
such a mission , whether of influential chiefs or of young people , would give some security to your own party .
carry with you some matter of the kinepox ; inform those of them with whom you may be , of it'[s ] efficacy as a preservative from the small - pox ; & instruct & incourage them in the use of it .
this may be especially done wherever you winter .
as it is impossible for us to foresee in what manner you will be recieved by those people , whether with hospitality or hostility , so is it impossible to prescribe the exact degree of perseverance with which you are to pursue your journey .
we value too much the lives of citizens to offer them to probable destruction .
your numbers will be sufficient to secure you against the unauthorised opposition of individuals or of small parties : but if a superior force , authorised , or not authorised , by a nation , should be arrayed against your further passage , and inflexibly determined to arrest it , you must decline its further pursuit , and return .
in the loss of yourselves , we should lose also the information you will have acquired .
by returning safely with that , you may enable us to renew the essay with better calculated means .
to your own discretion therefore must be left the degree of danger you may risk , and the point at which you should decline , only saying we wish you to err on the side of your safety , and to bring back your party safe even it if be with less information .
as far up the missouri as the white settlements extend , an intercourse will probably be found to exist between them & the spanish post of st. louis opposite cahokia , or ste .
genevieve opposite kaskaskia .
from still further up the river , the traders may furnish a conveyance for letters .
beyond that , you may perhaps be able to engage indian to bring letters for the government to cahokia or kaskaskia , on promising that they shall there receive such special compensation as you shall have stipulated with them .
avail yourself of these means to communicate to us , at seasonable intervals , a copy of your journal , notes & observations , of every kind , putting into cypher whatever might do injury if betrayed .
should you reach the pacific ocean inform yourself of the circumstances which may decide whether the furs of those parts may not be collected as advantageously at the head of the missouri ( convenient as it supposed to the waters of the colorado & oregan or columbia ) as at nootka sound , or any other point of that coast ; and that trade be consequently conducted through the missouri & u. s. more beneficially than by the circumnavigation now practised .
on your arrival on that coast endeavor to learn if there be any port within your reach frequented by the sea - vessels of any nation , & to send two of your trusty people back by sea , in such way as shall appear practicable , with a copy of your notes : and should you be of opinion that the return of your party by the way they went will be eminently dangerous , then ship the whole , & return by sea , by way either of cape horn , or the cape of good hope , as you shall be able .
as you will be without money , clothes or provisions , you must endeavor to use the credit of the u. s. to obtain them , for which purpose open letters of credit shall be furnished you , authorising you to draw upon the executive of the u. s. or any of its officers , in any part of the world , on which draughts can be disposed of , & to apply with our recommendations to the consuls , agents , merchants , or citizens of any nation with which we have intercourse , assuring them , in our name , that any aids they may furnish you , shall be honorably repaid , and on demand .
our consuls thomas hewes at batavia in java , win .
buchanan in the isles of france & bourbon , & john elmslie at the cape of good hope will be able to supply your necessities by draughts on us .
should you find it safe to return by the way you go , after sending two of your party around by sea , or with your whole party , if no conveyance by sea can be found , do so ; making such observations on your return , as may serve to supply , correct or confirm those made on your outward journey .
on re - entering the u. s. and reaching a place of safety , discharge any of your attendants who may desire & deserve it , procuring for them immediate paiment of all arrears of pay & cloathing which may have incurred since their departure , and assure them that they shall be recommended to the liberality of the legislature for the grant of a souldier 's portion of land each , as proposed in my message to congress : & repair yourself with papers to the seat of government .
to provide , on the accident of your death , against anarchy , dispersion , & the consequent danger to your party , and total failure of the enterprize , you are hereby authorised , by any instrument signed & written in your own hand , to name the person among them who shall succeed to the command on your decease , and by like instruments to change the nomination from time to time as further experience of the characters accompanying you shall point out superior fitness : and all the powers and authorities given to yourself are , in the event of your death , transferred to , & vested in the successor so named , with further power to him , and his successors in like manner to name each his successor , who , on the death of his predecessor , shall be invested with all the powers & authorities given to yourself .
given under my hand at the city of washington this 20th day of june 1803 .
th .
jefferson pr .
u. s. of america
during the wars which for some time have unhappily prevailed among the powers of europe the united states of america , firm in their principles of peace , have endeavored , by justice , by a regular discharge of all their national and social duties , and by every friendly office their situation has admitted , to maintain with all the belligerents their accustomed relations of friendship , hospitality , and commercial intercourse .
taking no part in the questions which animate these powers against each other , nor permitting themselves to entertain a wish but for the restoration of general peace , they have observed with good faith the neutrality they assumed , and they believe that no instance of a departure from its duties can be justly imputed to them by any nation .
a free use of their harbors and waters , the means of refitting and of refreshment , of succor to their sick and suffering , have at all times and on equal principles been extended to all , and this , too , amidst a constant recurrence of acts of insubordination to the laws , of violence to the persons , and of trespasses on the property of our citizens committed by officers of one of the belligerent parties received among us .
in truth , these abuses of the laws of hospitality have , with few exceptions , become habitual to the commanders of the british armed vessels hovering on our coasts and frequenting our harbors .
they have been the subject of repeated representations to their government .
assurances have been given that proper orders should restrain them within the limits of the rights and of the respect due to a friendly nation ; but those orders and assurances have been without effect -- no instance of punishment for past wrongs has taken place .
at length a deed transcending all we have hitherto seen or suffered brings the public sensibility to a serious crisis and our forbearance to a necessary pause .
a frigate of the united states , trusting to a state of peace , and leaving her harbor on a distant service , has been surprised and attacked by a british vessel of superior force -- one of a squadron then lying in our waters and covering the transaction -- and has been disabled from service , with the loss of a number of men killed and wounded .
this enormity was not only without provocation or justifiable cause , but was committed with the avowed purpose of taking by force from a ship of war of the united states a part of her crew ; and that no circumstance might be wanting to mark its character , it had been previously ascertained that the seamen demanded were native citizens of the united states .
having effected her purpose , she returned to anchor with her squadron within our jurisdiction .
hospitality under such circumstances ceases to be a duty , and a continuance of it with such uncontrolled abuses would tend only , by multiplying injuries and irritations , to bring on a rupture between the two nations .
this extreme resort is equally opposed to the interests of both , as it is to assurances of the most friendly dispositions on the part of the british government , in the midst of which this outrage has been committed .
in this light the subject can not but present itself to that government and strengthen the motives to an honorable reparation of the wrong which has been done , and to that effectual control of its naval commanders which alone can justify the government of the united states in the exercise of those hospitalities it is now constrained to discontinue .
in consideration of these circumstances and of the right of every nation to regulate its own police , to provide for its peace and for the safety of its citizens , and consequently to refuse the admission of armed vessels into its harbors or waters , either in such numbers or of such descriptions as are inconsistent with these or with the maintenance of the authority of the laws , i have thought proper , in pursuance of the authorities specially given by law , to issue this my proclamation , hereby requiring all armed vessels bearing commissions under the government of great britain now within the harbors or waters of the united states immediately and without any delay to depart from the same , and interdicting the entrance of all the said harbors and waters to the said armed vessels and to all others bearing commissions under the authority of the british government .
and if the said vessels , or any of them , shall fall to depart as aforesaid , or if they or any others so interdicted shall hereafter enter the harbors or waters aforesaid , i do in that case forbid all intercourse with them , or any of them , their officers or crews , and do prohibit all supplies and aid from being furnished to them , or any of them .
and i do declare and make known that if any person from or within the jurisdictional limits of the united states shall afford any aid to any such vessel contrary to the prohibition contained in this proclamation , either in repairing any such vessel or in furnishing her , her officers or crew , with supplies of any kind or in any manner whatsoever ; or if any pilot shall assist in navigating any of the said armed vessels , unless it be for the purpose of carrying them in the first instance beyond the limits and jurisdiction of the united states , or unless it be in the case of a vessel forced by distress or charged with public dispatches , as hereinafter provided for , such person or persons shall on conviction suffer all the pains and penalties by the laws provided for such offenses .
and i do hereby enjoin and require all persons bearing office , civil or military , within or under the authority of the united states , and all others citizens or inhabitants thereof , or being within the same , with vigilance and promptitude to exert their respective authorities and to be aiding and assisting to the carrying this proclamation and every part thereof into full effect .
provided , nevertheless , that if any such vessel shall be forced into the harbors or waters of the united states by distress , by the dangers of the sea , or by the pursuit of an enemy , or shall enter them charged with dispatches or business from their government , or shall be a public packet for the conveyance of letters and dispatches , the commanding officer , immediately reporting his vessel to the collector of the district , stating the object or causes of entering the said harbors or waters , and conforming himself to the regulations in that case prescribed under the authority of the laws , shall be allowed the benefit of such regulations respecting repairs , supplies , stay , intercourse , and departure as shall be permitted under the same authority .
in testimony whereof i have caused the seal of the united states to be affixed to these presents , and signed the same .
given at the city of washington , the 2d day of july , a. d. 1807 , and of the sovereignty and independence of the united states the thirty - first .
th : jefferson .
by the president : james madison , secretary of state .

to the senate and house of representatives of the united states : it would have been a source , fellow citizens , of much gratification , if our last communications from europe had enabled me to inform you that the belligerent nations , whose disregard of neutral rights has been so destructive to our commerce , had become awakened to the duty and true policy of revoking their unrighteous edicts .
that no means might be omitted to produce this salutary effect , i lost no time in availing myself of the act authorizing a suspension , in whole or in part , of the several embargo laws .
our ministers at london and paris were instructed to explain to the respective governments there , our disposition to exercise the authority in such manner as would withdraw the pretext on which the aggressions were originally founded , and open a way for a renewal of that commercial intercourse which it was alleged on all sides had been reluctantly obstructed .
as each of those governments had pledged its readiness to concur in renouncing a measure which reached its adversary through the incontestable rights of neutrals only , and as the measure had been assumed by each as a retaliation for an asserted acquiescence in the aggressions of the other , it was reasonably expected that the occasion would have been seized by both for evincing the sincerity of their profession , and for restoring to the commerce of the united states its legitimate freedom .
the instructions to our ministers with respect to the different belligerents were necessarily modified with reference to their different circumstances , and to the condition annexed by law to the executive power of suspension , requiring a degree of security to our commerce which would not result from a repeal of the decrees of france .
instead of a pledge , therefore , of a suspension of the embargo as to her in case of such a repeal , it was presumed that a sufficient inducement might be found in other considerations , and particularly in the change produced by a compliance with our just demands by one belligerent , and a refusal by the other , in the relations between the other and the united states .
to great britain , whose power on the ocean is so ascendant , it was deemed not inconsistent with that condition to state explicitly , that on her rescinding her orders in relation to the united states their trade would be opened with her , and remain shut to her enemy , in case of his failure to rescind his decrees also .
from france no answer has been received , nor any indication that the requisite change in her decrees is contemplated .
the favorable reception of the proposition to great britain was the less to be doubted , as her orders of council had not only been referred for their vindication to an acquiescence on the part of the united states no longer to be pretended , but as the arrangement proposed , while it resisted the illegal decrees of france , involved , moreover , substantially , the precise advantages professedly aimed at by the british orders .
the arrangement has nevertheless been rejected .
this candid and liberal experiment having thus failed , and no other event having occurred on which a suspension of the embargo by the executive was authorized , it necessarily remains in the extent originally given to it .
we have the satisfaction , however , to reflect , that in return for the privations by the measure , and which our fellow citizens in general have borne with patriotism , it has had the important effects of saving our mariners and our vast mercantile property , as well as of affording time for prosecuting the defensive and provisional measures called for by the occasion .
it has demonstrated to foreign nations the moderation and firmness which govern our councils , and to our citizens the necessity of uniting in support of the laws and the rights of their country , and has thus long frustrated those usurpations and spoliations which , if resisted , involve war ; if submitted to , sacrificed a vital principle of our national independence .
under a continuance of the belligerent measures which , in defiance of laws which consecrate the rights of neutrals , overspread the ocean with danger , it will rest with the wisdom of congress to decide on the course best adapted to such a state of things ; and bringing with them , as they do , from every part of the union , the sentiments of our constituents , my confidence is strengthened , that in forming this decision they will , with an unerring regard to the essential rights and interests of the nation , weigh and compare the painful alternatives out of which a choice is to be made .
nor should i do justice to the virtues which on other occasions have marked the character of our fellow citizens , if i did not cherish an equal confidence that the alternative chosen , whatever it may be , will be maintained with all the fortitude and patriotism which the crisis ought to inspire .
the documents containing the correspondences on the subject of the foreign edicts against our commerce , with the instructions given to our ministers at london and paris , are now laid before you .
the communications made to congress at their last session explained the posture in which the close of the discussion relating to the attack by a british ship of war on the frigate chesapeake left a subject on which the nation had manifested so honorable a sensibility .
every view of what had passed authorized a belief that immediate steps would be taken by the british government for redressing a wrong , which , the more it was investigated , appeared the more clearly to require what had not been provided for in the special mission .
it is found that no steps have been taken for the purpose .
on the contrary , it will be seen , in the documents laid before you , that the inadmissible preliminary which obstructed the adjustment is still adhered to ; and , moreover , that it is now brought into connection with the distinct and irrelative case of the orders in council .
the instructions which had been given to our ministers at london with a view to facilitate , if necessary , the reparation claimed by the united states , are included in the documents communicated .
our relations with the other powers of europe have undergone no material changes since your last session .
the important negotiations with spain , which had been alternately suspended and resumed , necessarily experience a pause under the extraordinary and interesting crisis which distinguished her internal situation .
with the barbary powers we continue in harmony , with the exception of an unjustifiable proceeding of the dey of algiers toward our consul to that regency .
its character and circumstances are now laid before you , and will enable you to decide how far it may , either now or hereafter , call for any measures not within the limits of the executive authority .
with our indian neighbors the public peace has been steadily maintained .
some instances of individual wrong have , as at other times , taken place , but in nowise implicating the will of the nation .
beyond the mississippi , the iowas , the sacs , and the alabamas , have delivered up for trial and punishment individuals from among themselves accused of murdering citizens of the united states .
on this side of the mississippi , the creeks are exerting themselves to arrest offenders of the same kind ; and the choctaws have manifested their readiness and desire for amicable and just arrangements respecting depredations committed by disorderly persons of their tribe .
and , generally , from a conviction that we consider them as part of ourselves , and cherish with sincerity their rights and interests , the attachment of the indian tribes is gaining strength daily -- is extending from the nearer to the more remote , and will amply requite us for the justice and friendship practised towards them .
husbandry and household manufacture are advancing among them , more rapidly with the southern than the northern tribes , from circumstances of soil and climate ; and one of the two great divisions of the cherokee nation have now under consideration to solicit the citizenship of the united states , and to be identified with us in laws and government , in such progressive manner as we shall think best .
in consequence of the appropriations of the last session of congress for the security of our seaport towns and harbors , such works of defence have been erected as seemed to be called for by the situation of the several places , their relative importance , and the scale of expense indicated by the amount of the appropriation .
these works will chiefly be finished in the course of the present season , except at new york and new orleans , where most was to be done ; and although a great proportion of the last appropriation has been expended on the former place , yet some further views will be submitted by congress for rendering its security entirely adequate against naval enterprise .
a view of what has been done at the several places , and of what is proposed to be done , shall be communicated as soon as the several reports are received .
of the gun - boats authorized by the act of december last , it has been thought necessary to build only one hundred and three in the present year .
these , with those before possessed , are sufficient for the harbors and waters exposed , and the residue will require little time for their construction when it is deemed necessary .
under the act of the last session for raising an additional military force , so many officers were immediately appointed as were necessary for carrying on the business of recruiting , and in proportion as it advanced , others have been added .
we have reason to believe their success has been satisfactory , although such returns have not yet been received as enable me to present to you a statement of the numbers engaged .
i have not thought it necessary in the course of the last season to call for any general detachments of militia or volunteers under the law passed for that purpose .
for the ensuing season , however , they will require to be in readiness should their services be wanted .
some small and special detachments have been necessary to maintain the laws of embargo on that portion of our northern frontier which offered peculiar facilities for evasion , but these were replaced as soon as it could be done by bodies of new recruits .
by the aid of these , and of the armed vessels called into actual service in other quarters , the spirit of disobedience and abuse which manifested itself early , and with sensible effect while we were unprepared to meet it , has been considerably repressed .
considering the extraordinary character of the times in which we live , our attention should unremittingly be fixed on the safety of our country .
for a people who are free , and who mean to remain so , a well - organized and armed militia is their best security .
it is , therefore , incumbent on us , at every meeting , to revise the condition of the militia , and to ask ourselves if it is prepared to repel a powerful enemy at every point of our territories exposed to invasion .
some of the states have paid a laudable attention to this object ; but every degree of neglect is to be found among others .
congress alone have power to produce a uniform state of preparation in this great organ of defence ; the interests which they so deeply feel in their own and their country 's security will present this as among the most important objects of their deliberation .
under the acts of march 11th and april 23d , respecting arms , the difficulty of procuring them from abroad , during the present situation and dispositions of europe , induced us to direct our whole efforts to the means of internal supply .
the public factories have , therefore , been enlarged , additional machineries erected , and in proportion as artificers can be found or formed , their effect , already more than doubled , may be increased so as to keep pace with the yearly increase of the militia .
the annual sums appropriated by the latter act , have been directed to the encouragement of private factories of arms , and contracts have been entered into with individual undertakers to nearly the amount of the first year 's appropriation .
the suspension of our foreign commerce , produced by the injustice of the belligerent powers , and the consequent losses and sacrifices of our citizens , are subjects of just concern .
the situation into which we have thus been forced , has impelled us to apply a portion of our industry and capital to internal manufactures and improvements .
the extent of this conversion is daily increasing , and little doubt remains that the establishments formed and forming will -- under the auspices of cheaper materials and subsistence , the freedom of labor from taxation with us , and of protecting duties and prohibitions -- become permanent .
the commerce with the indians , too , within our own boundaries , is likely to receive abundant aliment from the same internal source , and will secure to them peace and the progress of civilization , undisturbed by practices hostile to both .
the accounts of the receipts and expenditures during the year ending on the 30th day of september last , being not yet made up , a correct statement will hereafter be transmitted from the treasury .
in the meantime , it is ascertained that the receipts have amounted to near eighteen millions of dollars , which , with the eight millions and a half in the treasury at the beginning of the year , have enabled us , after meeting the current demands and interest incurred , to pay two millions three hundred thousand dollars of the principal of our funded debt , and left us in the treasury , on that day , near fourteen millions of dollars .
of these , five millions three hundred and fifty thousand dollars will be necessary to pay what will be due on the first day of january next , which will complete the reimbursement of the eight per cent .
stock .
these payments , with those made in the six years and a half preceding , will have extinguished thirty - three millions five hundred and eighty thousand dollars of the principal of the funded debt , being the whole which could be paid or purchased within the limits of the law and our contracts ; and the amount of principal thus discharged will have liberated the revenue from about two millions of dollars of interest , and added that sum annually to the disposable surplus .
the probable accumulation of the surpluses of revenue beyond what can be applied to the payment of the public debt , whenever the freedom and safety of our commerce shall be restored , merits the consideration of congress .
shall it lie unproductive in the public vaults ?
shall the revenue be reduced ?
or shall it rather be appropriated to the improvements of roads , canals , rivers , education , and other great foundations of prosperity and union , under the powers which congress may already possess , or such amendment of the constitution as may be approved by the states ?
while uncertain of the course of things , the time may be advantageously employed in obtaining the powers necessary for a system of improvement , should that be thought best .
availing myself of this the last occasion which will occur of addressing the two houses of the legislature at their meeting , i can not omit the expression of my sincere gratitude for the repeated proofs of confidence manifested to me by themselves and their predecessors since my call to the administration , and the many indulgences experienced at their hands .
the same grateful acknowledgments are due to my fellow citizens generally , whose support has been my great encouragement under all embarrassments .
in the transaction of their business i can not have escaped error .
it is incident to our imperfect nature .
but i may say with truth , my errors have been of the understanding , not of intention ; and that the advancement of their rights and interests has been the constant motive for every measure .
on these considerations i solicit their indulgence .
looking forward with anxiety to their future destinies , i trust that , in their steady character unshaken by difficulties , in their love of liberty , obedience to law , and support of the public authorities , i see a sure guaranty of the permanence of our republic ; and retiring from the charge of their affairs , i carry with me the consolation of a firm persuasion that heaven has in store for our beloved country long ages to come of prosperity and happiness .

returning to the scenes of my birth and early life , to the society of those with whom i was raised , and who have been ever dear to me , i receive , fellow citizens and neighbors , with inexpressible pleasure , the cordial welcome you are so good as to give me .
long absent on duties which the history of a wonderful era made incumbent on those called to them , the pomp , the turmoil , the bustle and splendor of office , have drawn but deeper sighs for the tranquil and irresponsible occupations of private life , for the enjoyment of an affectionate intercourse with you , my neighbors and friends , and the endearments of family love , which nature has given us all , as the sweetener of every hour .
for these i gladly lay down the distressing burthen of power , and seek , with my fellow citizens , repose and safety under the watchful cares , the labors , and perplexities of younger and abler minds .
the anxieties you express to administer to my happiness , do , of themselves , confer that happiness : and the measure will be complete , if my endeavors to fulfill my duties in the several public stations to which i have been called , have obtained for me the approbation of my country .
the part which i have acted on the theatre of public life , has been before them ; and to their sentence i submit it : but the testimony of my native country , of the individuals who have known me in private life , to my conduct in its various duties and relations , is the more grateful , as proceeding from eye witnesses and observers , from triers of the vicinage .
of you then , my neighbors , i may ask , in the face of the world , ?
whose ox have i taken , or whom have defrauded ?
whom have i oppressed , or of whose hand have i received a bribe to blind mine eyes therewith ? ?
on your verdict i rest with conscious security .
your wishes for my happiness are received with just sensibility , and i offer sincere prayers for your own welfare and prosperity .

to the senate and house of representatives of the united states : at a moment when the nations of europe are in commotion and arming against each other , and when those with whom we have principle intercourse are engaged in the general contest , and when the countenance of some of them toward our peaceable country threatens that even that may not be affected by what is passing on the general theater , a meeting of the representatives of the nation in both houses of congress has become more than usually desirable .
coming from every section of our country , they bring with them the sentiments and the information of the whole , and will be enabled to give direction to the public affairs which the will and the wisdom of the whole will approve and support .
in taking a view of the state of our country we in the first place notice the late affliction of two of our cities under the fatal fever which in latter times has occasionally visited our shores .
providence in his goodness gave it an early termination on this occasion and lessened the number of victims which have usually fallen before it .
in the course of the several visitations by this disease it has appeared that it is strictly local , incident to cities and on the tide waters only , incommunicable in the country either by persons under the disease or by goods carried from diseased places ; that its access is with the autumn and it disappears with the early frosts .
these restrictions within narrow limits of time and space give security even to our maritime cities three fourths of the year , and to the country always .
although from these facts it appears unnecessary , yet to satisfy the fears of foreign nations and cautions on their part not to be complained of in a danger whose limits are yet unknown to them i have strictly enjoined on the officers at the head of customs to certify with exact truth , for every vessel sailing for a foreign port the state of health respecting this fever which prevails at the place from which she sails .. under every motive from character and duty to certify the truth , i have no doubt they have faithfully executed this injunction .
much real injury has , however , been sustained from a propensity to identify with this endemic and to call by the same name fevers of very different kinds , which have been placed among those deemed contagious .
as we advance in our knowledge of this disease , as facts develop the source from which individuals receive it , the state authorities charged with the care of the public health , and congress with that of the general commerce , will become able to regulate with effect their respective functions in these departments .
the burthen of quarantines is felt at home as well as abroad ; their efficacy merits examination .
although the health laws of the states should be found to need no present revisal by congress , yet commerce claims that their attention be ever awake to them .
since our last meeting the aspect of our foreign relations has considerably changed .
our coasts have been infested and our harbors watched by private armed vessels , some of them without commissions , some with illegal commissions , others with those legal form .
but committing piratical acts beyond the authority of their commissions .
they have captured in the very entrance of our harbors , as well as on the high seas , not only the vessels of our friends coming to trade with us , but our own also .
they have carried them off under pretense of legal adjudication but not daring to approach a court of justice , they have plundered and sunk them by the way or in obscure places where no evidence could arise against them , maltreated the crews , and abandoned them in boats in the open sea or on desert shores without food or covering .
these enormities appearing to be unreached by any control of their sovereigns , i found it necessary to equip a force to cruise within our own seas , to arrest all vessels of these descriptions found hovering on our coasts within the limits of the gulf stream and to bring the offenders in for trial as pirates .
the same system of hovering on our coasts and harbors under color of seeking enemies has been also carried on by public armed ships to the great annoyance and oppression of our commerce .
new principles , too , have been interpolated into the law of nations , founded neither in justice nor the usage or acknowledgment of nations .
according to these belligerent takes to itself a commerce with its own enemy which it denies to a neutral on the ground of its aiding that enemy in the war ; but reason revolts at such an inconsistency , and the neutral having equal right with the belligerent to decide the question , the interests of our constituents and the duty of maintaining the authority of reason , the only umpire between just nations , impose on us the obligation of providing an effectual and determined opposition to a doctrine so injurious to the rights of peaceable nations .
indeed , the confidence we ought to have in the justice of others still countenances the hope that a sounder view of those rights will of itself induce from every belligerent a more correct observance of them .
with spain our negotiations for a settlement of differences have not had a satisfactory issue .
spoliations during a former war , for which she had formally acknowledged herself responsible , have been refused to be compensated but on conditions affecting other claims in no wise connected with them .
yet the same practices are renewed in the present war and are already of great amount .
on the mobile , our commerce passing through that river continues to be obstructed by arbitrary duties and vexatious searches .
propositions for adjusting amicably the boundaries of louisana have not been acceded to .
while , however , the right is unsettled , we have avoided changing the state of things by taking new posts or strengthening ourselves in the disputed territories , in the hope that the other power would not by contrary conduct oblige us to meet their example and endanger conflicts of authority the issue of which may not be easily controlled .
but in this hope we have now reason to lessen our confidence .
inroads have been recently made into the territories of orleans and the mississippi , our citizens have been seized and their property plundered in the very parts of the former which had been actually delivered up by spain , and this by the regular officers and soldiers of that government .
i have therefore found it necessary at length to give orders to our troops on that frontier to be in readiness to protect our citizens , and to repel by arms any similar aggressions in future .
other details necessary for your full information of the state of things between this country and that shall be the subject of another communication .
in reviewing these injuries from some of the belligerent powers the moderation , the firmness , and the wisdom of the legislature will all be called into action .
we ought still to hope that time and a more correct estimate of interest as well as of character will produce the justice we are bound to expect .
but should any nation deceive itself by false calculations and disappointment that expectation , we must join in unprofitable contest of trying which party can do the other the most harm .
some of these injuries may perhaps admit a peaceable remedy .
where that is competent it is always the most desirable .
but some of them are of a nature to be met by force only , and all of them may lead to it .
i can not , therefore , but recommend such preparations as circumstances call for .
the first object is to place our seaport town out of danger of insult .
measures have been already taken for furnishing them with heavy cannon for the service of such land batteries as may make apart of their defense against armed vessels approaching them .
in aid of these it is desirable we should have a competent number of gunboats , and the number , to be competent , must be considerable .
if immediately begun , they may be in readiness for service at the opening of the next season .
whether it will be necessary to augment our land forces will be decided buy occurrences probably in the course of your session .
in the meantime you will consider whether it would not be expedient for a state of peace as well as war so to organize or class the militia as would enable us on any sudden emergency to call for the services of the younger portions unencumbered with the old and those having families .
upward of 300,000 able - bodied men between the ages of 18 and 26 years , which the last census shews we may now count within our limits , will furnish a competent number for offense or defense in any point where they may be wanted , and will give time for raising regular forces after the necessity of them shall become certain ; and the reducing to the early period of life all its active service can not but be desirable to our younger citizens of the present as well as future times , inasmuch as it engages to them in more advanced age a quiet and undisturbed repose in the bosom of their families .
i can not , then , but earnestly recommend to your early consideration the expediency of so modifying our militia system as , by a separation of the more active part from that which is less so , we may draw from it when necessary an efficient corps fit for real and active service , and to be called to it in regular rotation .
considerable provision has been made under former authorities from congress of materials for the construction of ships of war of 74 guns .
these materials are on hand subject to the further will of the legislature .
turning from these unpleasant views of violence and wrong , i congratulate you on the liberation of our fellow - citizens who were stranded on the coast of tripoli and made prisoners of war .
in a government bottomed on the will of all the life and liberty of every individual citizen become interesting to all .
in the treaty , therefore , which has concluded our warefare with that state an article for the ransom of our citizens has been agreed to .
an operation by land by a small band of our countrymen and others , engaged for the occasion in conjunction with the troops of the ex - bashaw of that county , gallantly conducted by our late consul , eaton , and their successful enterprise on the city of derne , contributed doubtless to the impression which produced peace , and the concluison of this prevented opportunities of which the officers and men of our squadron destined for tripoli would have availed themselves to emulate the acts of valor exhibited by their brethren in the attack of last year .
reflecting with high satisfaction on the distinguished bravery displayed whenever occasions permitted in the late mediterranean service , i think it would be an useful encouragement as well as a just reward to make an opening for some present promotion by enlarging our peace establishment of captains and lieutenants .
with tunis some misunderstandings have arisen not yet sufficiently explained , but friendly discussions with their ambassador recently arrived and a mutual disposition to do whatever is just and reasonable can not fail of dissipating these , so that we may consider our peace on that coast , generally , to be on as sound a footing as it has been at any preceding time .
still , it will not be expedient to withdraw immediately the whole of our force from that sea .
the law providing for a naval peace establishment fixes the number of frigates which shall be kept in constant service in time of peace , and prescribes that they shall be manned by not more than two - thirds of their complement of seamen and ordinary seamen .
whether a frigate may be trusted to two - thirds only of her proper complement of men must depend on the nature of the service on which she is ordered ; that may sometimes , for her safety as well as to insure her object , require her fullest complement .
in adverting to this subject congress will perhaps consider whether the best limitation on the executive discretion in this case would not be by the number of seamen which may be employed in the whole service rather than by the number of the vessels .
occasions oftener arise for the employment of small than of large vessels , and it would lessen risk as well as expense to be authorized to employ them of preference .
the limitation suggested by the number of seamen would admit a selection of vessels best adapted to the service .
our indian neighbors are advancing , many of them with spirit , and others beginning to engage in the pursuits of agriculture and household manufacture .
they are becoming sensible that the earth yields subsistence with less labor and more certainty than the forest , and find it their interest from time e to time to dispose of parts of their surplus and waste lands for the means of improving those they occupy and of subsisting their families while they are preparing their farms .
since your last session the northern tribes have sold to us the lands between the connecticut reserve and the former indian boundary and those on the ohio rom the same boundary to the rapids and for a considerable depth inland .
the chickasaws and cherokees have sold us the country between and adjacent to the two districts of tennessee , and the creeks the residue of their lands in the fork of ocmulgee up to the olcofauhatche .
the three former purchases are important , inasmuch as they consolidate disjoined parts of our settled country and render their intercourse secure ; and the second particularly so , as , with the small point on the river which we expect is by this time ceded by the piankeshaws , it completes our possession of the whole of both banks of the ohio from its source to near its mouth , and the navigation of that river is thereby rendered forever safe to our citizens settled and settling on its extensive waters .
the purchase from the creeks , too , has been for some time particularly interesting to the state of georgia .
the several treaties which have been mentioned will be submitted to both houses of congress for the exercise of their respective functions .
deputations now on their way to the seat of government from various nations of indians inhabiting the missouri and other parts beyond the mississippi come charged with assurances of their satisfaction with the new relations in which they are placed with us , of their dispositions to cultivate our peace and friendship , and their desire to enter into commercial intercourse with us .
a state of our progress in exploring the principle rivers of that country , and of the information respecting them hitherto obtained , will be communicated so soon as we shall receive some further relations which we have reason shortly to expect .
the receipts at the treasury during the year ending on the 30th day of september last have exceeded the sum 13,000,000 , which , with not quite five millions in the treasury at the beginning of the year have enabled us after meeting other demands to pay nearly two millions of the debt contracted under the british treaty and convention upward of four millions of principle of the public debt and four millions of interest .
these payments , with those which had been made in three years and a half preceding , have extinguished of the funded debt nearly eighteen millions of principle .
congress by their act of november 10 , 1803 , authorized us to borrow $ 1,750,000 toward meeting the claims of our citizens assumed by the convention with france .
we have not , however , made use o this authority , because the sum of four millions and a half which remained in the treasury on the same 30th day of september last , with receipts which we may calculate on for the ensuing year , besides paying the annual sum of $ 8,000,000 appropriated to the funded debt and meeting all the current demands which may be expected , will enable us to pay the whole sum of $ 3,750,000 assumed by the french convention and still leave us a surplus of nearly $ 1,000,000 at our free disposal .
should you concur in the provisions of arms and armed vessels recommended by the circumstances of the times , this surplus will furnish the means of doing so .
on this first occasion of addressing congress since , by the choice of my constituents , i have entered on a second term of administration , i embrace the opportunity to give this public assurance that i will exert my best endeavors to administer faithfully the executive department , and will zealously cooperate with you in every measure which may tend to secure the liberty , property , and personal safety of our fellow - citizens , and to consolidate the republican forms and principles of our government .
in the course of your session you shall receive all the aid which i can give for the dispatch of public business , and all the information necessary for your deliberations , of which the interests of our own country and the confidence reposed in us by others will admit a communication .

gentleman , the affectionate sentiments of esteem and approbation which you are so good as to express towards me , on behalf of the danbury baptist association , give me the highest satisfaction .
my duties dictate a faithful and zealous pursuit of the interests of my constituents , and in proportion as they are persuaded of my fidelity to those duties , the discharge of them becomes more and more pleasing .
believing with you that religion is a matter which lies solely between man and his god , that he owes account to none other for his faith or his worship , that the legislative powers of government reach actions only , and not opinions , i contemplate with sovereign reverence that act of the whole american people which declared that their legislature should " make no law respecting an establishment of religion , or prohibiting the free exercise thereof , " thus building a wall of separation between church and state .
adhering to this expression of the supreme will of the nation in behalf of the rights of conscience , i shall see with sincere satisfaction the progress of those sentiments which tend to restore to man all his natural rights , convinced he has no natural right in opposition to his social duties .
i reciprocate your kind prayers for the protection and blessing of the common father and creator of man , and tender you for yourselves and your religious association , assurances of my high respect and esteem .

to the senate and house of representatives of the united states : when we assemble together , fellow citizens , to consider the state of our beloved country , our just attentions are first drawn to those pleasing circumstances which mark the goodness of that being from whose favor they flow and the large measure of thankfulness we owe for his bounty .
another year has come around , and finds us still blessed with peace and friendship abroad ; law , order , and religion at home ; good affection and harmony with our indian neighbors ; our burthens lightened , yet our income sufficient for the public wants , and the produce of the year great beyond example .
these , fellow citizens , are the circumstances under which we meet , and we remark with special satisfaction those which under the smiles of providence result from the skill , industry , and order of our citizens , managing their own affairs in their own way and for their own use , unembarrassed by too much regulation , unoppressed by fiscal exactions .
on the restoration of peace in europe that portion of the general carrying trade which had fallen to our share during the war was abridged by the returning competition of the belligerent powers .
this was to be expected , and was just .
but in addition we find in some parts of europe monopolizing discriminations , which in the form of duties tend effectually to prohibit the carrying thither our own produce in our own vessels .
from existing amities and a spirit of justice it is hope that friendly discussion will produce a fair and adequate reciprocity .
but should false calculations of interest defeat our hope , it rests with the legislature to decide whether they will meet inequalities abroad with countervailing inequalities at home , or provide for the evil in any other way .
it is with satisfaction i lay before you an act of the british parliament anticipating this subject so far as to authorize a mutual abolition of the duties and countervailing duties permitted under the treaty of 1794 .
it shows on their part a spirit of justice and friendly accommodation which it is our duty and our interest to cultivate with all nations .
whether this would produce a due equality in the navigation between the two countries is a subject for your consideration .
another circumstances which claims attention as directly affecting the very source of our navigation in the defect or the evasion of the law providing for the return of seamen , and particularly of those belonging to vessels sold abroad .
numbers of them , discharged in foreign ports , have dangers into which their distresses might plunge them and save them to their country , have found it necessary in some cases to return them at the public charge .
the cession of the spanish province of louisiana to france , which took place in the course of the late war , will if carried into effect , make a change in the aspect of our foreign relations which will doubtless have just weight in any deliberations of the legislature connected with that subject .
there was reason not long since to apprehend that the warfare in which we were engaged with tripoli might be taken up by some other of the barbary powers .
a reenforcement , therefore , was immediately ordered to the vessels already there .
subsequent information , however has removed these apprehensions for the present .
to secure our commerce in that sea with the smallest force competent , we have supposed it best to watch strictly the harbor of tripoli .
still , however , the shallowness of their coast and the want of smaller vessels on our part has permitted some cruisers to escape unobserved , and to one of these an american vessel unfortunately fell a prey .
the captain , one american seaman , and two others of color remain prisoners with them unless exchanged under an agreement formerly made with the bashaw , to whom , on the faith of that , some of his captive subjects had been restored .
the convention with the state of georgia has been ratified by their legislature , and a repurchase from the creeks has been consequently made of a part of the talasscee country .
in this purchase has been also comprehended a part of the lands within the fork of oconee and oakmulgee rivers .
the particulars of the contract will be laid before congress so soon as they shall be in a state for communication .
in order to remove every ground of difference possible with our indian neighbors , i have proceeded in the work of settling with them and marking the boundaries between us .
that with choctaw nation is fixed in one part and will be through the whole within a short time .
the country to which their title had been extinguished before the revolution is sufficient to receive a very respectful population , which congress will probably see the expediency of encouraging so soon as the limits shall be declared .
we are to view this position as an outpost of the united states , surrounded by strong neighbors and distant from its support ; and how far that monopoly which prevents population should here be guarded against and actual habitation made a condition of the continuance of title will be for your consideration .
a prompt settlement , too , of all existing rights and claims within this territory presents itself as a preliminary operation .
in that part of the indian territory which includes vicennes the lines settled with neighboring tribes fix the extinction of their title at a breadth of 24 leagues from east to west and about the same length parallel with and including the wabash .
they have also ceded a tract of four miles square , including the salt springs near the mouth of that river .
in the department of finance it is with pleasure i inform you that the receipts of external duties for the last twelve months have exceeded those of any former year , and that the ratio of increase has been also greater than usual .
this has enabled us to answer all the regular exigencies of government , to pay from the treasury within one year upward of $ 8,000,000 , principal and interest , of the public debt , exclusive of upward of one million paid by the sale of bank stock , and making in the whole a reduction of nearly five millions and a half of principal , and to have now in the treasury $ 4,500,000 , which are in a course of application to the further discharge of debt and current demands .
experience , too , so far , authorizes us to believe , if no extraordinary event supervenes , and the expenses which will be actually incurred shall not be greater than were contemplated by congress at their last session , that we shall not be disappointed in the expectations then formed .
but nevertheless , as the effect of peace on the amount of duties is not yet fully ascertained , it is the more necessary to practice every useful economy and to incur no expense which may be avoided without prejudice .
the collection of the internal taxes having been retarded , it will be some time before the system is closed .
it is not yet been thought necessary to employ the agent authorized by an act of the last session for transacting business in europe relative to debts and loans .
nor have we used the power confided by the same act of prolonging the foreign debt by reloans , and of redeeming instead thereof an equal sum of domestic debt .
should , however , the difficulties of remittance on so large a scale render it necessary at any time , the power shall be executed and the money thus unemployed abroad shall , in conformity with that law , be faithfully applied here in equivalent extinction of domestic debt .
when effects do salutary result from the plans you have already sanctioned ; when merely by avoiding false objects of expense we are able , without a direct tax , without internal taxes , and without borrowing to make large and effectual payments toward the discharge of public debt and the emancipation of our posterity from that mortal canker , it is an encouragement , fellow citizens , of the highest order to proceed as we have begun in substituting economy for taxation , and in pursuing what is useful for a nation placed as we are , rather than what is practiced by others under different circumstances .
and whensoever we are destined to meet events which shall call forth all the energies of our countryman , we have the firmest reliance on those energies and the comfort of leaving for calls like these the extraordinary resources of loans and internal taxes .
in the meantime , by payments of the principal of our debt , we are liberating annually portions of the external taxes and forming from them a growing fund still further to lessen the necessity of recurring to extraordinary resources .
the usual account of receipts and expenditures for the last year , with an estimate of the expenses of the ensuing one , will be laid before you by the secretary of treasury .
no change being deemed necessary in our military establishment , an estimate of its expenses for the ensuing year on its present footing , as also sums to be employed in fornications and other objects within that department , has been prepared by the secretary of war , and will make a part of the general estimates which will be presented you .
considering that our regular troops are employed for local purposes , and that the militia our general reliance for great and sudden emergencies , you will doubtless think this institution worth of a review , and give those improvements of which you find susceptible .
estimates for the naval department , prepared by the secretary of the navy , for another year will in like manner be communicated with general estimates .
a small force in the mediterranean will still be necessary to restrain the tripoline cruisers , and the uncertain tenure of peace with some other of the barbary powers may eventually require that force to be augmented .
the necessity of procuring some smaller vessels for that service will raise the estimate , but the difference in their maintenance will soon make it a measure of economy .
presuming it will be deemed expedient to expend annually a convenient sum toward providing the naval defense which our situation may require .
i can not but recommend that the first appropriations for that purpose may go to the saving what we already possess .
no cares , no attentions , can preserve vessels from rapid decay which lie in water exposed to the sun .
these decays require great and constant repairs and will consume , if continues , a great portion of the moneys destined to naval purposes .
to avoid this waste of our resources it is proposed to add to our navy yard here a dock within which our present vessels may be laid up dry and cover from the sun .
under these circumstances experience proves that works of wood will remain scarcely at all affected by time .
the great abundance of running water which this situation possess , at heights far above the level of the tide , if employed as is practiced for lock navigation , furnishes the means for raising and laying up our vessels on a dry and sheltered bed .
and should the measure be found useful here , similar depositories for laying up as well as for building and repairing vessel may hereafter be undertaken at other navy yards offering the same means .
the plans and estimates of the work , prepared by a person of skill and experience , will be presented to you without delay , and from this it will be seen that scarcely more than has been the cost of one vessel is necessary to save the whole , and that the annual sum to be employed toward its completion may be adapted to the views of the legislature as to naval expenditure .
to cultivate peace and maintain commerce and navigation in all their lawful enterprises ; to foster our fisheries as nurseries of navigation and for the nurture of man , and protect the manufactures adapted to our circumstances ; to preserve the faith of the nation by an exact discharge of its debts and contracts , expend the public money with same care and economy we would practice with our own , and impose on our citizens no unnecessary burthens ; to keep in all of safety -- these , fellow citizens , are the landmarks by which we are to guide ourselves in all our proceedings .
by continuing to make these the rule of our action we shall endear to our countrymen the true principles of their constitution and promote an union of sentiment an of action equally auspicious to their happiness and safety .
on my part , you may count on a cordial concurrence in every measure for the public good and on all the information i possess which may enable you to discharge to advantage the high functions with which you are invested by your country .

friends and fellow - citizens , called upon to undertake the duties of the first executive office of our country , i avail myself of the presence of that portion of my fellow - citizens which is here assembled to express my grateful thanks for the favor with which they have been pleased to look toward me , to declare a sincere consciousness that the task is above my talents , and that i approach it with those anxious and awful presentiments which the greatness of the charge and the weakness of my powers so justly inspire .
a rising nation , spread over a wide and fruitful land , traversing all the seas with the rich productions of their industry , engaged in commerce with nations who feel power and forget right , advancing rapidly to destinies beyond the reach of mortal eye -- when i contemplate these transcendent objects , and see the honor , the happiness , and the hopes of this beloved country committed to the issue and the auspices of this day , i shrink from the contemplation , and humble myself before the magnitude of the undertaking .
utterly , indeed , should i despair did not the presence of many whom i here see remind me that in the other high authorities provided by our constitution i shall find resources of wisdom , of virtue , and of zeal on which to rely under all difficulties .
to you , then , gentlemen , who are charged with the sovereign functions of legislation , and to those associated with you , i look with encouragement for that guidance and support which may enable us to steer with safety the vessel in which we are all embarked amidst the conflicting elements of a troubled world .
during the contest of opinion through which we have passed the animation of discussions and of exertions has sometimes worn an aspect which might impose on strangers unused to think freely and to speak and to write what they think ; but this being now decided by the voice of the nation , announced according to the rules of the constitution , all will , of course , arrange themselves under the will of the law , and unite in common efforts for the common good .
all , too , will bear in mind this sacred principle , that though the will of the majority is in all cases to prevail , that will to be rightful must be reasonable ; that the minority possess their equal rights , which equal law must protect , and to violate would be oppression .
let us , then , fellow - citizens , unite with one heart and one mind .
let us restore to social intercourse that harmony and affection without which liberty and even life itself are but dreary things .
and let us reflect that , having banished from our land that religious intolerance under which mankind so long bled and suffered , we have yet gained little if we countenance a political intolerance as despotic , as wicked , and capable of as bitter and bloody persecutions .
during the throes and convulsions of the ancient world , during the agonizing spasms of infuriated man , seeking through blood and slaughter his long - lost liberty , it was not wonderful that the agitation of the billows should reach even this distant and peaceful shore ; that this should be more felt and feared by some and less by others , and should divide opinions as to measures of safety .
but every difference of opinion is not a difference of principle .
we have called by different names brethren of the same principle .
we are all republicans , we are all federalists .
if there be any among us who would wish to dissolve this union or to change its republican form , let them stand undisturbed as monuments of the safety with which error of opinion may be tolerated where reason is left free to combat it .
i know , indeed , that some honest men fear that a republican government can not be strong , that this government is not strong enough ; but would the honest patriot , in the full tide of successful experiment , abandon a government which has so far kept us free and firm on the theoretic and visionary fear that this government , the world 's best hope , may by possibility want energy to preserve itself ?
i trust not .
i believe this , on the contrary , the strongest government on earth .
i believe it the only one where every man , at the call of the law , would fly to the standard of the law , and would meet invasions of the public order as his own personal concern .
sometimes it is said that man can not be trusted with the government of himself .
can he , then , be trusted with the government of others ?
or have we found angels in the forms of kings to govern him ?
let history answer this question .
let us , then , with courage and confidence pursue our own federal and republican principles , our attachment to union and representative government .
kindly separated by nature and a wide ocean from the exterminating havoc of one quarter of the globe ; too high - minded to endure the degradations of the others ; possessing a chosen country , with room enough for our descendants to the thousandth and thousandth generation ; entertaining a due sense of our equal right to the use of our own faculties , to the acquisitions of our own industry , to honor and confidence from our fellow - citizens , resulting not from birth , but from our actions and their sense of them ; enlightened by a benign religion , professed , indeed , and practiced in various forms , yet all of them inculcating honesty , truth , temperance , gratitude , and the love of man ; acknowledging and adoring an overruling providence , which by all its dispensations proves that it delights in the happiness of man here and his greater happiness hereafter -- with all these blessings , what more is necessary to make us a happy and a prosperous people ?
still one thing more , fellow - citizens -- a wise and frugal government , which shall restrain men from injuring one another , shall leave them otherwise free to regulate their own pursuits of industry and improvement , and shall not take from the mouth of labor the bread it has earned .
this is the sum of good government , and this is necessary to close the circle of our felicities .
about to enter , fellow - citizens , on the exercise of duties which comprehend everything dear and valuable to you , it is proper you should understand what i deem the essential principles of our government , and consequently those which ought to shape its administration .
i will compress them within the narrowest compass they will bear , stating the general principle , but not all its limitations .
equal and exact justice to all men , of whatever state or persuasion , religious or political ; peace , commerce , and honest friendship with all nations , entangling alliances with none ; the support of the state governments in all their rights , as the most competent administrations for our domestic concerns and the surest bulwarks against antirepublican tendencies ; the preservation of the general government in its whole constitutional vigor , as the sheet anchor of our peace at home and safety abroad ; a jealous care of the right of election by the people -- a mild and safe corrective of abuses which are lopped by the sword of revolution where peaceable remedies are unprovided ; absolute acquiescence in the decisions of the majority , the vital principle of republics , from which is no appeal but to force , the vital principle and immediate parent of despotism ; a well - disciplined militia , our best reliance in peace and for the first moments of war till regulars may relieve them ; the supremacy of the civil over the military authority ; economy in the public expense , that labor may be lightly burthened ; the honest payment of our debts and sacred preservation of the public faith ; encouragement of agriculture , and of commerce as its handmaid ; the diffusion of information and arraignment of all abuses at the bar of the public reason ; freedom of religion ; freedom of the press , and freedom of person under the protection of the habeas corpus , and trial by juries impartially selected .
these principles form the bright constellation which has gone before us and guided our steps through an age of revolution and reformation .
the wisdom of our sages and blood of our heroes have been devoted to their attainment .
they should be the creed of our political faith , the text of civic instruction , the touchstone by which to try the services of those we trust ; and should we wander from them in moments of error or of alarm , let us hasten to retrace our steps and to regain the road which alone leads to peace , liberty , and safety .
i repair , then , fellow - citizens , to the post you have assigned me .
with experience enough in subordinate offices to have seen the difficulties of this the greatest of all , i have learnt to expect that it will rarely fall to the lot of imperfect man to retire from this station with the reputation and the favor which bring him into it .
without pretensions to that high confidence you reposed in our first and greatest revolutionary character , whose preeminent services had entitled him to the first place in his country 's love and destined for him the fairest page in the volume of faithful history , i ask so much confidence only as may give firmness and effect to the legal administration of your affairs .
i shall often go wrong through defect of judgment .
when right , i shall often be thought wrong by those whose positions will not command a view of the whole ground .
i ask your indulgence for my own errors , which will never be intentional , and your support against the errors of others , who may condemn what they would not if seen in all its parts .
the approbation implied by your suffrage is a great consolation to me for the past , and my future solicitude will be to retain the good opinion of those who have bestowed it in advance , to conciliate that of others by doing them all the good in my power , and to be instrumental to the happiness and freedom of all .
relying , then , on the patronage of your good will , i advance with obedience to the work , ready to retire from it whenever you become sensible how much better choice it is in your power to make .
and may that infinite power which rules the destinies of the universe lead our councils to what is best , and give them a favorable issue for your peace and prosperity .

gentlemen of the senate and of the house of representatives : as the continuance of the act for establishing trading houses with the indian tribes will be under the consideration of the legislature at its present session , i think it my duty to communicate the views which have guided me in the execution of that act , in order that you may decide on the policy of continuing it in the present or any other form , or discontinue it altogether if that shall , on the whole , seem most for the public good .
the indian tribes residing within the limits of the united states have for a considerable time been growing more and more uneasy at the constant diminution of the territory they occupy , although effected by their own voluntary sales , and the policy has long been gaining strength with them of refusing absolutely all further sale on any conditions , insomuch that at this time it hazards their friendship and excites dangerous jealousies and perturbations in their minds to make any overture for the purchase of the smallest portions of their land .
a very few tribes only are not yet obstinately in these dispositions .
in order peaceably to counteract this policy of theirs and to provide an extension of territory which the rapid increase of our numbers will call for , two measures are deemed expedient .
first .
to encourage them to abandon hunting , to apply to the raising stock , to agriculture , and domestic manufacture , and thereby prove to themselves that less land and labor will maintain them in this better than in their former mode of living .
the extensive forests necessary in the hunting life will then become useless , and they will see advantage in exchanging them for the means of improving their farms and of increasing their domestic comforts .
secondly .
to multiply trading houses among them , and place within their reach those things which will contribute more to their domestic comfort than the possession of extensive but uncultivated wilds .
experience and reflection will develop to them the wisdom of exchanging what they can spare and we want for what we can spare and they want .
in leading them thus to agriculture , to factures , and civilization ; in bringing together their and our sentiments , and in preparing them ultimately to participate in the benefits of our government , i trust and believe we are acting for their greatest good .
at these trading houses we have pursued the principles of the act of congress which directs that the commerce shall be carried on liberally , and requires only that the capital stock shall not be diminished .
we consequently undersell private traders , foreign and domestic , drive them from the competition , and thus , with the good will of the indians , rid ourselves of a description of men who are constantly endeavoring to excite in the indian mind suspicions , fears , and irritations toward us .
a letter now inclosed shows the effect of our competition on the operations of the traders , while the indians , perceiving the advantage of purchasing from us , are soliciting generally our establishment of trading houses among them .
in one quarter this is particularly interesting .
the legislature , reflecting on the late occurrences on the mississippi , must be sensible how desirable it is to possess a respectable breadth of country on that river , from our southern limit to the illinois , at least , so that we may present as firm a front on that as on our eastern border .
we possess what is below the yazoo , and can probably acquire a certain breadth from the illinois and wabash to the ohio ; but between the ohio and yazoo the country all belongs to the chickasaws , the most friendly tribe within our limits , but the most decided against the alienation of lands .
the portion of their country most important for us is exactly that which they do not inhabit .
their settlements are not on the mississippi , but in the interior country .
they have lately shown a desire to become agricultural , and this leads to the desire of buying implements and comforts .
in the strengthening and gratifying of these wants i see the only prospect of planting on the mississippi itself the means of its own safety .
duty has required me to submit these views to the judgment of the legislature , but as their disclosure might embarrass and defeat their effect , they are committed to the special confidence of the two houses .
while the extension of the public commerce among the indian tribes may deprive of that source of profit such of our citizens as are engaged in it , it might be worthy the attention of congress in their care of individual as well as of the general interest to point in another direction the enterprise of these citizens , as profitably for themselves and more usefully for the public .
the river missouri and the indians inhabiting it are not as well known as is rendered desirable by their connection with the mississippi , and consequently with us .
it is , however , understood that the country on that river is inhabited by numerous tribes , who furnish great supplies of furs and peltry to the trade of another nation , carried on in a high latitude through an infinite number of portages and lakes shut up by ice through a long season .
the commerce on that line could bear no competition with that of the missouri , traversing a moderate climate , offering , according to the best accounts , a continued navigation from its source , and possibly with a single portage from the western ocean , and finding to the atlantic a choice of channels through the illinois or wabash , the lakes and hudson , through the ohio and susquehanna , or potomac or james rivers , and through the tennessee and savannah rivers .
an intelligent officer , with ten or twelve chosen men , fit for the enterprise and willing to undertake it , taken from our posts where they may be spared without inconvenience , might explore the whole line , even to the western ocean , have conferences with the natives on the subject of commercial intercourse , get admission among them for our traders as others are admitted , agree on convenient deposits for an interchange of articles , and return with the information acquired in the course of two summers .
their arms and accouterments , some instruments of observation , and light and cheap presents for the indians would be all the apparatus they could carry , and with an expectation of a soldier 's portion of land on their return would constitute the whole expense .
their pay would be going on whether here or there .
while other civilized nations have encountered great expense to enlarge the boundaries of knowledge by undertaking voyages of discovery , and for other literary purposes , in various parts and directions , our nation seems to owe to the same object , as well as to its own interests , to explore this the only line of easy communication across the continent , and so directly traversing our own part of it .
the interests of commerce place the principal object within the constitutional powers and care of congress , and that it should incidentally advance the geographical knowledge of our own continent can not but be an additional gratification .
the nation claiming the territory , regarding this as a literary pursuit , which it is in the habit of permitting within its dominions , would not be disposed to view it with jealousy , even if the expiring state of its interests there did not render it a matter of indifference .
the appropriation of $ 2 , 500 " for the purpose of extending the external commerce of the united states , " while understood and considered by the executive as giving the legislative sanction , would cover the undertaking from notice and prevent the obstructions which interested individuals might otherwise previously prepare in its way .
th : jefferson .

to the senate and house of representatives of the united states : agreeably to the request of the house of representatives , communicated in their resolution of the 16th instant , i proceed to state under the reserve therein expressed , information received touching an illegal combination of private individuals against the peace and safety of the union , and a military expedition planned by them against the territories of a power in amity with the united states , with the measures i have pursued for suppressing the same .
i had for some time been in the constant expectation of receiving such further information as would have enabled me to lay before the legislature the termination as well as the beginning and progress of this scene of depravity , so far it has been acted on the ohio and its waters .
from this the state and safety of the lower country might have been estimated on probable grounds , and the delay was indulged the rather , because no circumstance had yet made it necessary to call in the aid of the legislative functions .
information now recently communicated has brought us nearly to the period contemplated .
the mass of what i have received , in the course of these transactions , is voluminous , but little has been given under the sanction of an oath , so as to constitute formal and legal evidence .
it is chiefly in the form of letters , often containing such a mixture of rumors , conjectures , and suspicions , as render it difficult to sift out the real facts , and unadvisable to hazard more than general outlines , strengthened by concurrent information , or the particular credibility of the relater .
in this state of the evidence , delivered sometimes too under the restriction of private confidence , neither safety nor justice will permit the exposing names , except that of the principal actor , whose guilt is placed beyond question .
some time in the latter part of september , i received intimations that designs were in agitation in the western country , unlawful and unfriendly to the peace of the union ; and that the prime mover in these was aaron burr , heretofore distinguished by the favor of his country .
the grounds of these intimations being inconclusive , the objects uncertain , and the fidelity of that country known to be firm , the only measure taken was to urge the informants to use their best endeavors to get further insight into the designs and proceedings of the suspected persons , and to communicate them to me .
it was not until the latter part of october , that the objects of the conspiracy began to be perceived , but still so blended and involved in mystery that nothing distinct could be singled out for pursuit .
in this state of uncertainty as to the crime contemplated , the acts done , and the legal course to be pursued , i thought it best to send to the scene where these things were principally in transaction , a person , in whose integrity , understanding , and discretion , entire confidence could be reposed , with instructions to investigate the plots going on , to enter into conference ( for which he had sufficient credentials ) with the governors and all other officers , civil and military , and with their aid to do on the spot whatever should be necessary to discover the designs of the conspirators , arrest their means , bring their persons to punishment , and to call out the force of the country to suppress any unlawful enterprise in which it should be found they were engaged .
by this time it was known that many boats were under preparation , stores of provisions collecting , and an unusual number of suspicious characters in motion on the ohio and its waters .
besides despatching the confidential agent to that quarter , orders were at the same time sent to the governors of the orleans and mississippi territories , and to the commanders of the land and naval forces there , to be on their guard against surprise , and in constant readiness to resist any enterprise which might be attempted on the vessels , posts , or other objects under their care ; and on the 8th of november , instructions were forwarded to general wilkinson to hasten an accommodation with the spanish commander on the sabine , and as soon as that was effected , to fall back with his principal force to the hither bank of the mississippi , for the defence of the intersecting points on that river .
by a letter received from that officer on the 25th of november , but dated october 21st , we learn that a confidential agent of aaron burr had been deputed to him , with communications partly written in cipher and partly oral , explaining his designs , exaggerating his resources , and making such offers of emolument and command , to engage him and the army in his unlawful enterprise , as he had flattered himself would be successful .
the general , with the honor of a soldier and fidelity of a good citizen , immediately despatched a trusty officer to me with information of what had passed , proceeding to establish such an understanding with the spanish commandant on the sabine as permitted him to withdraw his force across the mississippi , and to enter on measures for opposing the projected enterprise .
the general 's letter , which came to hand on the 25th of november , as has been mentioned , and some other information received a few days earlier , when brought together , developed burr 's general designs , different parts of which only had been revealed to different informants .
it appeared that he contemplated two distinct objects , which might be carried on either jointly or separately , and either the one or the other first , as circumstances should direct .
one of these was the severance of the union of these states by the alleghany mountains ; the other , an attack on mexico .
a third object was provided , merely ostensible , to wit : the settlement of a pretended purchase of a tract of country on the washita , claimed by a baron bastrop .
this was to serve as the pretext for all his preparations , an allurement for such followers as really wished to acquire settlements in that country , and a cover under which to retreat in the event of final discomfiture of both branches of his real design .
he found at once that the attachment of the western country to the present union was not to be shaken ; that its dissolution could not be effected with the consent of its inhabitants , and that his resources were inadequate , as yet , to effect it by force .
he took his course then at once , determined to seize on new orleans , plunder the bank there , possess himself of the military and naval stores , and proceed on his expedition to mexico ; and to this object all his means and preparations were now directed .
he collected from all the quarters where himself or his agents possessed influence , all the ardent , restless , desperate , and disaffected persons who were ready for any enterprise analogous to their characters .
he seduced good and well - meaning citizens , some by assurances that he possessed the confidence of the government and was acting under its secret patronage , a pretence which obtained some credit from the state of our differences with spain ; and others by offers of land in bastrop 's claim on the washita .
this was the state of my information of his proceedings about the last of november , at which time , therefore , it was first possible to take specific measures to meet them .
the proclamation of november 27 , two days after the receipt of general wilkinson 's information , was now issued .
orders were despatched to every intersecting point on the ohio and mississippi , from pittsburg to new orleans , for the employment of such force either of the regulars or of the militia , and of such proceedings also of the civil authorities , as might enable them to seize on all the boats and stores provided for the enterprise , to arrest the persons concerned , and to suppress effectually the further progress of the enterprise .
a little before the receipt of these orders in the state of ohio , our confidential agent , who had been diligently employed in investigating the conspiracy , had acquired sufficient information to open himself to the governor of that state , and apply for the immediate exertion of the authority and power of the state to crush the combination .
governor tiffin and the legislature , with a promptitude , an energy , and patriotic zeal , which entitle them to a distinguished place in the affection of their sister states , effected the seizure of all the boats , provisions , and other preparations within their reach , and thus gave a first blow , materially disabling the enterprise in its outset .
in kentucky , a premature attempt to bring burr to justice , without sufficient evidence for his conviction , had produced a popular impression in his favor , and a general disbelief of his guilt .
this gave him an unfortunate opportunity of hastening his equipments .
the arrival of the proclamation and orders , and the application and information of our confidential agent , at length awakened the authorities of that state to the truth , and then produced the same promptitude and energy of which the neighboring state had set the example .
under an act of their legislature of december 23 , militia was instantly ordered to different important points , and measures taken for doing whatever could yet be done .
some boats ( accounts vary from five to double or treble that number ) and persons ( differently estimated from one to three hundred ) had in the meantime passed the falls of the ohio , to rendezvous at the mouth of the cumberland , with others expected down that river .
not apprized , till very late , that any boats were building on cumberland , the effect of the proclamation had been trusted to for some time in the state of tennessee ; but on the 19th of december , similar communications and instructions with those of the neighboring states were despatched by express to the governor , and a general officer of the western division of the state , and on the 23rd of december our confidential agent left frankfort for nashville , to put into activity the means of that state also .
but by information received yesterday i learn that on the 22rd of december , mr. burr descended the cumberland with two boats merely of accommodation , carrying with him from that state no quota toward his unlawful enterprise .
whether after the arrival of the proclamation , of the orders , or of our agent , any exertion which could be made by that state , or the orders of the governor of kentucky for calling out the militia at the mouth of cumberland , would be in time to arrest these boats , and those from the falls of the ohio , is still doubtful .
on the whole , the fugitives from ohio , with their associates from cumberland , or any other place in that quarter , can not threaten serious danger to the city of new orleans .
by the same express of december nineteenth , orders were sent to the governors of new orleans and mississippi , supplementary to those which had been given on the 25th of november , to hold the militia of their territories in readiness to co - operate for their defence , with the regular troops and armed vessels then under command of general wilkinson .
great alarm , indeed , was excited at new orleans by the exaggerated accounts of mr. burr , disseminated through his emissaries , of the armies and navies he was to assemble there .
general wilkinson had arrived there himself on the 24th of november and had immediately put into activity the resources of the place for the purpose of its defence ; and on the tenth of december he was joined by his troops from the sabine .
great zeal was shown by the inhabitants generally , the merchants of the place readily agreeing to the most laudable exertions and sacrifices for manning the armed vessels with their seamen , and the other citizens manifesting unequivocal fidelity to the union , and a spirit of determined resistance to their expected assailants .
surmises have been hazarded that this enterprise is to receive aid from certain foreign powers .
but these surmises are without proof or probability .
the wisdom of the measures sanctioned by congress at its last session had placed us in the paths of peace and justice with the only powers with whom we had any differences , and nothing has happened since which makes it either their interest or ours to pursue another course .
no change of measures has taken place on our part ; none ought to take place at this time .
with the one , friendly arrangement was then proposed , and the law deemed necessary on the failure of that was suspended to give time for a fair trial of the issue .
with the same power , negotiation is still preferred and provisional measures only are necessary to meet the event of rupture .
while , therefore , we do not deflect in the slightest degree from the course we then assumed , and are still pursuing , with mutual consent , to restore a good understanding , we are not to impute to them practices as irreconcilable to interest as to good faith , and changing necessarily the relations of peace and justice between us to those of war .
these surmises are , therefore , to be imputed to the vauntings of the author of this enterprise , to multiply his partisans by magnifying the belief of his prospects and support .
by letters from general wilkinson , of the 14th and 18th of september , which came to hand two days after date of the resolution of the house of representatives , that is to say , on the morning of the 18th instant , i received the important affidavit , a copy of which i now communicate , with extracts of so much of the letters as come within the scope of the resolution .
by these it will be seen that of three of the principal emissaries of mr. burr , whom the general had caused to be apprehended , one had been liberated by habeas corpus , and the two others , being those particularly employed in the endeavor to corrupt the general and army of the united states , have been embarked by him for our ports in the atlantic states , probably on the consideration that an impartial trial could not be expected during the present agitations of new orleans , and that that city was not as yet a safe place of confinement .
as soon as these persons shall arrive , they will be delivered to the custody of the law , and left to such course of trial , both as to place and process , as its functionaries may direct .
the presence of the highest judicial authorities , to be assembled at this place within a few days , the means of pursuing a sounder course of proceedings here than elsewhere , and the aid of the executive means , should the judges have occasion to use them , render it equally desirable for the criminals as for the public , that being already removed from the place where they were first apprehended , the first regular arrest should take place here , and the course of proceedings receive here its proper direction .

whereas information has been received that sundry persons , citizens of the united states or residents within the same , are conspiring and confederating together to begin and set on foot , provide , and prepare the means for a military expedition or enterprise against the dominions of spain ; that for this purpose they are fitting out and arming vessels in the western waters of the united states , collecting provisions , arms , military stores , and means ; are deceiving and seducing honest and well - meaning citizens , under various pretenses , to engage in their criminal enterprises ; are organizing , officering , and arming themselves for the same , contrary to the laws in such cases made and provided : i have therefore thought proper to issue this my proclamation , warning and enjoining all faithful citizens who have been led without due knowledge or consideration to participate in the said unlawful enterprises to withdraw from the same without delay , and commanding all persons whatsoever engaged or concerned in the same to cease all further proceedings therein , as they will answer the contrary at their peril and incur prosecution with all the rigors of the law .
and i hereby enjoin and require all officers , civil and military , of the united states , or of any of the states or territories , and especially all governors and other executive authorities , all judges , justices , and other officers of the peace , all military officers of the army or navy of the united states , or officers of the militia , to be vigilant , each within his respective department and according to his functions , in searching out and bringing to condign punishment all persons engaged or concerned in such enterprise , in seizing and detaining , subject to the disposition of the law , all vessels , arms , military stores , or other means provided or providing for the same , and , in general , in preventing the carrying on such expedition or enterprise by all lawful means within their power ; and i require all good and faithful citizens and others within the united states to be aiding and assisting herein , and especially in the discovery , apprehension , and bringing to justice of all such offenders , in preventing the execution of their unlawful designs , and in giving information against them to the proper authorities .
in testimony whereof i have caused the seal of the united states to be affixed to these presents , and have signed the same with my hand .
given at the city of washington on the 27th day of november , 1806 , and in the year of the sovereignty of the united states the thirty - first , th : jefferson .
by the president : james madison ,
to the senate and house of representatives of the united states : to a people , fellow - citizens , who sincerely desire the happiness and prosperity of other nations : to those who justly calculate that their own well - being is advanced by that of the nations with which they have intercourse , it will be a satisfaction to observe that the war which was lighted up europe a little before our last meeting has not yet extended its flames to other nations , nor been marked by the calamities which sometimes stain the footsteps of war .
the irregularities , too on the ocean , which generally harass the commerce of neutral nations , have in distant parts , disturbed ours less than on former occasions ; but in the american seas they have been greater from peculiar causes , and even within our harbors and jurisdiction infringements on the authority of the laws have been committed which have called for serious attention the friendly conduct of the governments from whose officers and subjects these acts have proceeded , in other respects and in places more under their observation and control , gives us confidence that our representations on this subject will have been completely regarded .
while noticing the irregularities committed on the ocean by others , those on our own part should not be omitted nor left unprovided for .
complaints have been received that persons residing within the united states have taken on themselves to arm merchant vessels and to force a commerce into certain ports and countries in defiance of the laws of those countries in defiance of the laws of those countries .
that individuals should undertake to wage private war , independently of the authority of their country , can not be permitted in a well - ordered society .
its tendency to produce aggression on the laws and rights of other nations and to endanger the peace of our own is so oblivious that i doubt not you will adopt measures for restraining it effectually in future .
soon after the passage of the act of the last session authorizing the establishment of a district and a port of entry on the waters of the mobile we learnt that its object was misunderstood on the part of spain .
candid explanations were immediately given and assurances that , reserving our claims in that quarter as a subject of discussion and arrangement with spain , no act was mediated in the meantime inconsistent with peace and friendship existing between the two nations , and that conformably to these intentions would be the execution of the law .
that government had , however , thought proper to suspend the ratification of the convention of 1802 ; but the explanations which would reach them soon after , and still more the confirmation of them by the tenor of the instrument establishing the port and district , may reasonably be expected to replace them in the dispositions and views of the whole subject which originally dictated the convention .
i have the satisfaction to inform you that the objections which had been urged by that government against the validity of our title to the country of louisana have been withdrawn , its exact limits , however , remaining still to be settled between us ; and to this is to be added that having prepared and delivered the stock created in execution of the convention of paris of april 30 , 1803 .
in consideration of the cession of that country , we have received from the government of france an acknowledgment in due form , of the fulfillment of that stipulation .
with the nations of europe in general our friendship and intercourse are undisturbed , and from the governments of the belligerent powers especially we continue to receive those friendly manifestations which are justly due to an honest neutrality and to such good offices consistent with that as we have opportunities of rendering .
the activity and success of the small force employed in the mediterranean in the early part of the present year , the reenforcements sent into that sea , and the energy of the officers having command in the several vessels will , i trust , by the sufferings of war , reduce the barbarians of tripoli to the desire of peace on proper terms .
great injury , however , ensues to ourselves , as well as to others interested , from the distance to which prizes must be brought for adjudication and from the impracticability of bringing hither such as are not seaworthy .
the bey of tunis having made requisitions unauthorized by our treaty , their rejection has produced from him some expressions of discontent .
but to those who expect us to calculate whether a compliance with unjust demands will not cost us less than a war we must leave as a question of calculation for them also whether to retire from unjust demands will not cost them less than a war .
we can do to each other very sensible injuries by war , but mutual advantages of peace make that the best interest of both .
peace and intercourse with other powers on the same coast continue on the footing on which they are established by treaty .
in pursuance of the act providing for the temporary government of louisana , the necessary officers for the territory of orleans were appointed in due time to commence the exercise of their functions on the 1st .
day of october .
the distance , however , of some of them and indispensable previous arrangements may have retarded its commencement in some of its parts .
the form of government thus provided having been considered but as temporary , and open to such future improvements as further information of the circumstances of our brethren there might suggest , it will of course be subject to your consideration .
in the district of louisana it has been thought best to adopt the division into subordinate districts which had been established under its former government .
these being five in number , a commanding officer has been appointed to each , according to the provisions of the law , and so soon as they can be at their stations that district will also be in its due state of organization .
in the meantime their places are supplied by the officers commanding there .
and the functions of the governor and judges of indiana having commenced , the government , we presume is preceding in its new form .
the lead mines in that district offer so rich a supply of that metal as to merit attention .
the report now communicated will inform you of their state and of the necessity of immediate inquiry into their occupation and titles .
with the indian tribes established within our newly acquired limits , i have deemed it necessary to open conferences for the purpose of establishing a good understanding and neighborly relations between us .
so far as we have yet learned , we have reason to believe that their dispositions on their part , we have in our own hands means which can not fail us for preserving their peace and friendship .
by pursuing an uniform course of justice toward them , by aiding them in all the improvements which may better their condition , and especially by establishing a commerce on terms which shall be advantageous to them and only not losing to us , and so regulated as that no incendiaries of our own or any other nation may be permitted to disturb the natural effects of our just and friendly offices , we may render ourselves so necessary to their comfort and prosperity that the protection of our citizens from their disorderly members will become their interest and their voluntary care .
instead , therefore , of an augmentation of military force proportioned to our extension of frontier , i propose a moderate enlargement of the capital employed in that commerce as a more effectual , economical , and humane instrument for preserving peace and good neighborhood with them .
on this side of the mississippi an important relinquishment of native title has been received from the delawares .
that tribe , desiring to extinguish in their people the spirit of hunting and to convert superfluous lands into the means of improving what they retain , has ceded to us all the country between wabash and ohio south of and including the road from the rapids toward vincennes , for which they are to receive annuities in animals and implements for agriculture and in other necessaries .
this acquisition is important , not only for its extent and fertility , but as fronting 300 miles on the ohio , and near half that on the wabash .
the produce of the settled country descending those rivers will no longer pass in review of the indian frontier but in a small portion , and , with the cession heretofore made by the kaskaskias , nearly consolidates our possessions north of the ohio , in a very respectful breadth - from lake erie to the mississippi .
the piankeshaws having some claim to the country ceded by the delawares , it has been thought best to keep quiet that by fair purchase also .
so soon as the treaties on this subject shall have received their constitutional sanctions they shall be laid before both houses .
the act of congress of february 28 , 1803 , for building and employing a number of gunboats , is now in a course of execution to the extent there provided for .
the obstacle to naval enterprise which vessels of this construction offer for our seaport towns , their utility toward supporting within our waters the authority of the laws , the promptness with which they will be manned by the seamen and militia of the place in the moment they are wanting , the facility of their assembling from different parts of the coast to any point where they are required in greater force than ordinary , the economy of their maintenance and preservation from decay when not in actual service , and the competence of our finances to this defensive provision without any new burthen are considerations which will have due weight with congress in deciding on the expediency of adding to their number from year to year , as experience shall test their utility , until all our important harbors , by these and auxiliary means , shall be secured against insult and opposition to the laws .
no circumstances has arisen since your last session which calls for any augmentation of our regular military force .
should any improvement occur in militia system , that will be always seasonable .
accounts of the receipts and expenditures of the last year , with estimates for the ensuing one , will as usual be laid before you .
the state of our finances continues to fulfill our expectations .
eleven millions and a half of dollars , received in the course of the year ending the 30th of september last , have enabled us , us , after meeting all the ordinary expenses of the year , to pay upward of $ 3,600,000 of the public debt , exclusive of interest .
this payment , with those of the two preceding years , has extinguished upward of twelve millions of the principle and a greater sum of interest within that period , and by a proportionate diminution of interest renders already sensible the effect of the growing sum yearly applicable to the discharge of the principle .
it is also ascertained that the revenue accrued during the last year exceeds that of the preceding , and the probable receipts of the ensuing year may safely be relied on as sufficient , with the sum already in the treasury , to meet all the current demands of the year , to discharge upwards of three millions and a half of the engagements incurred under the british and french conventions , and to advance in the further redemption of the funded debt as rapidly as had been contemplated .
these , fellow - citizens , are the principle matters which i have thought it necessary at this time to communicate for your consideration and attention .
some others will be laid before you in the course of the session ; but in the discharge of the great duties confided to you by our country you will take a broader view of the field of legislation .
whether the great interests of agriculture , manufactures , commerce , or navigation can within the pale of your constitutional powers be aided in any of their relations ; whether laws are provided in all cases where they are wanting ; whether those provided are exactly what they should be ; whether any abuses take place in their administration , or in that of the public revenues ; whether the organization of the public agents or of the public force is perfect in all its parts ; in fine , whether anything can be done to advance the general good , are questions within the limits of your functions which will necessarily occupy your attention .
in these and all other matters which you in your wisdom may propose for the good of our country you may count with assurance on my hearty cooperation and faithful execution .

my children , the wolf and people of the mandan nation : i take you by the hand of friendship hearty welcome to the seat of the government of the united states .
the journey which you have taken to visit your fathers on this side of our island is a long one , and your having undertaken it is a proof that you desired to become acquainted with us .
i thank the great spirit that he has protected you through the journey and brought you safely to the residence of your friends , and i hope he will have you constantly in his safe keeping , and restore you in good health to your nations and families .
my friends and children , we are descended from the old nations which live beyond the great water , but we and our forefathers have been so long here that we seem like you to have grown out of this land .
we consider ourselves no longer of the old nations beyond the great water , but as united in one family with our red brethren here .
the french , the english , the spaniards , have now agreed with us to retire from all the country which you and we hold between canada and mexico , and never more to return to it .
and remember the words i now speak to you , my children , they are never to return again .
we are now your fathers ; and you shall not lose by the change .
as soon as spain had agreed to withdraw from all the waters of the missouri and mississippi , i felt the desire of becoming acquainted with all my red children beyond the mississippi , and of uniting them with us as we have those on this side of that river , in the bonds of peace and friendship .
i wished to learn what we could do to benefit them by furnishing them the necessaries they want in exchange for their furs and peltries .
i therefore sent our beloved man , captain lewis , one of my own family , to go up the missouri river to get acquainted with all the indian nations in its neighborhood , to take them by the hand , deliver my talks to them , and to inform us in what way we could be useful to them .
your nation received him kindly , you have taken him by the hand and been friendly to him .
my children , i thank you for the services you rendered him , and for your attention to his words .
he will now tell us where we should establish trading houses to be convenient to you all , and what we must send to them .
my friends and children , i have now an important advice to give you .
i have already told you that you and all the red men are my children , and i wish you to live in peace and friendship with one another as brethren of the same family ought to do .
how much better is it for neighbors to help than to hurt one another ; how much happier must it make them .
if you will cease to make war on one another , if you will live in friendship with all mankind , you can employ all your time in providing food and clothing for yourselves and your families .
your men will not be destroyed in war , and your women and children will lie down to sleep in their cabins without fear of being surprised by their enemies and killed or carried away .
your numbers will be increased instead of diminishing , and you will live in plenty and in quiet .
my children , i have given this advice to all your red brethren on this side of the mississippi ; they are following it , they are increasing in their numbers , are learning to clothe and provide for their families as we do .
remember then my advice , my children , carry it home to your people , and tell them that from the day that they have become all of the same family , from the day that we became father to them all , we wish , as a true father should do , that we may all live together as one household , and that before they strike one another , they should go to their father and let him endeavor to make up the quarrel .
my children , you are come from the other side of our great island , from where the sun sets , to see your new friends at the sun rising .
you have now arrived where the waters are constantly rising and falling every day , but you are still distant from the sea .
i very much desire that you should not stop here , but go and see your brethren as far as the edge of the great water .
i am persuaded you have so far seen that every man by the way has received you as his brothers , and has been ready to do you all the kindness in his power .
you will see the same thing quite to the sea shore ; and i wish you , therefore , to go and visit our great cities in that quarter , and see how many friends and brothers you have here .
you will then have travelled a long line from west to east , and if you had time to go from north to south , from canada to florida , you would find it as long in that direction , and all the people as sincerely your friends .
i wish you , my children , to see all you can , and to tell your people all you see ; because i am sure the more they know of us , the more they will be our hearty friends .
i invite you , therefore , to pay a visit to baltimore , philadelphia , new york , and the cities still beyond that , if you are willing to go further .
we will provide carriages to convey you and a person to go with you to see that you want for nothing .
by the time you come back the snows will be melted on the mountains , the ice in the rivers broken up , and you will be wishing to set out on your return home .
my children , i have long desired to see you ; i have now opened my heart to you , let my words sink into your hearts and never be forgotten .
if ever lying people or bad spirits should raise up clouds between us , call to mind what i have said , and what you have seen yourselves .
be sure there are some lying spirits between us ; let us come together as friends and explain to each other what is misrepresented or misunderstood , the clouds will fly away like morning fog , and the sun of friendship appear and shine forever bright and clear between us .
my children , it may happen that while you are here occasion may arise to talk about many things which i do not now particularly mention .
the secretary at war will always be ready to talk with you , and you are to consider whatever he says as said by myself .
he will also take care of you and see that you are furnished with all comforts here .

we have long heard of your nation as a numerous , peaceable , and friendly people ; but this is the first visit we have had from its great men at the seat of our government .
i welcome you here ; am glad to take you by the hand , and to assure you , for your nation , that we are their friends .
born in the same land , we ought to live as brothers , doing to each other all the good we can , and not listening to wicked men , who may endeavor to make us enemies .
by living in peace , we can help and prosper one another ; by waging war , we can kill and destroy many on both sides ; but those who survive will not be the happier for that .
then , brothers , let it forever be peace and good neighborhood between us .
our seventeen states compose a great and growing nation .
their children are as the leaves of the trees , which the winds are spreading over the forest .
but we are just also .
we take from no nation what belongs to it .
our growing numbers make us always willing to buy lands from our red brethren , when they are willing to sell .
but be assured we never mean to disturb them in their possessions .
on the contrary , the lines established between us by mutual consent , shall be sacredly preserved , and will protect your lands from all encroachments by our own people or any others .
we will give you a copy of the law , made by our great council , for punishing our people , who may encroach on your lands , or injure you otherwise .
carry it with you to your homes , and preserve it , as the shield which we spread over you , to protect your land , your property and persons .
it is at the request which you sent me in september , signed by puckshanublee and other chiefs , and which you now repeat , that i listen to your proposition to sell us lands .
you say you owe a great debt to your merchants , that you have nothing to pay it with but lands , and you pray us to take lands , and pay your debt .
the sum you have occasion for , brothers , is a very great one .
we have never yet paid as much to any of our red brethren for the purchase of lands .
you propose to us some on the tombigbee , and some on the mississippi .
those on the mississippi suit us well .
we wish to have establishments on that river , as resting places for our boats , to furnish them provisions , and to receive our people who fall sick on the way to or from new orleans , which is now ours .
in that quarter , therefore , we are willing to purchase as much as you will spare .
but as to the manner in which the line shall be run , we are not judges of it here , nor qualified to make any bargain .
but we will appoint persons hereafter to treat with you on the spot , who , knowing the country and quality of the lands , will be better able to agree with you on a line which will give us a just equivalent for the sum of money you want paid .
you have spoken , brothers , of the lands which your fathers formerly sold and marked off to the english , and which they ceded to us with the rest of the country they held here ; and you say that , though you do not know whether your fathers were paid for them , you have marked the line over again for us , and do not ask repayment .
it has always been the custom , brothers , when lands were bought of the red men , to pay for them immediately , and none of us have ever seen an example of such a debt remaining unpaid .
it is to satisfy their immediate wants that the red men have usually sold lands ; and in such a case , they would not let the debt be unpaid .
the presumption from custom then is strong ; so it is also from the great length of time since your fathers sold these lands .
but we have , moreover , been informed by persons now living , and who assisted the english in making the purchase , that the price was paid at the time .
were it otherwise , as it was their contract , it would be their debt , not ours .
i rejoice , brothers , to hear you propose to become cultivators of the earth for the maintenance of your families .
be assured you will support them better and with less labor , by raising stock and bread , and by spinning and weaving clothes , than by hunting .
a little land cultivated , and a little labor , will procure more provisions than the most successful hunt ; and a woman will clothe more by spinning and weaving , than a man by hunting .
compared with you , we are but as of yesterday in this land .
yet see how much more we have multiplied by industry , and the exercise of that reason which you possess in common with us .
follow then our example , brethren , and we will aid you with great pleasure .
the clothes and other necessaries which we sent you the last year , were , as you supposed , a present from us .
we never meant to ask land or any other payment for them ; and the store which we sent on , was at your request also ; and to accommodate you with necessaries at a reasonable price , you wished of course to have it on your land ; but the land would continue yours , not ours .
as to the removal of the store , the interpreter , and the agent , and any other matters you may wish to speak about , the secretary at war will enter into explanations with you , and whatever he says , you may consider as said by myself , and what he promises you will be faithfully performed .
i am glad , brothers , you are willing to go and visit some other parts of our country .
carriages shall be ready to convey you , and you shall be taken care of on your journey ; and when you shall have returned here and rested yourselves to your own mind , you shall be sent home by land .
we had provided for your coming by land , and were sorry for the mistake which carried you to savannah instead of augusta , and exposed you to the risks of a voyage by sea .
had any accident happened to you , though we could not help it , it would have been a cause of great mourning to us .
but we thank the great spirit who took care of you on the ocean , and brought you safe and in good health to the seat of our great council ; and we hope his care will accompany and protect you , on your journey and return home ; and that he will preserve and prosper your nation in all its just pursuits .

gentleman , i have received the remonstrance you were pleased to address to me , on the appointment of samuel bishop to the office of collector of new haven , lately vacated by the death of david austin .
the right of our fellow citizens to represent to the public functionaries their opinion on proceedings interesting to them , is unquestionably a constitutional right , often useful , sometimes necessary , and will always be respectfully acknoleged by me .
of the various executive duties , no one excites more anxious concern than that of placing the interests of our fellow citizens in the hands of honest men , with understandings sufficient for their station .
no duty , at the same time , is more difficult to fulfil .
the knolege of characters possessed by a single individual is , of necessity , limited .
to seek out the best through the whole union , we must resort to other information , which , from the best of men , acting disinterestedly and with the purest motives , is sometimes incorrect .
in the case of samuel bishop , however , the subject of your remonstrance , time was taken , information was sought , and such obtained as could leave no room for doubt of his fitness .
from private sources it was learnt that his understanding was sound , his integrity pure , his character unstained .
and the offices confided to him within his own state , are public evidences of the estimation in which he is held by the state in general , and the city and township particularly in which he lives .
he is said to be the town clerk , a justice of the peace , mayor of the city of new haven , an office held at the will of the legislature , chief judge of the court of common pleas for new haven county , a court of high criminal and civil jurisdiction wherein most causes are decided without the right of appeal or review , and sole judge of the court of probates , wherein he singly decides all questions of wills , settlement of estates , testate and intestate , appoints guardians , settles their accounts , and in fact has under his jurisdiction and care all the property real and personal of persons dying .
the two last offices , in the annual gift of the legislature , were given to him in may last .
is it possible that the man to whom the legislature of connecticut has so recently committed trusts of such difficulty and magnitude , is ` unfit to be the collector of the district of new haven , ' tho ' acknoleged in the same writing , to have obtained all this confidence ` by a long life of usefulness ? '
it is objected , indeed , in the remonstrance , that he is 77 .
years of age ; but at a much more advanced age , our franklin was the ornament of human nature .
he may not be able to perform in person , all the details of his office ; but if he gives us the benefit of his understanding , his integrity , his watchfulness , and takes care that all the details are well performed by himself or his necessary assistants , all public purposes will be answered .
the remonstrance , indeed , does not allege that the office has been illy conducted , but only apprehends that it will be so .
should this happen in event , be assured i will do in it what shall be just and necessary for the public service .
in the meantime , he should be tried without being prejudged .
the removal , as it is called , of mr. goodrich , forms another subject of complaint .
declarations by myself in favor of political tolerance , exhortations to harmony and affection in social intercourse , and to respect for the equal rights of the minority , have , on certain occasions , been quoted and misconstrued into assurances that the tenure of offices was to be undisturbed .
but could candor apply such a construction ?
it is not indeed in the remonstrance that we find it ; but it leads to the explanations which that calls for .
when it is considered , that during the late administration , those who were not of a particular sect of politics were excluded from all office ; when , by a steady pursuit of this measure , nearly the whole offices of the u s were monopolized by that sect ; when the public sentiment at length declared itself , and burst open the doors of honor and confidence to those whose opinions they more approved , was it to be imagined that this monopoly of office was still to be continued in the hands of the minority ?
does it violate their equal rights , to assert some rights in the majority also ?
is it political intolerance to claim a proportionate share in the direction of the public affairs ?
can they not harmonize in society unless they have everything in their own hands ?
if the will of the nation , manifested by their various elections , calls for an administration of government according with the opinions of those elected ; if , for the fulfilment of that will , displacements are necessary , with whom can they so justly begin as with persons appointed in the last moments of an administration , not for its own aid , but to begin a career at the same time with their successors , by whom they had never been approved , and who could scarcely expect from them a cordial cooperation ?
mr. goodrich was one of these .
was it proper for him to place himself in office , without knowing whether those whose agent he was to be would have confidence in his agency ?
can the preference of another , as the successor to mr. austin , be candidly called a removal of mr. goodrich ?
if a due participation of office is a matter of right , how are vacancies to be obtained ?
those by death are few ; by resignation , none .
can any other mode than that of removal be proposed ?
this is a painful office ; but it is made my duty , and i meet it as such .
i proceed in the operation with deliberation and inquiry , that it may injure the best men least , and effect the purposes of justice and public utility with the least private distress ; that it may be thrown , as much as possible , on delinquency , on oppression , on intolerance , on incompetence , on ante - revolutionary adherence to our enemies .
the remonstrance laments " that a change in the administration must produce a change in the subordinate officers ; " in other words , that it should be deemed necessary for all officers to think with their principal .
but on whom does this imputation bear ?
on those who have excluded from office every shade of opinion which was not theirs ?
or on those who have been so excluded ?
lament sincerely that unessential differences of political opinion should ever have been deemed sufficient to interdict half the society from the rights and the blessings of self - government , to proscribe them as characters unworthy of every trust .
it would have been to me a circumstance of great relief , had i found a moderate participation of office in the hands of the majority .
i would gladly have left to time and accident to raise them to their just share .
but their total exclusion calls for prompter correctives .
shall correct the procedure ; but that done , disdain to follow it , shall return with joy to that state of things , when the only questions concerning a candidate shall be , is he honest ?
is he capable ?
is he faithful to the constitution ?
i tender you the homage of my high respect .

