fellow citizens of the united states : in compliance with a custom as old as the government itself , i appear before you to address you briefly , and to take in your presence the oath prescribed by the constitution of the united states to be taken by the president " before he enters on the execution of his office."i do not consider it necessary at present for me to discuss those matters of administration about which there is no special anxiety or excitement .
apprehension seems to exist among the people of the southern states that by the accession of a republican administration their property and their peace and personal security are to be endangered .
there has never been any reasonable cause for such apprehension .
indeed , the most ample evidence to the contrary has all the while existed and been open to their inspection .
it is found in nearly all the published speeches of him who now addresses you .
i do but quote from one of those speeches when i declare that " i have no purpose , directly or indirectly , to interfere with the institution of slavery in the states where it exists .
i beheve i have no lawful right to do so , and i have no inclination to do so . "
those who nominated and elected me did so with full knowledge that i had made this and many similar declarations , and had never recanted them .
and , more than this , they placed in the platform for my acceptance , and as a law to themselves and to me , the clear and emphatic resolution which i now read : resolved , that the maintenance inviolate of the rights of the states , and especially the right of each state to order and control its own domestic institutions according to its own judgment exclusively , is essential to that balance of power on which the perfection and endurance of our political fabric depend , and we denounce the lawless invasion by armed force of the soil of any state or territory , no matter under what pretext , as among the gravest of crimes .
i now reiterate these sentiments ; and , in doing so , i only press upon the public attention the most conclusive evidence of which the case is susceptible , that the property , peace , and security of no section are to be in any wise endangered by the now incoming administration .
i add , too , that all the protection which , consistently with the constitution and the laws , can be given , will be cheerfully given to all the states when lawfully demanded , for whatever cause -- as cheerfully to one section as to another .
there is much controversy about the delivering up of fugitives from service or labor .
the clause i now read is as plainly written in the constitution as any other of its provisions : no person held to service or labor in one state , under the laws thereof , escaping into another , shall in consequence of any law or regulation therein be discharged from such service or labor , but shall be delivered up on claim of the party to whom such service or labor may be due .
it is scarcely questioned that this provision was intended by those who made it for the reclaiming of what we call fugitive slaves ; and the intention of the lawgiver is the law .
all members of congress swear their support to the whole constitution -- to this provision as much as to any other .
to the proposition , then , that slaves whose cases come within the terms of this clause " shall be delivered up , " their oaths are unanimous .
now , if they would make the effort in good temper , could they not with nearly equal unanimity frame and pass a law by means of which to keep good that unanimous oath?there is some difference of opinion whether this clause should be enforced by national or by state authority ; but surely that difference is not a very material one .
if the slave is to be surrendered , it can be of but little consequence to him or to others by which authority it is done .
and should anyone in any case be content that his oath shall go unkept on a merely unsubstantial controversy as to how it shall be kept?again , in any law upon this subject , ought not all the safeguards of liberty known in civilized and humane jurisprudence to be introduced , so that a free man be not , in any case , surrendered as a slave ?
and might it not be well at the same time to provide by law for the enforcement of that clause in the constitution which guarantees that " the citizen of each state shall be entitled to all privileges and immunities of citizens in the several states."i take the official oath to - day with no mental reservations , and with no purpose to construe the constitution or laws by any hypercritical rules .
and while i do not choose now to specify particular acts of congress as proper to be enforced , i do suggest that it will be much safer for all , both in official and private stations , to conform to and abide by all those acts which stand unrepealed , than to violate any of them , trusting to find impunity in having them held to be unconstitutional .
it is seventy - two years since the first inauguration of a president under our national constitution .
during that period fifteen different and greatly distinguished citizens have , in succession , administered the executive branch of the government .
they have conducted it through many perils , and generally with great success .
yet , with all this scope of precedent , i now enter upon the same task for the brief constitutional term of four years under great and peculiar difficulty .
a disruption of the federal union , heretofore only menaced , is now formidably attempted .
i hold that , in contemplation of universal law and of the constitution , the union of these states is perpetual .
perpetuity is implied , if not expressed , in the fundamental law of all national governments .
it is safe to assert that no government proper ever had a provision in its organic law for its own termination .
continue to execute all the express provisions of our national constitution , and the union will endure forever -- it being impossible to destroy it except by some action not provided for in the instrument itself .
again , if the united states be not a government proper , but an association of states in the nature of contract merely , can it , as a contract , be peaceably unmade by less than all the parties who made it ?
one party to a contract may violate it -- break it , so to speak ; but does it not require all to lawfully rescind it?descending from these general principles , we find the proposition that , in legal contemplation the union is perpetual confirmed by the history of the union itself .
the union is much older than the constitution .
it was formed , in fact , by the articles of association in 1774 .
it was matured and continued by the declaration of independence in 1776 .
it was further matured , and the faith of all the then thirteen states expressly plighted and engaged that it should be perpetual , by the articles of confederation in 1778 .
and , finally , in 1787 one of the declared objects for ordaining and establishing the constitution was " to form a more perfect union."but if the destruction of the union by one or by a part only of the states be lawfully possible , the union is less perfect than before the constitution , having lost the vital element of perpetuity .
it follows from these views that no state upon its own mere motion can lawfully get out of the union ; that resolves and ordinances to that effect are legally void ; and that acts of violence , within any state or states , against the authority of the united states , are insurrectionary or revolutionary , according to circumstances .
i therefore consider that , in view of the constitution and the laws , the union is unbroken ; and to the extent of my ability i shall take care , as the constitution itself expressly enjoins upon me , that the laws of the union be faithfully executed in all the states .
doing this i deem to be only a simple duty on my part ; and i shall perform it so far as practicable , unless my rightful masters , the american people , shall withhold the requisite means , or in some authoritative manner direct the contrary .
i trust this will not be regarded as a menace , but only as the declared purpose of the union that it will constitutionally defend and maintain itself .
in doing this there needs to be no bloodshed or violence ; and there shall be none , unless it be forced upon the national authority .
the power confided to me will be used to hold , occupy , and possess the property and places belonging to the government , and to collect the duties and imposts ; but beyond what may be necessary for these objects , there will be no invasion , no using of force against or among the people anywhere .
where hostility to the united states , in any interior locality , shall be so great and universal as to prevent competent resident citizens from holding the federal offices , there will be no attempt to force obnoxious strangers among the people for that object .
while the strict legal right may exist in the government to enforce the exercise of these offices , the attempt to do so would be so irritating , and so nearly impracticable withal , that i deem it better to forego for the time the uses of such offices .
the mails , unless repelled , will continue to be furnished in all parts of the union .
so far as possible , the people everywhere shall have that sense of perfect security which is most favorable to calm thought and reflection .
the course here indicated will be followed unless current events and experience shall show a modification or change to be proper , and in every case and exigency my best discretion will be exercised according to circumstances actually existing , and with a view and a hope of a peaceful solution of the national troubles and the restoration of fraternal sympathies and affections .
that there are persons in one section or another who seek to destroy the union at all events , and are glad of any pretext to do it , i will neither affirm nor deny ; but if there be such , i need address no word to them .
to those , however , who really love the union may i not speak?before entering upon so grave a matter as the destruction of our national fabric , with all its benefits , its memories , and its hopes , would it not be wise to ascertain precisely why we do it ?
will you hazard so desperate a step while there is any possibility that any portion of the ills you fly from have no real existence ?
will you , while the certain ills you fly to are greater than all the real ones you fly from -- will you risk the commission of so fearful a mistake?all profess to be content in the union if all constitutional rights can be maintained .
is it true , then , that any right , plainly written in the constitution , has been denied ?
i think not .
happily the human mind is so constituted that no party can reach to the audacity of doing this .
think , if you can , of a single instance in which a plainly written provision of the constitution has ever been denied .
if by the mere force of numbers a majority should deprive a minority of any clearly written constitutional right , it might , in a moral point of view , justify revolution -- certainly would if such a right were a vital one .
but such is not our case .
all the vital rights of minorities and of individuals are so plainly assured to them by affirmations and negations , guarantees and prohibitions , in the constitution , that controversies never arise concerning them .
but no organic law can ever be framed with a provision specifically applicable to every question which may occur in practical administration .
no foresight can anticipate , nor any document of reasonable length contain , express provisions for all possible questions .
shall fugitives from labor be surrendered by national or by state authority ?
the constitution does not expressly say .
may congress prohibit slavery in the territories ?
the constitution does not expressly say .
must congress protect slavery in the territories ?
the constitution does not expressly say .
from questions of this class spring all our constitutional controversies , and we divide upon them into majorities and minorities .
if the minority will not acquiesce , the majority must , or the government must cease .
there is no other alternative ; for continuing the government is acquiescence on one side or the other .
if a minority in such case will secede rather than acquiesce , they make a precedent which in turn will divide and ruin them ; for a minority of their own will secede from them whenever a majority refuses to be controlled by such minority .
for instance , why may not any portion of a new confederacy a year or two hence arbitrarily secede again , precisely as portions of the present union now claim to secede from it ?
all who cherish disunion sentiments are now being educated to the exact temper of doing this .
is there such perfect identity of interests among the states to compose a new union , as to produce harmony only , and prevent renewed secession?plainly , the central idea of secession is the essence of anarchy .
a majority held in restraint by constitutional checks and limitations , and always changing easily with deliberate changes of popular opinions and sentiments , is the only true sovereign of a free people .
whoever rejects it does , of necessity , fly to anarchy or to despotism .
unanimity is impossible ; the rule of a minority , as a permanent arrangement , is wholly inadmissible ; so that , rejecting the majority principle , anarchy or despotism in some form is all that is left .
i do not forget the position , assumed by some , that constitutional questions are to be decided by the supreme court ; nor do i deny that such decisions must be binding , in any case , upon the parties to a suit , as to the object of that suit , while they are also entitled to very high respect and consideration in all parallel cases by all other departments of the government .
and while it is obviously possible that such decision may be erroneous in any given case , still the evil effect following it , being limited to that particular case , with the chance that it may be overruled and never become a precedent for other cases , can better be borne than could the evils of a different practice .
at the same time , the candid citizen must confess that if the policy of the government , upon vital questions affecting the whole people , is to be irrevocably fixed by decisions of the supreme court , the instant they are made , in ordinary litigation between parties in personal actions , the people will have ceased to be their own rulers , having to that extent practically resigned their government into the hands of that eminent tribunal .
nor is there in this view any assault upon the court or the judges .
it is a duty from which they may not shrink to decide cases properly brought before them , and it is no fault of theirs if others seek to turn their decisions to political purposes .
one section of our country believes slavery is right , and ought to be extended , while the other believes it is wrong , and ought not to be extended .
this is the only substantial dispute .
the fugitive - slave clause of the constitution , and the law for the suppression of the foreign slave - trade , are each as well enforced , perhaps , as any law can ever be in a community where the moral sense of the people imperfectly supports the law itself .
the great body of the people abide by the dry legal obligation in both cases , and a few break over in each .
this , i think , can not be perfectly cured ; and it would be worse in both cases after the separation of the sections than before .
the foreign slave - trade , now imperfectly suppressed , would be ultimately revived , without restriction , in one section , while fugitive slaves , now only partially surrendered , would not be surrendered at all by the other .
physically speaking , we can not separate .
we can not remove our respective sections from each other , nor build an impassable wall between them .
a husband and wife may be divorced , and go out of the presence and beyond the reach of each other ; but the different parts of our country can not do this .
they can not but remain face to face , and intercourse , either amicable or hostile , must continue between them .
is it possible , then , to make that intercourse more advantageous or more satisfactory after separation than before ?
can aliens make treaties easier than friends can make laws ?
can treaties be more faithfully enforced between aliens than laws can among friends ?
suppose you go to war , you can not fight always ; and when , after much loss on both sides , and no gain on either , you cease fighting , the identical old questions as to terms of intercourse are again upon you .
this country , with its institutions , belongs to the people who inhabit it .
whenever they shall grow weary of the existing government , they can exercise their constitutional right of amending it , or their revolutionary right to dismember or overthrow it .
i can not be ignorant of the fact that many worthy and patriotic citizens are desirous of having the national constitution amended .
while i make no recommendation of amendments , i fully recognize the rightful authority of the people over the whole subject , to be exercised in either of the modes prescribed in the instrument itself ; and i should , under existing circumstances , favor rather than oppose a fair opportunity being afforded the people to act upon it .
i will venture to add that to me the convention mode seems preferable , in that it allows amendments to originate with the people themselves , instead of only permitting them to take or reject propositions originated by others not especially chosen for the purpose , and which might not be precisely such as they would wish to either accept or refuse .
i understand a proposed amendment to the constitution -- which amendment , however , i have not seen -- has passed congress , to the effect that the federal government shall never interfere with the domestic institutions of the states , including that of persons held to service .
to avoid misconstruction of what i have said , i depart from my purpose not to speak of particular amendments so far as to say that , holding such a provision to now be implied constitutional law , i have no objection to its being made express and irrevocable .
the chief magistrate derives all his authority from the people , and they have conferred none upon him to fix terms for the separation of the states .
the people themselves can do this also if they choose ; but the executive , as such , has nothing to do with it .
his duty is to administer the present government , as it came to his hands , and to transmit it , unimpaired by him , to his successor .
why should there not be a patient confidence in the ultimate justice of the people ?
is there any better or equal hope in the world ?
in our present differences is either party without faith of being in the right ?
if the almighty ruler of nations , with his eternal truth and justice , be on your side of the north , or on yours of the south , that truth and that justice will surely prevail by the judgment of this great tribunal of the american people .
by the frame of the government under which we live , this same people have wisely given their public servants but little power for mischief ; and have , with equal wisdom , provided for the return of that little to their own hands at very short intervals .
while the people retain their virtue and vigilance , no administration , by any extreme of wickedness or folly , can very seriously injure the government in the short space of four years .
my countrymen , one and all , think calmly and well upon this whole subject .
nothing valuable can be lost by taking time .
if there be an object to hurry any of you in hot haste to a step which you would never take deliberately , that object will be frustrated by taking time ; but no good object can be frustrated by it .
such of you as are now dissatisfied , still have the old constitution unimpaired , and , on the sensitive point , the laws of your own framing under it ; while the new administration will have no immediate power , if it would , to change either .
if it were admitted that you who are dissatisfied hold the right side in the dispute , there still is no single good reason for precipitate action .
intelligence , patriotism , christianity , and a firm reliance on him who has never yet forsaken this favored land , are still competent to adjust in the best way all our present difficulty .
in your hands , my dissatisfied fellow - countrymen , and not in mine , is the momentous issue of civil war .
the government will not assail you .
you can have no conflict without being yourselves the aggressors .
you have no oath registered in heaven to destroy the government , while i shall have the most solemn one to " preserve , protect , and defend it."i am loath to close .
we are not enemies , but friends .
we must not be enemies .
though passion may have strained , it must not break our bonds of affection .
the mystic chords of memory , stretching from every battle - field and patriot grave to every living heart and hearthstone all over this broad land , will yet swell the chorus of the union when again touched , as surely they will be , by the better angels of our nature .

fellow - citizens of the senate and house of representatives : 
 having been convened on an extraordinary occasion , as authorized by the constitution , your attention is not called to any ordinary subject of legislation .
at the beginning of the present presidential term , four months ago , the functions of the federal government were found to be generally suspended within the several states of south carolina , georgia , alabama , mississippi , louisiana , and florida , excepting only those of the post - office department .
within these states all the forts , arsenals , dockyards , custom - houses , and the like , including the movable and stationary property in and about them , had been seized and were held in open hostility to this government , excepting only forts pickens , taylor , and jefferson , on and near the florida coast , and fort sumter , in charleston harbor , south carolina .
the forts thus seized had been put in improved condition , new ones had been built , and armed forces had been organized and were organizing , all avowedly with the same hostile purpose .
the forts remaining in the possession of the federal government in and near these states were either besieged or menaced by warlike preparations , and especially fort sumter was nearly surrounded by well - protected hostile batteries , with guns equal in quality to the best of its own and outnumbering the latter as perhaps ten to one .
a disproportionate share of the federal muskets and rifles had somehow found their way into these states , and had been seized to be used against the government .
accumulations of the public revenue lying within them had been seized for the same object .
the navy was scattered in distant seas , leaving but a very small part of it within the immediate reach of the government .
officers of the federal army and navy had resigned in great numbers , and of those resigning a large proportion had taken up arms against the government .
simultaneously and in connection with all this the purpose to sever the federal union was openly avowed .
in accordance with this purpose , an ordinance had been adopted in each of these states declaring the states respectively to be separated from the national union .
a formula for instituting a combined government of these states had been promulgated , and this illegal organization , in the character of confederate states , was already invoking recognition , aid , and intervention from foreign powers .
finding this condition of things and believing it to be an imperative duty upon the incoming executive to prevent , if possible , the consummation of such attempt to destroy the federal union , a choice of means to that end became indispensable .
this choice was made , and was declared in the inaugural address .
the policy chosen looked to the exhaustion of all peaceful measures before a resort to any stronger ones .
it sought only to hold the public places and property not already wrested from the government and to collect the revenue , relying for the rest on time , discussion , and the ballot box .
it promised a continuance of the mails at government expense to the very people who were resisting the government , and it gave repeated pledges against any disturbance to any of the people or any of their rights .
of all that which a president might constitutionally and justifiably do in such a case , everything was forborne without which it was believed possible to keep the government on foot .
on the 5th of march , the present incumbent 's first full day in office , a letter of major anderson , commanding at fort sumter , written on the 28th of february and received at the war department on the 4th of march , was by that department placed in his hands .
this letter expressed the professional opinion of the writer that reenforcements could not be thrown into that fort within the time for his relief rendered necessary by the limited supply of provisions , and with a view of holding possession of the same , with a force of less than 20,000 good and well - disciplined men .
this opinion was concurred in by all the officers of his command , and their memoranda on the subject were made inclosures of major anderson 's letter .
the whole was immediately laid before lieutenant - general scott , who at once concurred with major anderson in opinion .
on reflection , however , he took full time , consulting with other officers , both of the army and the navy , and at the end of four days came reluctantly , but decidedly , to the same conclusion as before .
he also stated at the same time that no such sufficient force was then at the control of the government or could be raised and brought to the ground within the time when the provisions in the fort would be exhausted .
in a purely military point of view this reduced the duty of the administration in the case to the mere matter of getting the garrison safely out of the fort .
it was believed , however , that to so abandon that position under the circumstances would be utterly ruinous ; that the necessity under which it was to be done would not be fully understood ; that by many it would be construed as a part of a voluntary policy ; that at home it would discourage the friends of the union , embolden its adversaries , and go far to insure to the latter a recognition abroad ; that , in fact , it would be our national destruction consummated .
this could not be allowed .
starvation was not yet upon the garrison , and ere it would be reached fort pickens might be reenforced .
this last would be a clear indication of policy , and would better enable the country to accept the evacuation of fort sumter as a military necessity .
an order was at once directed to be sent for the landing of the troops from the steamship brooklyn into fort pickens .
this order could not go by land but must take the longer and slower route by sea .
the first return news from the order was received just one week before the fall of fort sumter .
the news itself was that the officer commanding the sabine , to which vessel the troops had been transferred from the brooklyn , acting upon some quasi armistice of the late administration ( and of the existence of which the present administration , up to the time the order was dispatched , had only too vague and uncertain rumors to fix attention ) , had refused to land the troops .
to now reenforce fort pickens before a crisis would be reached at fort sumter was impossible , rendered so by the near exhaustion of provisions in the latter - named fort .
in precaution against such a conjuncture the government had a few days before commenced preparing an expedition , as well adapted as might be , to relieve fort sumter , which expedition was intended to be ultimately used or not , according to circumstances .
the strongest anticipated case for using it was now presented , and it was resolved to send it forward .
as had been intended in this contingency , it was also resolved to notify the governor of south carolina that he might expect an attempt would be made to provision the fort , and that if the attempt should not be resisted there would be no effort to throw in men , arms , or ammunition without further notice , or in case of an attack upon the fort .
this notice was accordingly given , whereupon the fort was attacked and bombarded to its fall , without even awaiting the arrival of the provisioning expedition .
it is thus seen that the assault upon and reduction of fort sumter was in no sense a matter of self - defense on the part of the assailants .
they well knew that the garrison in the fort could by no possibility commit aggression upon them .
they knew -- they were expressly notified -- that the giving of bread to the few brave and hungry men of the garrison was all which would on that occasion be attempted , unless themselves , by resisting so much , should provoke more .
they knew that this government desired to keep the garrison in the fort , not to assail them , but merely to maintain visible possession , and thus to preserve the union from actual and immediate dissolution , trusting , as hereinbefore stated , to time , discussion , and the ballot box for final adjustment ; and they assailed and reduced the fort for precisely the reverse object -- to drive out the visible authority of the federal union , and thus force it to immediate dissolution .
that this was their object the executive well understood ; and having said to them in the inaugural address , " you can have no conflict without being yourselves the aggressors , " he took pains not only to keep this declaration good , but also to keep the case so free from the power of ingenious sophistry as that the world should not be able to misunderstand it .
by the affair at fort sumter , with its surrounding circumstances , that point was reached .
then and thereby the assailants of the government began the conflict of arms , without a gun in sight or in expectancy to return their fire , save only the few in the fort , sent to that harbor years before for their own protection , and still ready to give that protection in whatever was lawful .
in this act , discarding all else , they have forced upon the country the distinct issue , " immediate dissolution or blood . "
and this issue embraces more than the fate of these united states .
it presents to the whole family of man the question whether a constitutional republic , or democracy -- a government of the people by the same people -- can or can not maintain its territorial integrity against its own domestic foes .
it presents the question whether discontented individuals , too few in numbers to control administration according to organic law in any case , can always , upon the pretenses made in this case , or on any other pretenses , or arbitrarily without any pretense , break up their government , and thus practically put an end to free government upon the earth .
it forces us to ask , is there in all republics this inherent and fatal weakness ?
must a government of necessity be too strong for the liberties of its own people , or too weak to maintain its own existence ?
so viewing the issue , no choice was left but to call out the war power of the government and so to resist force employed for its destruction by force for its preservation .
the call was made , and the response of the country was most gratifying , surpassing in unanimity and spirit the most sanguine expectation .
yet none of the states commonly called slave states , except delaware gave a regiment through regular state organization .
a few regiments have been organized within some others of those states by individual enterprise and received into the government service .
of course the seceded states , so called ( and to which texas had been joined about the time of the inauguration ) , gave no troops to the cause of the union .
the border states , so called , were not uniform in their action , some of them being almost for the union , while in others , as virginia , north carolina , tennessee , and arkansas , the union sentiment was nearly repressed and silenced .
the course taken in virginia was the most remarkable , perhaps the most important .
a convention elected by the people of that state to consider this very question of disrupting the federal union was in session at the capital of virginia when fort sumter fell .
to this body the people had chosen a large majority of professed union men .
almost immediately after the fall of sumter many members of that majority went over to the original disunion minority , and with them adopted an ordinance for withdrawing the state from the union .
whether this change was wrought by their great approval of the assault upon sumter or their great resentment at the government 's resistance to that assault is not definitely known .
although they submitted the ordinance for ratification to a vote of the people , to be taken on a day then somewhat more than a month distant , the convention and the legislature ( which was also in session at the same time and place ) , with leading men of the state not members of either , immediately commenced acting as if the state were already out of the union .
they pushed military preparations vigorously forward all over the state .
they seized the united states armory at harpers ferry and the navy - yard at gosport , near norfolk .
they received -- perhaps invited -- into their state large bodies of troops , with their warlike appointments , from the so - called seceded states .
they formally entered into a treaty of temporary alliance and cooperation with the so - called " confederate states , " and sent members to their congress at montgomery ; and , finally , they permitted the insurrectionary government to be transferred to their capital at richmond .
the people of virginia have thus allowed this giant insurrection to make its nest within her borders , and this government has no choice left but to deal with it where it finds it ; and it has the less regret , as the loyal citizens have in due form claimed its protection .
those loyal citizens this government is bound to recognize and protect , as being virginia .
in the border states , so called -- in fact , the middle states -- there are those who favor a policy which they call " armed neutrality ; " that is , an arming of those states to prevent the union forces passing one way or the disunion the other over their soil .
this would be disunion completed .
figuratively speaking , it would be the building of an impassable wall along the line of separation , and yet not quite an impassable one , for , under the guise of neutrality , it would tie the hands of the union men and freely pass supplies from among them to the insurrectionists , which it could not do as an open enemy .
at a stroke it would take all the trouble off the hands of secession , except only what proceeds from the external blockade .
it would do for the disunionists that which of all things they most desire -- feed them well and give them disunion without a struggle of their own .
it recognizes no fidelity to the constitution , no obligation to maintain the union ; and while very many who have favored it are doubtless loyal citizens , it is , nevertheless , very injurious in effect .
recurring to the action of the government , it may be stated that at first a call was made for 75,000 militia , and rapidly following this a proclamation was issued for closing the ports of the insurrectionary districts by proceedings in the nature of blockade .
so far all was believed to be strictly legal .
at this point the insurrectionists announced their purpose to enter upon the practice of privateering .
other calls were made for volunteers to serve three years unless sooner discharged , and also for large additions to the regular army and navy .
these measures , whether strictly legal or not , were ventured upon under what appeared to be a popular demand and a public necessity , trusting then , as now , that congress would readily ratify them .
it is believed that nothing has been done beyond the constitutional competency of congress .
soon after the first call for militia it was considered a duty to authorize the commanding general in proper cases , according to his discretion , to suspend the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus , or , in other words , to arrest and detain without resort to the ordinary processes and forms of law such individuals as he might deem dangerous to the public safety .
this authority has purposely been exercised but very sparingly .
nevertheless , the legality and propriety of what has been done under it are questioned , and the attention of the country has been called to the proposition that one who is sworn to " take care that the laws be faithfully executed " should not himself violate them .
of course some consideration was given to the questions of power and propriety before this matter was acted upon .
the whole of the laws which were required to be faithfully executed were being resisted and failing of execution in nearly one - third of the states .
must they be allowed to finally fail of execution , even had it been perfectly clear that by the use of the means necessary to their execution some single law , made in such extreme tenderness of the citizen 's liberty that practically it relieves more of the guilty than of the innocent , should to a very limited extent be violated ?
to state the question more directly , are all the laws but one to go unexecuted , and the government itself go to pieces lest that one be violated ?
even in such a case , would not the official oath be broken if the government should be overthrown when it was believed that disregarding the single law would tend to preserve it ?
but it was not believed that this question was presented .
it was not believed that any law was violated .
the provision of the constitution that " the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus shall not be suspended unless when , in cases of rebellion or invasion , the public safety may require it " is equivalent to a provision -- is a provision - that such privilege may be suspended when , in cases of rebellion or invasion , the public safety does require it .
it was decided that we have a case of rebellion and that the public safety does require the qualified suspension of the privilege of the writ which was authorized to be made .
now it is insisted that congress , and not the executive , is vested with this power ; but the constitution itself is silent as to which or who is to exercise the power ; and as the provision was plainly made for a dangerous emergency , it can not be believed the framers of the instrument intended that in every case the danger should run its course until congress could be called together , the very assembling of which might be prevented , as was intended in this case , by the rebellion .
no more extended argument is now offered , as an opinion at some length will probably be presented by the attorney - general .
whether there shall be any legislation upon the subject , and , if any , what , is submitted entirely to the better judgment of congress .
the forbearance of this government had been so extraordinary and so long continued as to lead some foreign nations to shape their action as if they supposed the early destruction of our national union was probable .
while this on discovery gave the executive some concern , he is now happy to say that the sovereignty and rights of the united states are now everywhere practically respected by foreign powers , and a general sympathy with the country is manifested throughout the world .
the reports of the secretaries of the treasury , war , and the navy will give the information in detail deemed necessary and convenient for your deliberation and action , while the executive and all the departments will stand ready to supply omissions or to communicate new facts considered important for you to know .
it is now recommended that you give the legal means for making this contest a short and a decisive one ; that you place at the control of the government for the work at least 400,000 men and $ 400,000,000 .
that number of men is about one - tenth of those of proper ages within the regions where apparently all are willing to engage , and the sum is less than a twenty - third part of the money value owned by the men who seem ready to devote the whole .
a debt of $ 600,000,000 now is a less sum per head than was the debt of our revolution when we came out of that struggle , and the money value in the country now bears even a greater proportion to what it was then than does the population .
surely each man has as strong a motive now to preserve our liberties as each had then to establish them .
a right result at this time will be worth more to the world than ten times the men and ten times the money .
the evidence reaching us from the country leaves no doubt that the material for the work is abundant , and that it needs only the hand of legislation to give it legal sanction and the hand of the executive to give it practical shape and efficiency .
one of the greatest perplexities of the government is to avoid receiving troops faster than it can provide for them .
in a word , the people will save their government if the government itself will do its part only indifferently well .
it might seem at first thought to be of little difference whether the present movement at the south be called " secession " or " rebellion . "
the movers , however , well understand the difference .
at the beginning they knew they could never raise their treason to any respectable magnitude by any name which implies violation of law .
they knew their people possessed as much of moral sense , as much of devotion to law and order , and as much pride in and reverence for the history and government of their common country as any other civilized and patriotic people .
they knew they could make no advancement directly in the teeth of these strong and noble sentiments .
accordingly , they commenced by an insidious debauching of the public mind .
they invented an ingenious sophism , which , if conceded , was followed by perfectly logical steps through all the incidents to the complete destruction of the union .
the sophism itself is that any state of the union may consistently with the national constitution , and therefore lawfully and peacefully , withdraw from the union without the consent of the union or of any other state .
the little disguise that the supposed right is to be exercised only for just cause , themselves to be the sole judge of its justice , is too thin to merit any notice .
with rebellion thus sugar coated they have been drugging the public mind of their section for more than thirty years , and until at length they have brought many good men to a willingness to take up arms against the government the day after some assemblage of men have enacted the farcical pretense of taking their state out of the union who could have been brought to no such thing the day before .
this sophism derives much , perhaps the whole , of its currency from the assumption that there is some omnipotent and sacred supremacy pertaining to a state -- to each state of our federal union .
our states have neither more nor less power than that reserved to them in the union by the constitution , no one of them ever having been a state out of the union .
the original ones passed into the union even before they cast off their british colonial dependence , and the new ones each came into the union directly from a condition of dependence , excepting texas ; and even texas , in its temporary independence , was never designated a state .
the new ones only took the designation of states on coming into the union , while that name was first adopted for the old ones in and by the declaration of independence .
therein the " united colonies " were declared to be " free and independent states ; " but even then the object plainly was not to declare their independence of one another or of the union , but directly the contrary , as their mutual pledge and their mutual action before , at the time , and afterwards abundantly show .
the express plighting of faith by each and all of the original thirteen in the articles of confederation , two years later , that the union shall be perpetual is most conclusive .
having never been states , either in substance or in name , outside of the union , whence this magical omnipotence of " state rights , " asserting a claim of power to lawfully destroy the union itself ?
much is said about the " sovereignty " of the states , but the word even is not in the national constitution , nor , as is believed , in any of the state constitutions .
what is a " sovereignty " in the political sense of the term ?
would it be far wrong to define it " a political community without a political superior " ?
tested by this , no one of our states , except texas , ever was a sovereignty ; and even texas gave up the character on coming into the union , by which act she acknowledged the constitution of the united states and the laws and treaties of the united states made in pursuance of the constitution to be for her the supreme law of the land .
the states have their status in the union , and they have no other legal status .
if they break from this , they can only do so against law and by revolution .
the union , and not themselves separately , procured their independence and their liberty .
by conquest or purchase the union gave each of them whatever of independence and liberty it has .
the union is older than any of the states , and , in fact , it created them as states .
originally some dependent colonies made the union , and in turn the union threw off their old dependence for them and made them states , such as they are .
not one of them ever had a state constitution independent of the union .
of course it is not forgotten that all the new states framed their constitutions before they entered the union , nevertheless dependent upon and preparatory to coming into the union .
unquestionably the states have the powers and rights reserved to them in and by the national constitution ; but among these surely are not included all conceivable powers , however mischievous or destructive , but at most such only as were known in the world at the time as governmental powers ; and certainly a power to destroy the government itself had never been known as a governmental -- as a merely administrative power .
this relative matter of national power and state rights , as a principle , is no other than the principle of generality and locality .
whatever concerns the whole should be confided to the whole -- to the general government -- while whatever concerns only the state should be left exclusively to the state .
this is all there is of original principle about it .
whether the national constitution in defining boundaries between the two has applied the principle with exact accuracy is not to be questioned .
we are all bound by that defining without question .
what is now combated is the position that secession is consistent with the constitution -- is lawful and peaceful .
it is not contended that there is any express law for it , and nothing should ever be implied as law which leads to unjust or absurd consequences .
the nation purchased with money the countries out of which several of these states were formed .
is it just that they shall go off without leave and without refunding ?
the nation paid very large sums ( in the aggregate , i believe , nearly a hundred millions ) to relieve florida of the aboriginal tribes .
is it just that she shall now be off without consent or without making any return ?
the nation is now in debt for money applied to the benefit of these so - called seceding states in common with the rest .
is it just either that creditors shall go unpaid or the remaining states pay the whole ?
a part of the present national debt was contracted to pay the old debts of texas .
is it just that she shall leave and pay no part of this herself ?
again : if one state may secede , so may another ; and when all shall have seceded none is left to pay the debts .
is this quite just to creditors ?
did we notify them of this sage view of ours when we borrowed their money ?
if we now recognize this doctrine by allowing the seceders to go in peace , it is difficult to see what we can do if others choose to go or to extort terms upon which they will promise to remain .
the seceders insist that our constitution admits of secession .
they have assumed to make a national constitution of their own , in which of necessity they have either discarded or retained the right of secession , as they insist it exists in ours .
if they have discarded it , they thereby admit that on principle it ought not to be in ours .
if they have retained it , by their own construction of ours they show that to be consistent they must secede from one another whenever they shall find it the easiest way of settling their debts or effecting any other selfish or unjust object .
the principle itself is one of disintegration , and upon which no government can possibly endure .
if all the states save one should assert the power to drive that one out of the union , it is presumed the whole class of seceder politicians would at once deny the power and denounce the act as the greatest outrage upon state rights .
but suppose that precisely the same act , instead of being called " driving the one out , " should be called " the seceding of the others from that one , " it would be exactly what the seceders claim to do , unless , indeed , they make the point that the one , because it is a minority , may rightfully do what the others , because they are a majority , may not rightfully do .
these politicians are subtle and profound on the rights of minorities .
they are not partial to that power which made the constitution and speaks from the preamble , calling itself " we , the people . "
it may well be questioned whether there is to - day a majority of the legally qualified voters of any state , except , perhaps , south carolina , in favor of disunion .
there is much reason to believe that the union men are the majority in many , if not in every other one , of the so - called seceded states .
the contrary has not been demonstrated in any one of them .
it is ventured to affirm this even of virginia and tennessee ; for the result of an election held in military camps , where the bayonets are all on one side of the question voted upon , can scarcely be considered as demonstrating popular sentiment .
at such an election all that large class who are at once for the union and against coercion would be coerced to vote against the union .
it may be affirmed without extravagance that the free institutions we enjoy have developed the powers and improved the condition of our whole people beyond any example in the world .
of this we now have a striking and an impressive illustration .
so large an army as the government has now on foot was never before known without a soldier in it but who had taken his place there of his own free choice .
but more than this , there are many single regiments whose members , one and another , possess full practical knowledge of all the arts , sciences , professions , and whatever else , whether useful or elegant , is known in the world ; and there is scarcely one from which there could not be selected a president , a cabinet , a congress , and perhaps a court , abundantly competent to administer the government itself .
nor do i say this is not true also in the army of our late friends , now adversaries in this contest ; but if it is , so much better the reason why the government which has conferred such benefits on both them and us should not be broken up .
whoever in any section proposes to abandon such a government would do well to consider in deference to what principle it is that he does it ; what better he is likely to get in its stead ; whether the substitute will give , or be intended to give , so much of good to the people .
there are some foreshadowings on this subject .
our adversaries have adopted some declarations of independence in which , unlike the good old one penned by jefferson , they omit the words " all men are created equal . "
why ?
they have adopted a temporary national constitution , in the preamble of which , unlike our good old one signed by washington , they omit " we , the people , " and substitute " we , the deputies of the sovereign and independent states . "
why ?
why this deliberate pressing out of view the rights of men and the authority of the people ?
this is essentially a people 's contest .
on the side of the union it is a struggle for maintaining in the world that form and substance of government whose leading object is to elevate the condition of men ; to lift artificial weights from all shoulders ; to clear the paths of laudable pursuit for all ; to afford all an unfettered start and a fair chance in the race of life .
yielding to partial and temporary departures , from necessity , this is the leading object of the government for whose existence we contend .
i am most happy to believe that the plain people understand and appreciate this .
it is worthy of note that while in this the government 's hour of trial large numbers of those in the army and navy who have been favored with the offices have resigned and proved false to the hand which had pampered them , not one common soldier or common sailor is known to have deserted his flag .
great honor is due to those officers who remained true despite the example of their treacherous associates ; but the greatest honor and most important fact of all is the unanimous firmness of the common soldiers and common sailors .
to the last man , so far as known , they have successfully resisted the traitorous efforts of those whose commands but an hour before they obeyed as absolute law .
this is the patriotic instinct of plain people .
they understand without an argument that the destroying the government which was made by washington means no good to them .
our popular government has often been called an experiment .
two points in it our people have already settled -- the successful establishing and the successful administering of it .
one still remains -- its successful maintenance against a formidable internal attempt to overthrow it .
it is now for them to demonstrate to the world that those who can fairly carry an election can also suppress a rebellion ; that ballots are the rightful and peaceful successors of bullets , and that when ballots have fairly and constitutionally decided there can be no successful appeal back to bullets ; that there can be no successful appeal except to ballots themselves at succeeding elections .
such will be a great lesson of peace , teaching men that what they can not take by an election neither can they take it by a war ; teaching all the folly of being the beginners of a war .
lest there be some uneasiness in the minds of candid men as to what is to be the course of the government toward the southern states after the rebellion shall have been suppressed , the executive deems it proper to say it will be his purpose then , as ever , to be guided by the constitution and the laws , and that he probably will have no different understanding of the powers and duties of the federal government relatively to the rights of the states and the people under the constitution than that expressed in the inaugural address .
he desires to preserve the government , that it may be administered for all as it was administered by the men who made it .
loyal citizens everywhere have the right to claim this of their government , and the government has no right to withhold or neglect it .
it is not perceived that in giving it there is any coercion , any conquest , or any subjugation in any just sense of those terms .
the constitution provides , and all the states have accepted the provision , that " the united states shall guarantee to every state in this union a republican form of government . "
but if a state may lawfully go out of the union , having done so it may also discard the republican form of government ; so that to prevent its going out is an indispensable means to the end of maintaining the guaranty mentioned ; and when an end is lawful and obligatory the indispensable means to it are also lawful and obligatory .
it was with the deepest regret that the executive found the duty of employing the war power in defense of the government forced upon him .
he could but perform this duty or surrender the existence of the government .
no compromise by public servants could in this case be a cure ; not that compromises are not often proper , but that no popular government can long survive a marked precedent that those who carry an election can only save the government from immediate destruction by giving up the main point upon which the people gave the election .
the people themselves , and not their servants , can safely reverse their own deliberate decisions .
as a private citizen the executive could not have consented that these institutions shall perish ; much less could he in betrayal of so vast and so sacred a trust as these free people had confided to him .
he felt that he had no moral right to shrink , nor even to count the chances of his own life in what might follow .
in full view of his great responsibility he has so far done what he has deemed his duty .
you will now , according to your own judgment , perform yours .
he sincerely hopes that your views and your action may so accord with his as to assure all faithful citizens who have been disturbed in their rights of a certain and speedy restoration to them under the constitution and the laws .
and having thus chosen our course , without guile and with pure purpose , let us renew our trust in god and go forward without fear and with manly hearts .

the repeal of the missouri compromise , and the propriety of its restoration , constitute the subject of what i am about to say .
as i desire to present my own connected view of this subject , my remarks will not be , specifically , an answer to judge douglas ; yet , as i proceed , the main points he has presented will arise , and will receive such respectful attention as i may be able to give them .
i wish further to say , that i do not propose to question the patriotism , or to assail the motives of any man , or class of men ; but rather to strictly confine myself to the naked merits of the question .
i also wish to be no less than national in all the positions i may take ; and whenever i take ground which others have thought , or may think , narrow , sectional and dangerous to the union , i hope to give a reason , which will appear sufficient , at least to some , why i think differently .
and , as this subject is no other , than part and parcel of the larger general question of domestic - slavery , i wish to make and to keep the distinction between the existing institution , and the extension of it , so broad , and so clear , that no honest man can misunderstand me , and no dishonest one , successfully misrepresent me .
in order to a clear understanding of what the missouri compromise is , a short history of the preceding kindred subjects will perhaps be proper .
when we established our independence , we did not own , or claim , the country to which this compromise applies .
indeed , strictly speaking , the confederacy then owned no country at all ; the states respectively owned the country within their limits ; and some of them owned territory beyond their strict state limits .
virginia thus owned the north - western territory --- the country out of which the principal part of ohio , all indiana , all illinois , all michigan and all wisconsin , have since been formed .
she also owned ( perhaps within her then limits ) what has since been formed into the state of kentucky .
north carolina thus owned what is now the state of tennessee ; and south carolina and georgia , in separate parts , owned what are now mississippi and alabama .
connecticut , i think , owned the little remaining part of ohio --- being the same where they now send giddings to congress , and beat all creation at making cheese .
these territories , together with the states themselves , constituted all the country over which the confederacy then claimed any sort of jurisdiction .
we were then living under the articles of confederation , which were superceded by the constitution several years afterwards .
the question of ceding these territories to the general government was set on foot .
mr. jefferson , the author of the declaration of independence , and otherwise a chief actor in the revolution ; then a delegate in congress ; afterwards twice president ; who was , is , and perhaps will continue to be , the most distinguished politician of our history ; a virginian by birth and continued residence , and withal , a slave - holder ; conceived the idea of taking that occasion , to prevent slavery ever going into the north - western territory .
he prevailed on the virginia legislature to adopt his views , and to cede the territory , making the prohibition of slavery therein , a condition of the deed .
congress accepted the cession , with the condition ; and in the first ordinance ( which the acts of congress were then called ) for the government of the territory , provided that slavery should never be permitted therein .
this is the famed ordinance of ' 87 so often spoken of .
thenceforward , for sixty - one years , and until in 1848 , the last scrap of this territory came into the union as the state of wisconsin , all parties acted in quiet obedience to this ordinance .
it is now what jefferson foresaw and intended --- the happy home of teeming millions of free , white , prosperous people , and no slave amongst them .
thus , with the author of the declaration of independence , the policy of prohibiting slavery in new territory originated .
thus , away back of the constitution , in the pure fresh , free breath of the revolution , the state of virginia , and the national congress put that policy in practice .
thus through sixty odd of the best years of the republic did that policy steadily work to its great and beneficent end .
and thus , in those five states , and five millions of free , enterprising people , we have before us the rich fruits of this policy .
but now new light breaks upon us .
now congress declares this ought never to have been ; and the like of it , must never be again .
the sacred right of self government is grossly violated by it !
we even find some men , who drew their first breath , and every other breath of their lives , under this very restriction , now live in dread of absolute suffocation , if they should be restricted in the " sacred right " of taking slaves to nebraska .
that perfect liberty they sigh for --- the liberty of making slaves of other people --- jefferson never thought of ; their own father never thought of ; they never thought of themselves , a year ago .
how fortunate for them , they did not sooner become sensible of their great misery !
oh , how difficult it is to treat with respect , such assaults upon all we have ever really held sacred .
but to return to history .
in 1803 we purchased what was then called louisiana , of france .
it included the now states of louisiana , arkansas , missouri , and iowa ; also the territory of minnesota , and the present bone of contention , kansas and nebraska .
slavery already existed among the french at new orleans ; and , to some extent , at st. louis .
in 1812 louisiana came into the union as a slave state , without controversy .
in 1818 or ' 19 , missouri showed signs of a wish to come in with slavery .
this was resisted by northern members of congress ; and thus began the first great slavery agitation in the nation .
this controversy lasted several months , and became very angry and exciting ; the house of representatives voting steadily for the prohibition of slavery in missouri , and the senate voting as steadily against it .
threats of breaking up the union were freely made ; and the ablest public men of the day became seriously alarmed .
at length a compromise was made , in which , like all compromises , both sides yielded something .
it was a law passed on the 6th day of march , 1820 , providing that missouri might come into the union with slavery , but that in all the remaining part of the territory purchased of france , which lies north of 36 degrees and 30 minutes north latitude , slavery should never be permitted .
this provision of law , is the missouri compromise .
in excluding slavery north of the line , the same language is employed as in the ordinance of ' 87 .
it directly applied to iowa , minnesota , and to the present bone of contention , kansas and nebraska .
whether there should or should not , be slavery south of that line , nothing was said in the law ; but arkansas constituted the principal remaining part , south of the line ; and it has since been admitted as a slave state without serious controversy .
more recently , iowa , north of the line , came in as a free state without controversy .
still later , minnesota , north of the line , had a territorial organization without controversy .
texas principally south of the line , and west of arkansas ; though originally within the purchase from france , had , in 1819 , been traded off to spain , in our treaty for the acquisition of florida .
it had thus become a part of mexico .
mexico revolutionized and became independent of spain .
american citizens began settling rapidly , with their slaves in the southern part of texas .
soon they revolutionized against mexico , and established an independent government of their own , adopting a constitution , with slavery , strongly resembling the constitutions of our slave states .
by still another rapid move , texas , claiming a boundary much further west , than when we parted with her in 1819 , was brought back to the united states , and admitted into the union as a slave state .
there then was little or no settlement in the northern part of texas , a considerable portion of which lay north of the missouri line ; and in the resolutions admitting her into the union , the missouri restriction was expressly extended westward across her territory .
this was in 1845 , only nine years ago .
thus originated the missouri compromise ; and thus has it been respected down to 1845 .
and even four years later , in 1849 , our distinguished senator , in a public address , held the following language in relation to it:"the missouri compromise had been in practical operation for about a quarter of a century , and had received the sanction and approbation of men of all parties in every section of the union .
it had allayed all sectional jealousies and irritations growing out of this vexed question , and harmonized and tranquilized the whole country .
it had given to henry clay , as its prominent champion , the proud sobriquet of the " great pacificator " and by that title and for that service , his political friends had repeatedly appealed to the people to rally under his standard , as a presidential candidate , as the man who had exhibited the patriotism and the power to suppress , an unholy and treasonable agitation , and preserve the union .
he was not aware that any man or any party from any section of the union , had ever urged as an objection to mr. clay , that he was the great champion of the missouri compromise .
on the contrary , the effort was made by the opponents of mr. clay , to prove that he was not entitled to the exclusive merit of that great patriotic measure , and that the honor was equally due to others as well as to him , for securing its adoption --- that it had its origin in the hearts of all patriotic men , who desired to preserve and perpetuate the blessings of our glorious union --- an origin akin that of the constitution of the united states , conceived in the same spirit of fraternal affection , and calculated to remove forever , the only danger , which seemed to threaten , at some distant day , to sever the social bond of union .
all the evidences of public opinion at that day , seemed to indicate that this compromise had been canonized in the hearts of the american people , as a sacred thing which no ruthless hand would ever be reckless enough to disturb."i do not read this extract to involve judge douglas in an inconsistency .
if he afterwards thought he had been wrong , it was right for him to change .
i bring this forward merely to show the high estimate placed on the missouri compromise by all parties up to so late as the year 1849.but , going back a little , in point of time , our war with mexico broke out in 1846 .
when congress was about adjourning that session , president polk asked them to place two millions of dollars under his control , to be used by him in the recess , if found practicable and expedient , in negociating a treaty of peace with mexico , and acquiring some part of her territory .
a bill was duly got up , for the purpose , and was progressing swimmingly , in the house of representatives , when a member by the name of david wilmot , a democrat from pennsylvania , moved as an amendment " provided that in any territory thus acquired , there shall never be slavery."this is the origin of the far - famed " wilmot proviso . "
it created a great flutter ; but it stuck like wax , was voted into the bill , and the bill passed with it through the house .
the senate , however , adjourned without final action on it and so both appropriation and proviso were lost , for the time .
the war continued , and at the next session , the president renewed his request for the appropriation , enlarging the amount , i think , to three million .
again came the proviso ; and defeated the measure .
congress adjourned again , and the war went on .
in dec. , 1847 , the new congress assembled .
i was in the lower house that term .
the " wilmot proviso " or the principle of it , was constantly coming up in some shape or other , and i think i may venture to say i voted for it at least forty times ; during the short term i was there .
the senate , however , held it in check , and it never became law .
in the spring of 1848 a treaty of peace was made with mexico ; by which we obtained that portion of her country which now constitutes the territories of new mexico and utah , and the now state of california .
by this treaty the wilmot proviso was defeated , as so far as it was intended to be , a condition of the acquisition of territory .
its friends however , were still determined to find some way to restrain slavery from getting into the new country .
this new acquisition lay directly west of our old purchase from france , and extended west to the pacific ocean --- and was so situated that if the missouri line should be extended straight west , the new country would be divided by such extended line , leaving some north and some south of it .
on judge douglas ' motion a bill , or provision of a bill , passed the senate to so extend the missouri line .
the proviso men in the house , including myself , voted it down , because by implication , it gave up the southern part to slavery , while we were bent on having it all free .
in the fall of 1848 the gold mines were discovered in california .
this attracted people to it with unprecedented rapidity , so that on , or soon after , the meeting of the new congress in dec. , 1849 , she already had a population of nearly a hundred thousand , had called a convention , formed a state constitution , excluding slavery , and was knocking for admission into the union .
the proviso men , of course were for letting her in , but the senate , always true to the other side would not consent to her admission .
and there california stood , kept out of the union , because she would not let slavery into her borders .
under all the circumstances perhaps this was not wrong .
there were other points of dispute , connected with the general question of slavery , which equally needed adjustment .
the south clamored for a more efficient fugitive slave law .
the north clamored for the abolition of a peculiar species of slave trade in the district of columbia , in connection with which , in view from the windows of the capitol , a sort of negro - livery stable , where droves of negroes were collected , temporarily kept , and finally taken to southern markets , precisely like droves of horses , had been openly maintained for fifty years .
utah and new mexico needed territorial governments ; and whether slavery should or should not be prohibited within them , was another question .
the indefinite western boundary of texas was to be settled .
she was received a slave state ; and consequently the farther west the slavery men could push her boundary , the more slave country they secured .
and the farther east the slavery opponents could thrust the boundary back , the less slave ground was secured .
thus this was just as clearly a slavery question as any of the others .
these points all needed adjustment ; and they were all held up , perhaps wisely to make them help to adjust one another .
the union , now , as in 1820 , was thought to be in danger ; and devotion to the union rightfully inclined men to yield somewhat , in points where nothing else could have so inclined them .
a compromise was finally effected .
the south got their new fugitive - slave law ; and the north got california , ( the far best part of our acquisition from mexico , ) as a free state .
the south got a provision that new mexico and utah , when admitted as states , may come in with or without slavery as they may then choose ; and the north got the slave - trade abolished in the district of columbia .
the north got the western boundary of texas , thence further back eastward than the south desired ; but , in turn , they gave texas ten millions of dollars , with which to pay her old debts .
this is the compromise of 1850.preceding the presidential election of 1852 , each of the great political parties , democrats and whigs , met in convention , and adopted resolutions endorsing the compromise of ' 50 ; as a " finality , " a final settlement , so far as these parties could make it so , of all slavery agitation .
previous to this , in 1851 , the illinois legislature had indorsed it .
during this long period of time nebraska had remained , substantially an uninhabited country , but now emigration to , and settlement within it began to take place .
it is about one third as large as the present united states , and its importance so long overlooked , begins to come into view .
the restriction of slavery by the missouri compromise directly applies to it ; in fact , was first made , and has since been maintained , expressly for it .
in 1853 , a bill to give it a territorial government passed the house of representatives , and , in the hands of judge douglas , failed of passing the senate only for want of time .
this bill contained no repeal of the missouri compromise .
indeed , when it was assailed because it did not contain such repeal , judge douglas defended it in its existing form .
on january 4th , 1854 , judge douglas introduces a new bill to give nebraska territorial government .
he accompanies this bill with a report , in which last , he expressly recommends that the missouri compromise shall neither be affirmed nor repealed .
before long the bill is so modified as to make two territories instead of one ; calling the southern one kansas .
also , about a month after the introduction of the bill , on the judge 's own motion , it is so amended as to declare the missouri compromise inoperative and void ; and , substantially , that the people who go and settle there may establish slavery , or exclude it , as they may see fit .
in this shape the bill passed both branches of congress , and became a law .
this is the repeal of the missouri compromise .
the foregoing history may not be precisely accurate in every particular ; but i am sure it is sufficiently so , for all the uses i shall attempt to make of it , and in it , we have before us , the chief material enabling us to correctly judge whether the repeal of the missouri compromise is right or wrong .
i think , and shall try to show , that it is wrong ; wrong in its direct effect , letting slavery into kansas and nebraska --- and wrong in its prospective principle , allowing it to spread to every other part of the wide world , where men can be found inclined to take it .
this declared indifference , but as i must think , covert real zeal for the spread of slavery , i can not but hate .
i hate it because of the monstrous injustice of slavery itself .
i hate it because it deprives our republican example of its just influence in the world --- enables the enemies of free institutions , with plausibility , to taunt us as hypocrites --- causes the real friends of freedom to doubt our sincerity , and especially because it forces so many really good men amongst ourselves into an open war with the very fundamental principles of civil liberty --- criticising the declaration of independence , and insisting that there is no right principle of action but self - interest .
before proceeding , let me say i think i have no prejudice against the southern people .
they are just what we would be in their situation .
if slavery did not now exist amongst them , they would not introduce it .
if it did now exist amongst us , we should not instantly give it up .
this i believe of the masses north and south .
doubtless there are individuals , on both sides , who would not hold slaves under any circumstances ; and others who would gladly introduce slavery anew , if it were out of existence .
we know that some southern men do free their slaves , go north , and become tip - top abolitionists ; while some northern ones go south , and become most cruel slave - masters .
when southern people tell us they are no more responsible for the origin of slavery , than we ; i acknowledge the fact .
when it is said that the institution exists ; and that it is very difficult to get rid of it , in any satisfactory way , i can understand and appreciate the saying .
i surely will not blame them for not doing what i should not know how to do myself .
if all earthly power were given me , i should not know what to do , as to the existing institution .
my first impulse would be to free all the slaves , and send them to liberia ,--- to their own native land .
but a moment 's reflection would convince me , that whatever of high hope , ( as i think there is ) there may be in this , in the long run , its sudden execution is impossible .
if they were all landed there in a day , they would all perish in the next ten days ; and there are not surplus shipping and surplus money enough in the world to carry them there in many times ten days .
what then ?
free them all , and keep them among us as underlings ?
is it quite certain that this betters their condition ?
i think i would not hold one in slavery , at any rate ; yet the point is not clear enough for me to denounce people upon .
what next ?
free them , and make them politically and socially , our equals ?
my own feelings will not admit of this ; and if mine would , we well know that those of the great mass of white people will not .
whether this feeling accords with justice and sound judgment , is not the sole question , if indeed , it is any part of it .
a universal feeling , whether well or ill - founded , can not be safely disregarded .
we can not , then , make them equals .
it does seem to me that systems of gradual emancipation might be adopted ; but for their tardiness in this , i will not undertake to judge our brethren of the south .
when they remind us of their constitutional rights , i acknowledge them , not grudgingly , but fully , and fairly ; and i would give them any legislation for the reclaiming of their fugitives , which should not , in its stringency , be more likely to carry a free man into slavery , than our ordinary criminal laws are to hang an innocent one .
but all this ; to my judgment , furnishes no more excuse for permitting slavery to go into our own free territory , than it would for reviving the african slave trade by law .
the law which forbids the bringing of slaves from africa ; and that which has so long forbid the taking them to nebraska , can hardly be distinguished on any moral principle ; and the repeal of the former could find quite as plausible excuses as that of the latter .
the arguments by which the repeal of the missouri compromise is sought to be justified , are these : first , that the nebraska country needed a territorial government .
second , that in various ways , the public had repudiated it , and demanded the repeal ; and therefore should not now complain of it .
and lastly , that the repeal establishes a principle , which is intrinsically right .
i will attempt an answer to each of them in its turn .
first , then , if that country was in need of a territorial organization , could it not have had it as well without as with the repeal ?
iowa and minnesota , to both of which the missouri restriction applied , had , without its repeal , each in succession , territorial organizations .
and even , the year before , a bill for nebraska itself , was within an ace of passing , without the repealing clause ; and this in the hands of the same men who are now the champions of repeal .
why no necessity then for the repeal ?
but still later , when this very bill was first brought in , it contained no repeal .
but , say they , because the public had demanded , or rather commanded the repeal , the repeal was to accompany the organization , whenever that should occur .
now i deny that the public ever demanded any such thing --- ever repudiated the missouri compromise --- ever commanded its repeal .
i deny it , and call for the proof .
it is not contended , i believe , that any such command has ever been given in express terms .
it is only said that it was done in principle .
the support of the wilmot proviso , is the first fact mentioned , to prove that the missouri restriction was repudiated in principle , and the second is , the refusal to extend the missouri line over the country acquired from mexico .
these are near enough alike to be treated together .
the one was to exclude the chances of slavery from the whole new acquisition by the lump ; and the other was to reject a division of it , by which one half was to be given up to those chances .
now whether this was a repudiation of the missouri line , in principle , depends upon whether the missouri law contained any principle requiring the line to be extended over the country acquired from mexico .
i contend it did not .
i insist that it contained no general principle , but that it was , in every sense , specific .
that its terms limit it to the country purchased from france , is undenied and undeniable .
it could have no principle beyond the intention of those who made it .
they did not intend to extend the line to country which they did not own .
if they intended to extend it , in the event of acquiring additional territory , why did they not say so ?
it was just as easy to say , that `` in all the country west of the mississippi , which we now own , or may hereafter acquire there shall never be slavery , " as to say , what they did say ; and they would have said it if they had meant it .
an intention to extend the law is not only not mentioned in the law , but is not mentioned in any contemporaneous history .
both the law itself , and the history of the times are a blank as to any principle of extension ; and by neither the known rules for construing statutes and contracts , nor by common sense , can any such principle be inferred .
another fact showing the specific character of the missouri law --- showing that it intended no more than it expressed --- showing that the line was not intended as a universal dividing line between free and slave territory , present and prospective --- north of which slavery could never go --- is the fact that by that very law , missouri came in as a slave state , north of the line .
if that law contained any prospective principle , the whole law must be looked to in order to ascertain what the principle was .
and by this rule , the south could fairly contend that inasmuch as they got one slave state north of the line at the inception of the law , they have the right to have another given them north of it occasionally --- now and then in the indefinite westward extension of the line .
this demonstrates the absurdity of attempting to deduce a prospective principle from the missouri compromise line .
when we voted for the wilmot proviso , we were voting to keep slavery out of the whole missouri acquisition ; and little did we think we were thereby voting , to let it into nebraska , laying several hundred miles distant .
when we voted against extending the missouri line , little did we think we were voting to destroy the old line , then of near thirty years standing .
to argue that we thus repudiated the missouri compromise is no less absurd than it would be to argue that because we have , so far , forborne to acquire cuba , we have thereby , in principle , repudiated our former acquisitions , and determined to throw them out of the union !
no less absurd than it would be to say that because i may have refused to build an addition to my house , i thereby have decided to destroy the existing house !
and if i catch you setting fire to my house , you will turn upon me and say i instructed you to do it !
the most conclusive argument , however , that , while voting for the wilmot proviso , and while voting against the extension of the missouri line , we never thought of disturbing the original missouri compromise , is found in the facts , that there was then , and still is , an unorganized tract of fine country , nearly as large as the state of missouri , lying immediately west of arkansas , and south of the missouri compromise line ; and that we never attempted to prohibit slavery as to it .
i wish particular attention to this .
it adjoins the original missouri compromise line , by its northern boundary ; and consequently is part of the country , into which , by implication , slavery was permitted to go , by that compromise .
there it has lain open ever since , and there it still lies .
and yet no effort has been made at any time to wrest it from the south .
in all our struggles to prohibit slavery within our mexican acquisitions , we never so much as lifted a finger to prohibit it , as to this tract .
is not this entirely conclusive that at all times , we have held the missouri compromise as a sacred thing ; even when against ourselves , as well as when for us?senator douglas sometimes says the missouri line itself was , in principle , only an extension of the line of the ordinance of ' 87 - --that is to say , an extension of the ohio river .
i think this is weak enough on its face .
i will remark , however that , as a glance at the map will show , the missouri line is a long way farther south than the ohio ; and that if our senator , in proposing his extension , had stuck to the principle of jogging southward , perhaps it might not have been voted down so readily .
but next it is said that the compromises of ' 50 and the ratification of them by both political parties , in ' 52 , established a new principle , which required the repeal of the missouri compromise .
this again i deny .
i deny it , and demand the proof .
i have already stated fully what the compromises of ' 50 are .
the particular part of those measures , for which the virtual repeal of the missouri compromise is sought to be inferred ( for it is admitted they contain nothing about it , in express terms ) is the provision in the utah and new mexico laws , which permits them when they seek admission into the union as states , to come in with or without slavery as they shall then see fit .
now i insist this provision was made for utah and new mexico , and for no other place whatever .
it had no more direct reference to nebraska than it had to the territories of the moon .
but , say they , it had reference to nebraska , in principle .
let us see .
the north consented to this provision , not because they considered it right in itself ; but because they were compensated --- paid for it .
they , at the same time , got california into the union as a free state .
this was far the best part of all they had struggled for by the wilmot proviso .
they also got the area of slavery somewhat narrowed in the settlement of the boundary of texas .
also , they got the slave trade abolished in the district of columbia .
for all these desirable objects the north could afford to yield something ; and they did yield to the south the utah and new mexico provision .
i do not mean that the whole north , or even a majority , yielded , when the law passed ; but enough yielded , when added to the vote of the south , to carry the measure .
now can it be pretended that the principle of this arrangement requires us to permit the same provision to be applied to nebraska , without any equivalent at all ?
give us another free state ; press the boundary of texas still further back , give us another step toward the destruction of slavery in the district , and you present us a similar case .
but ask us not to repeat , for nothing , what you paid for in the first instance .
if you wish the thing again , pay again .
that is the principle of the compromises of ' 50 , if indeed they had any principles beyond their specific terms --- it was the system of equivalents .
again , if congress , at that time , intended that all future territories should , when admitted as states , come in with or without slavery , at their own option , why did it not say so ?
with such an universal provision , all know the bills could not have passed .
did they , then --- could they --- establish a principle contrary to their own intention ?
still further , if they intended to establish the principle that wherever congress had control , it should be left to the people to do as they thought fit with slavery why did they not authorize the people of the district of columbia at their adoption to abolish slavery within these limits ?
i personally know that this has not been left undone , because it was unthought of .
it was frequently spoken of by members of congress and by citizens of washington six years ago ; and i heard no one express a doubt that a system of gradual emancipation , with compensation to owners , would meet the approbation of a large majority of the white people of the district .
but without the action of congress they could say nothing ; and congress said " no . "
in the measures of 1850 congress had the subject of slavery in the district expressly in hand .
if they were then establishing the principle of allowing the people to do as they please with slavery , why did they not apply the principle to that people?again , it is claimed that by the resolutions of the illinois legislature , passed in 1851 , the repeal of the missouri compromise was demanded .
this i deny also .
whatever may be worked out by a criticism of the language of those resolutions , the people have never understood them as being any more than an endorsement of the compromises of 1850 ; and a release of our senators from voting for the wilmot proviso .
the whole people are living witnesses , that this only , was their view .
finally , it is asked " if we did not mean to apply the utah and new mexico provision , to all future territories , what did we mean , when we , in 1852 , endorsed the compromises of ' 50?"for myself , i can answer this question most easily .
i meant not to ask a repeal , or modification of the fugitive slave law .
i meant not to ask for the abolition of slavery in the district of columbia .
i meant not to resist the admission of utah and new mexico , even should they ask to come in as slave states .
i meant nothing about additional territories , because , as i understood , we then had no territory whose character as to slavery was not already settled .
as to nebraska , i regarded its character as being fixed , by the missouri compromise , for thirty years --- as unalterably fixed as that of my own home in illinois .
as to new acquisitions i said " sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof . "
when we make new acquaintances , we will , as heretofore , try to manage them some how .
that is my answer .
that is what i meant and said ; and i appeal to the people to say , each for himself , whether that was not also the universal meaning of the free states .
and now , in turn , let me ask a few questions .
if by any , or all these matters , the repeal of the missouri compromise was commanded , why was not the command sooner obeyed ?
why was the repeal omitted in the nebraska bill of 1853 ?
why was it omitted in the original bill of 1854 ?
why , in the accompanying report , was such a repeal characterized as a departure from the course pursued in 1850 ?
and its continued omission recommended?i am aware judge douglas now argues that the subsequent express repeal is no substantial alteration of the bill .
this argument seems wonderful to me .
it is as if one should argue that white and black are not different .
he admits , however , that there is a literal change in the bill ; and that he made the change in deference to other senators , who would not support the bill without .
this proves that those other senators thought the change a substantial one ; and that the judge thought their opinions worth deferring to .
his own opinions , therefore , seem not to rest on a very firm basis even in his own mind --- and i suppose the world believes , and will continue to believe , that precisely on the substance of that change this whole agitation has arisen .
i conclude then , that the public never demanded the repeal of the missouri compromise .
i now come to consider whether the repeal , with its avowed principle , is intrinsically right .
i insist that it is not .
take the particular case .
a controversy had arisen between the advocates and opponents of slavery , in relation to its establishment within the country we had purchased of france .
the southern , and then best part of the purchase , was already in as a slave state .
the controversy was settled by also letting missouri in as a slave state ; but with the agreement that within all the remaining part of the purchase , north of a certain line , there should never be slavery .
as to what was to be done with the remaining part south of the line , nothing was said ; but perhaps the fair implication was , that it should come in with slavery if it should so choose .
the southern part , except a portion heretofore mentioned , afterwards did come in with slavery , as the state of arkansas .
all these many years since 1820 , the northern part had remained a wilderness .
at length settlements began in it also .
in due course , iowa , came in as a free state , and minnesota was given a territorial government , without removing the slavery restriction .
finally the sole remaining part , north of the line , kansas and nebraska , was to be organized ; and it is proposed , and carried , to blot out the old dividing line of thirty - four years standing , and to open the whole of that country to the introduction of slavery .
now , this , to my mind , is manifestly unjust .
after an angry and dangerous controversy , the parties made friends by dividing the bone of contention .
the one party first appropriates her own share , beyond all power to be disturbed in the possession of it ; and then seizes the share of the other party .
it is as if two starving men had divided their only loaf ; the one had hastily swallowed his half , and then grabbed the other half just as he was putting it to his mouth!let me here drop the main argument , to notice what i consider rather an inferior matter .
it is argued that slavery will not go to kansas and nebraska , in any event .
this is a palliation --- a lullaby .
i have some hope that it will not ; but let us not be too confident .
as to climate , a glance at the map shows that there are five slave states --- delaware , maryland , virginia , kentucky , and missouri --- and also the district of columbia , all north of the missouri compromise line .
the census returns of 1850 show that , within these , there are 867,276 slaves --- being more than one - fourth of all the slaves in the nation .
it is not climate , then , that will keep slavery out of these territories .
is there any thing in the peculiar nature of the country ?
missouri adjoins these territories , by her entire western boundary , and slavery is already within every one of her western counties .
i have even heard it said that there are more slaves , in proportion to whites , in the north western county of missouri , than within any county of the state .
slavery pressed entirely up to the old western boundary of the state , and when , rather recently , a part of that boundary , at the north - west was moved out a little farther west , slavery followed on quite up to the new line .
now , when the restriction is removed , what is to prevent it from going still further ?
climate will not .
no peculiarity of the country will --- nothing in nature will .
will the disposition of the people prevent it ?
those nearest the scene , are all in favor of the extension .
the yankees , who are opposed to it may be more numerous ; but in military phrase , the battle - field is too far from their base of operations .
but it is said , there now is no law in nebraska on the subject of slavery ; and that , in such case , taking a slave there , operates his freedom .
that is good book - law ; but is not the rule of actual practice .
wherever slavery is , it has been first introduced without law .
the oldest laws we find concerning it , are not laws introducing it ; but regulating it , as an already existing thing .
a white man takes his slave to nebraska now ; who will inform the negro that he is free ?
who will take him before court to test the question of his freedom ?
in ignorance of his legal emancipation , he is kept chopping , splitting and plowing .
others are brought , and move on in the same track .
at last , if ever the time for voting comes , on the question of slavery , the institution already in fact exists in the country , and can not well be removed .
the facts of its presence , and the difficulty of its removal will carry the vote in its favor .
keep it out until a vote is taken , and a vote in favor of it , can not be got in any population of forty thousand , on earth , who have been drawn together by the ordinary motives of emigration and settlement .
to get slaves into the country simultaneously with the whites , in the incipient stages of settlement , is the precise stake played for , and won in this nebraska measure .
the question is asked us , " if slaves will go in , notwithstanding the general principle of law liberates them , why would they not equally go in against positive statute law ?--- go in , even if the missouri restriction were maintained ? "
i answer , because it takes a much bolder man to venture in , with his property , in the latter case , than in the former --- because the positive congressional enactment is known to , and respected by all , or nearly all ; whereas the negative principle that no law is free law , is not much known except among lawyers .
we have some experience of this practical difference .
in spite of the ordinance of ' 87 , a few negroes were brought into illinois , and held in a state of quasi slavery ; not enough , however to carry a vote of the people in favor of the institution when they came to form a constitution .
but in the adjoining missouri country , where there was no ordinance of ' 87 - --was no restriction --- they were carried ten times , nay a hundred times , as fast , and actually made a slave state .
this is fact --- naked fact .
another lullaby argument is , that taking slaves to new countries does not increase their number --- does not make any one slave who otherwise would be free .
there is some truth in this , and i am glad of it , but it not wholly true .
the african slave trade is not yet effectually suppressed ; and if we make a reasonable deduction for the white people amongst us , who are foreigners , and the descendants of foreigners , arriving here since 1808 , we shall find the increase of the black population out - running that of the white , to an extent unaccountable , except by supposing that some of them too , have been coming from africa .
if this be so , the opening of new countries to the institution , increases the demand for , and augments the price of slaves , and so does , in fact , make slaves of freemen by causing them to be brought from africa , and sold into bondage .
but , however this may be , we know the opening of new countries to slavery , tends to the perpetuation of the institution , and so does keep men in slavery who otherwise would be free .
this result we do not feel like favoring , and we are under no legal obligation to suppress our feelings in this respect .
equal justice to the south , it is said , requires us to consent to the extending of slavery to new countries .
that is to say , inasmuch as you do not object to my taking my hog to nebraska , therefore i must not object to you taking your slave .
now , i admit this is perfectly logical , if there is no difference between hogs and negroes .
but while you thus require me to deny the humanity of the negro , i wish to ask whether you of the south yourselves , have ever been willing to do as much ?
it is kindly provided that of all those who come into the world , only a small percentage are natural tyrants .
that percentage is no larger in the slave states than in the free .
the great majority , south as well as north , have human sympathies , of which they can no more divest themselves than they can of their sensibility to physical pain .
these sympathies in the bosoms of the southern people , manifest in many ways , their sense of the wrong of slavery , and their consciousness that , after all , there is humanity in the negro .
if they deny this , let me address them a few plain questions .
in 1820 you joined the north , almost unanimously , in declaring the african slave trade piracy , and in annexing to it the punishment of death .
why did you do this ?
if you did not feel that it was wrong , why did you join in providing that men should be hung for it ?
the practice was no more than bringing wild negroes from africa , to sell to such as would buy them .
but you never thought of hanging men for catching and selling wild horses , wild buffaloes or wild bears .
again , you have amongst you , a sneaking individual , of the class of native tyrants , known as the " slave - dealer . "
he watches your necessities , and crawls up to buy your slave , at a speculating price .
if you can not help it , you sell to him ; but if you can help it , you drive him from your door .
you despise him utterly .
you do not recognize him as a friend , or even as an honest man .
your children must not play with his ; they may rollick freely with the little negroes , but not with the " slave - dealers " children .
if you are obliged to deal with him , you try to get through the job without so much as touching him .
it is common with you to join hands with the men you meet ; but with the slave dealer you avoid the ceremony --- instinctively shrinking from the snaky contact .
if he grows rich and retires from business , you still remember him , and still keep up the ban of non - intercourse upon him and his family .
now why is this ?
you do not so treat the man who deals in corn , cattle or tobacco .
and yet again ; there are in the united states and territories , including the district of columbia , 433,643 free blacks .
at $ 500 per head they are worth over two hundred millions of dollars .
how comes this vast amount of property to be running about without owners ?
we do not see free horses or free cattle running at large .
how is this ?
all these free blacks are the descendants of slaves , or have been slaves themselves , and they would be slaves now , but for something which has operated on their white owners , inducing them , at vast pecuniary sacrifices , to liberate them .
what is that something ?
is there any mistaking it ?
in all these cases it is your sense of justice , and human sympathy , continually telling you , that the poor negro has some natural right to himself --- that those who deny it , and make mere merchandise of him , deserve kickings , contempt and death .
and now , why will you ask us to deny the humanity of the slave ?
and estimate him only as the equal of the hog ?
why ask us to do what you will not do yourselves ?
why ask us to do for nothing , what two hundred million of dollars could not induce you to do?but one great argument in the support of the repeal of the missouri compromise , is still to come .
that argument is " the sacred right of self government . "
it seems our distinguished senator has found great difficulty in getting his antagonists , even in the senate to meet him fairly on this argument --- some poet has said " fools rush in where angels fear to tread."at the hazzard of being thought one of the fools of this quotation , i meet that argument --- i rush in , i take that bull by the horns .
i trust i understand , and truly estimate the right of self - government .
my faith in the proposition that each man should do precisely as he pleases with all which is exclusively his own , lies at the foundation of the sense of justice there is in me .
i extend the principles to communities of men , as well as to individuals .
i so extend it , because it is politically wise , as well as naturally just ; politically wise , in saving us from broils about matters which do not concern us .
here , or at washington , i would not trouble myself with the oyster laws of virginia , or the cranberry laws of indiana .
the doctrine of self government is right --- absolutely and eternally right --- but it has no just application , as here attempted .
or perhaps i should rather say that whether it has such just application depends upon whether a negro is not or is a man .
if he is not a man , why in that case , he who is a man may , as a matter of self - government , do just as he pleases with him .
but if the negro is a man , is it not to that extent , a total destruction of self - government , to say that he too shall not govern himself ?
when the white man governs himself that is self - government ; but when he governs himself , and also governs another man , that is more than self - government --- that is despotism .
if the negro is a man , why then my ancient faith teaches me that " all men are created equal ; " and that there can be no moral right in connection with one man 's making a slave of another .
judge douglas frequently , with bitter irony and sarcasm , paraphrases our argument by saying " the white people of nebraska are good enough to govern themselves , but they are not good enough to govern a few miserable negroes!!"well i doubt not that the people of nebraska are , and will continue to be as good as the average of people elsewhere .
i do not say the contrary .
what i do say is , that no man is good enough to govern another man , without that other 's consent .
i say this is the leading principle --- the sheet anchor of american republicanism .
our declaration of independence says:"we hold these truths to be self evident : that all men are created equal ; that they are endowed by their creator with certain inalienable rights ; that among these are life , liberty and the pursuit of happiness .
that to secure these rights , governments are instituted among men , deriving their just powers from the consent of the governed."i have quoted so much at this time merely to show that according to our ancient faith , the just powers of governments are derived from the consent of the governed .
now the relation of masters and slaves is , pro tanto , a total violation of this principle .
the master not only governs the slave without his consent ; but he governs him by a set of rules altogether different from those which he prescribes for himself .
allow all the governed an equal voice in the government , and that , and that only is self government .
let it not be said i am contending for the establishment of political and social equality between the whites and blacks .
i have already said the contrary .
i am not now combating the argument of necessity , arising from the fact that the blacks are already amongst us ; but i am combating what is set up as moral argument for allowing them to be taken where they have never yet been --- arguing against the extension of a bad thing , which where it already exists , we must of necessity , manage as we best can .
in support of his application of the doctrine of self - government , senator douglas has sought to bring to his aid the opinions and examples of our revolutionary fathers .
i am glad he has done this .
i love the sentiments of those old - time men ; and shall be most happy to abide by their opinions .
he shows us that when it was in contemplation for the colonies to break off from great britain , and set up a new government for themselves , several of the states instructed their delegates to go for the measure provided each state should be allowed to regulate its domestic concerns in its own way .
i do not quote ; but this in substance .
this was right .
i see nothing objectionable in it .
i also think it probable that it had some reference to the existence of slavery amongst them .
i will not deny that it had .
but had it , in any reference to the carrying of slavery into new countries ?
that is the question ; and we will let the fathers themselves answer it .
this same generation of men , and mostly the same individuals of the generation , who declared this principle --- who declared independence --- who fought the war of the revolution through --- who afterwards made the constitution under which we still live --- these same men passed the ordinance of ' 87 , declaring that slavery should never go to the north - west territory .
i have no doubt judge douglas thinks they were very inconsistent in this .
it is a question of discrimination between them and him .
but there is not an inch of ground left for his claiming that their opinions --- their example --- their authority --- are on his side in this controversy .
again , is not nebraska , while a territory , a part of us ?
do we not own the country ?
and if we surrender the control of it , do we not surrender the right of self - government ?
it is part of ourselves .
if you say we shall not control it because it is only part , the same is true of every other part ; and when all the parts are gone , what has become of the whole ?
what is then left of us ?
what use for the general government , when there is nothing left for it govern?but you say this question should be left to the people of nebraska , because they are more particularly interested .
if this be the rule , you must leave it to each individual to say for himself whether he will have slaves .
what better moral right have thirty - one citizens of nebraska to say , that the thirty - second shall not hold slaves , than the people of the thirty - one states have to say that slavery shall not go into the thirty - second state at all?but if it is a sacred right for the people of nebraska to take and hold slaves there , it is equally their sacred right to buy them where they can buy them cheapest ; and that undoubtedly will be on the coast of africa ; provided you will consent to not hang them for going there to buy them .
you must remove this restriction too , from the sacred right of self - government .
i am aware you say that taking slaves from the states of nebraska , does not make slaves of freemen ; but the african slave - trader can say just as much .
he does not catch free negroes and bring them here .
he finds them already slaves in the hands of their black captors , and he honestly buys them at the rate of about a red cotton handkerchief a head .
this is very cheap , and it is a great abridgement of the sacred right of self - government to hang men for engaging in this profitable trade!another important objection to this application of the right of self - government , is that it enables the first few , to deprive the succeeding many , of a free exercise of the right of self - government .
the first few may get slavery in , and the subsequent many can not easily get it out .
how common is the remark now in the slave states---"if we were only clear of our slaves , how much better it would be for us . "
they are actually deprived of the privilege of governing themselves as they would , by the action of a very few , in the beginning .
the same thing was true of the whole nation at the time our constitution was formed .
whether slavery shall go into nebraska , or other new territories , is not a matter of exclusive concern to the people who may go there .
the whole nation is interested that the best use shall be made of these territories .
we want them for the homes of free white people .
this they can not be , to any considerable extent , if slavery shall be planted within them .
slave states are places for poor white people to remove from ; not to remove to .
new free states are the places for poor people to go to and better their condition .
for this use , the nation needs these territories .
still further ; there are constitutional relations between the slave and free states , which are degrading to the latter .
we are under legal obligations to catch and return their runaway slaves to them --- a sort of dirty , disagreeable job , which i believe , as a general rule the slave - holders will not perform for one another .
then again , in the control of the government --- the management of the partnership affairs --- they have greatly the advantage of us .
by the constitution , each state has two senators --- each has a number of representatives ; in proportion to the number of its people --- and each has a number of presidential electors , equal to the whole number of its senators and representatives together .
but in ascertaining the number of the people , for this purpose , five slaves are counted as being equal to three whites .
the slaves do not vote ; they are only counted and so used , as to swell the influence of the white people 's votes .
the practical effect of this is more aptly shown by a comparison of the states of south carolina and maine .
south carolina has six representatives , and so has maine ; south carolina has eight presidential electors , and so has maine .
this is precise equality so far ; and , of course they are equal in senators , each having two .
thus in the control of the government , the two states are equals precisely .
but how are they in the number of their white people ?
maine has 581,813 - --while south carolina has 274,567 .
maine has twice as many as south carolina , and 32,679 over .
thus each white man in south carolina is more than the double of any man in maine .
this is all because south carolina , besides her free people , has 384,984 slaves .
the south carolinian has precisely the same advantage over the white man in every other free state , as well as in maine .
he is more than the double of any one of us in this crowd .
the same advantage , but not to the same extent , is held by all the citizens of the slave states , over those of the free ; and it is an absolute truth , without an exception , that there is no voter in any slave state , but who has more legal power in the government , than any voter in any free state .
there is no instance of exact equality ; and the disadvantage is against us the whole chapter through .
this principle , in the aggregate , gives the slave states , in the present congress , twenty additional representatives --- being seven more than the whole majority by which they passed the nebraska bill .
now all this is manifestly unfair ; yet i do not mention it to complain of it , in so far as it is already settled .
it is in the constitution ; and i do not , for that cause , or any other cause , propose to destroy , or alter , or disregard the constitution .
i stand to it , fairly , fully , and firmly .
but when i am told i must leave it altogether to other people to say whether new partners are to be bred up and brought into the firm , on the same degrading terms against me .
i respectfully demur .
i insist , that whether i shall be a whole man , or only , the half of one , in comparison with others , is a question in which i am somewhat concerned ; and one which no other man can have a sacred right of deciding for me .
if i am wrong in this --- if it really be a sacred right of self - government , in the man who shall go to nebraska , to decide whether he will be the equal of me or the double of me , then after he shall have exercised that right , and thereby shall have reduced me to a still smaller fraction of a man than i already am , i should like for some gentleman deeply skilled in the mysteries of sacred rights , to provide himself with a microscope , and peep about , and find out , if he can , what has become of my sacred rights !
they will surely be too small for detection with the naked eye .
finally , i insist , that if there is any thing which it is the duty of the whole people to never entrust to any hands but their own , that thing is the preservation and perpetuity , of their own liberties , and institutions .
and if they shall think , as i do , that the extension of slavery endangers them , more than any , or all other causes , how recreant to themselves , if they submit the question , and with it , the fate of their country , to a mere hand - full of men , bent only on temporary self - interest .
if this question of slavery extension were an insignificant one --- one having no power to do harm --- it might be shuffled aside in this way .
but being , as it is , the great behemoth of danger , shall the strong gripe of the nation be loosened upon him , to entrust him to the hands of such feeble keepers?i have done with this mighty argument , of self - government .
go , sacred thing !
go in peace .
but nebraska is urged as a great union - saving measure .
well i too , go for saving the union .
much as i hate slavery , i would consent to the extension of it rather than see the union dissolved , just as i would consent to any great evil , to avoid a greater one .
but when i go to union saving , i must believe , at least , that the means i employ has some adaptation to the end .
to my mind , nebraska has no such adaptation."it hath no relish of salvation in it."it is an aggravation , rather , of the only one thing which ever endangers the union .
when it came upon us , all was peace and quiet .
the nation was looking to the forming of new bonds of union ; and a long course of peace and prosperity seemed to lie before us .
in the whole range of possibility , there scarcely appears to me to have been any thing , out of which the slavery agitation could have been revived , except the very project of repealing the missouri compromise .
every inch of territory we owned , already had a definite settlement of the slavery question , and by which , all parties were pledged to abide .
indeed , there was no uninhabited country on the continent , which we could acquire ; if we except some extreme northern regions , which are wholly out of the question .
in this state of case , the genius of discord himself , could scarcely have invented a way of again getting us by the ears , but by turning back and destroying the peace measures of the past .
the councils of that genius seem to have prevailed , the missouri compromise was repealed ; and here we are , in the midst of a new slavery agitation , such , i think , as we have never seen before .
who is responsible for this ?
is it those who resist the measure ; or those who , causelessly , brought it forward , and pressed it through , having reason to know , and , in fact , knowing it must and would be so resisted ?
it could not but be expected by its author , that it would be looked upon as a measure for the extension of slavery , aggravated by a gross breach of faith .
argue as you will , and long as you will , this is the naked front and aspect , of the measure .
and in this aspect , it could not but produce agitation .
slavery is founded in the selfishness of man 's nature --- opposition to it , is his love of justice .
these principles are an eternal antagonism ; and when brought into collision so fiercely , as slavery extension brings them , shocks , and throes , and convulsions must ceaselessly follow .
repeal the missouri compromise --- repeal all compromises --- repeal the declaration of independence --- repeal all past history , you still can not repeal human nature .
it still will be the abundance of man 's heart , that slavery extension is wrong ; and out of the abundance of his heart , his mouth will continue to speak .
the structure , too , of the nebraska bill is very peculiar .
the people are to decide the question of slavery for themselves ; but when they are to decide ; or how they are to decide ; or whether , when the question is once decided , it is to remain so , or is it to be subject to an indefinite succession of new trials , the law does not say , is it to be decided by the first dozen settlers who arrive there ?
or is it to await the arrival of a hundred ?
is it to be decided by a vote of the people ?
or a vote of the legislature ?
or , indeed by a vote of any sort ?
to these questions , the law gives no answer .
there is a mystery about this ; for when a member proposed to give the legislature express authority to exclude slavery , it was hooted down by the friends of the bill .
this fact is worth remembering .
some yankees , in the east , are sending emigrants to nebraska , to exclude slavery from it ; and , so far as i can judge , they expect the question to be decided by voting , in some way or other .
but the missourians are awake too .
they are within a stone 's throw of the contested ground .
they hold meetings , and pass resolutions , in which not the slightest allusion to voting is made .
they resolve that slavery already exists in the territory ; that more shall go there ; that they , remaining in missouri will protect it ; and that abolitionists shall be hung , or driven away .
through all this , bowie - knives and six - shooters are seen plainly enough ; but never a glimpse of the ballot - box .
and , really , what is to be the result of this ?
each party within , having numerous and determined backers without , is it not probable that the contest will come to blows , and bloodshed ?
could there be a more apt invention to bring about collision and violence , on the slavery question , than this nebraska project is ?
i do not charge , or believe , that such was intended by congress ; but if they had literally formed a ring , and placed champions within it to fight out the controversy , the fight could be no more likely to come off , than it is .
and if this fight should begin , is it likely to take a very peaceful , union - saving turn ?
will not the first drop of blood so shed , be the real knell of the union?the missouri compromise ought to be restored .
for the sake of the union , it ought to be restored .
we ought to elect a house of representatives which will vote its restoration .
if by any means , we omit to do this , what follows ?
slavery may or may not be established in nebraska .
but whether it be or not , we shall have repudiated --- discarded from the councils of the nation --- the spirit of compromise ; for who after this will ever trust in a national compromise ?
the spirit of mutual concession --- that spirit which first gave us the constitution , and which has thrice saved the union --- we shall have strangled and cast from us forever .
and what shall we have in lieu of it ?
the south flushed with triumph and tempted to excesses ; the north , betrayed , as they believe , brooding on wrong and burning for revenge .
one side will provoke ; the other resent .
the one will taunt , the other defy ; one agrees , the other retaliates .
already a few in the north , defy all constitutional restraints , resist the execution of the fugitive slave law , and even menace the institution of slavery in the states where it exists .
already a few in the south , claim the constitutional right to take to and hold slaves in the free states --- demand the revival of the slave trade ; and demand a treaty with great britain by which fugitive slaves may be reclaimed from canada .
as yet they are but few on either side .
it is a grave question for the lovers of the union , whether the final destruction of the missouri compromise , and with it the spirit of all compromise will or will not embolden and embitter each of these , and fatally increase the numbers of both .
but restore the compromise , and what then ?
we thereby restore the national faith , the national confidence , the national feeling of brotherhood .
we thereby reinstate the spirit of concession and compromise --- that spirit which has never failed us in past perils , and which may be safely trusted for all the future .
the south ought to join in doing this .
the peace of the nation is as dear to them as to us .
in memories of the past and hopes of the future , they share as largely as we .
it would be on their part , a great act --- great in its spirit , and great in its effect .
it would be worth to the nation a hundred years ' purchase of peace and prosperity .
and what of sacrifice would they make ?
they only surrender to us , what they gave us for a consideration long , long ago ; what they have not now , asked for , struggled or cared for ; what has been thrust upon them , not less to their own astonishment than to ours .
but it is said we can not restore it ; that though we elect every member of the lower house , the senate is still against us .
it is quite true , that of the senators who passed the nebraska bill , a majority of the whole senate will retain their seats in spite of the elections of this and the next year .
but if at these elections , their several constituencies shall clearly express their will against nebraska , will these senators disregard their will ?
will they neither obey , nor make room for those who will?but even if we fail to technically restore the compromise , it is still a great point to carry a popular vote in favor of the restoration .
the moral weight of such a vote can not be estimated too highly .
the authors of nebraska are not at all satisfied with the destruction of the compromise --- an endorsement of this principle , they proclaim to be the great object .
with them , nebraska alone is a small matter --- to establish a principle , for future use , is what they particularly desire .
that future use is to be the planting of slavery wherever in the wide world , local and unorganized opposition can not prevent it .
now if you wish to give them this endorsement --- if you wish to establish this principle --- do so .
i shall regret it ; but it is your right .
on the contrary if you are opposed to the principle --- intend to give it no such endorsement --- let no wheedling , no sophistry , divert you from throwing a direct vote against it .
some men , mostly whigs , who condemn the repeal of the missouri compromise , nevertheless hesitate to go for its restoration , lest they be thrown in company with the abolitionist .
will they allow me as an old whig to tell them good humoredly , that i think this is very silly ?
stand with anybody that stands right .
stand with him while he is right and part with him when he goes wrong .
stand with the abolitionist in restoring the missouri compromise ; and stand against him when he attempts to repeal the fugitive slave law .
in the latter case you stand with the southern disunionist .
what of that ?
you are still right .
in both cases you are right .
in both cases you oppose the dangerous extremes .
in both you stand on middle ground and hold the ship level and steady .
in both you are national and nothing less than national .
this is good old whig ground .
to desert such ground , because of any company , is to be less than a whig --- less than a man --- less than an american .
i particularly object to the new position which the avowed principle of this nebraska law gives to slavery in the body politic .
i object to it because it assumes that there can be moral right in the enslaving of one man by another .
i object to it as a dangerous dalliance for a few people --- a sad evidence that , feeling prosperity we forget right --- that liberty , as a principle , we have ceased to revere .
i object to it because the fathers of the republic eschewed , and rejected it .
the argument of " necessity " was the only argument they ever admitted in favor of slavery ; and so far , and so far only as it carried them , did they ever go .
they found the institution existing among us , which they could not help ; and they cast blame upon the british king for having permitted its introduction .
before the constitution , they prohibited its introduction into the north - western territory --- the only country we owned , then free from it .
at the framing and adoption of the constitution , they forbore to so much as mention the word " slave " or " slavery " in the whole instrument .
in the provision for the recovery of fugitives , the slave is spoken of as a " person held to service or labor . "
in that prohibiting the abolition of the african slave trade for twenty years , that trade is spoken of as " the migration or importation of such persons as any of the states now existing , shall think proper to admit , " and c. these are the only provisions alluding to slavery .
thus , the thing is hid away , in the constitution , just as an afflicted man hides away a wen or a cancer , which he dares not cut out at once , lest he bleed to death ; with the promise , nevertheless , that the cutting may begin at the end of a given time .
less than this our fathers could not do ; and now they would not do .
necessity drove them so far , and farther , they would not go .
but this is not all .
the earliest congress , under the constitution , took the same view of slavery .
they hedged and hemmed it in to the narrowest limits of necessity .
in 1794 , they prohibited an out - going slave - trade --- that is , the taking of slaves from the united states to sell .
in 1798 , they prohibited the bringing of slaves from africa , into the mississippi territory --- this territory then comprising what are now the states of mississippi and alabama .
this was ten years before they had the authority to do the same thing as to the states existing at the adoption of the constitution .
in 1800 they prohibited american citizens from trading in slaves between foreign countries --- as , for instance , from africa to brazil .
in 1803 they passed a law in aid of one or two state laws , in restraint of the internal slave trade .
in 1807 , in apparent hot haste , they passed the law , nearly a year in advance to take effect the first day of 1808 - --the very first day the constitution would permit --- prohibiting the african slave trade by heavy pecuniary and corporal penalties .
in 1820 , finding these provisions ineffectual , they declared the trade piracy , and annexed to it , the extreme penalty of death .
while all this was passing in the general government , five or six of the original slave states had adopted systems of gradual emancipation ; and by which the institution was rapidly becoming extinct within these limits .
thus we see , the plain unmistakable spirit of that age , towards slavery , was hostility to the principle , and toleration , only by necessity .
but now it is to be transformed into a " sacred right . "
nebraska brings it forth , places it on the high road to extension and perpetuity ; and , with a pat on its back , says to it , " go , and god speed you . "
henceforth it is to be the chief jewel of the nation --- the very figure - head of the ship of state .
little by little , but steadily as man 's march to the grave , we have been giving up the old for the new faith .
near eighty years ago we began by declaring that all men are created equal ; but now from that beginning we have run down to the other declaration , that for some men to enslave others is a " sacred right of self - government . "
these principles can not stand together .
they are as opposite as god and mammon ; and whoever holds to the one , must despise the other .
when pettit , in connection with his support of the nebraska bill , called the declaration of independence " a self - evident lie " he only did what consistency and candor require all other nebraska men to do .
of the forty odd nebraska senators who sat present and heard him , no one rebuked him .
nor am i apprized that any nebraska newspaper , or any nebraska orator , in the whole nation , has ever yet rebuked him .
if this had been said among marion 's men , southerners though they were , what would have become of the man who said it ?
if this had been said to the men who captured andre , the man who said it , would probably have been hung sooner than andre was .
if it had been said in old independence hall , seventy - eight years ago , the very door - keeper would have throttled the man , and thrust him into the street .
let no one be deceived .
the spirit of seventy - six and the spirit of nebraska , are utter antagonisms ; and the former is being rapidly displaced by the latter .
fellow countrymen --- americans south , as well as north , shall we make no effort to arrest this ?
already the liberal party throughout the world , express the apprehension " that the one retrograde institution in america , is undermining the principles of progress , and fatally violating the noblest political system the world ever saw . "
this is not the taunt of enemies , but the warning of friends .
is it quite safe to disregard it --- to despise it ?
is there no danger to liberty itself , in discarding the earliest practice , and first precept of our ancient faith ?
in our greedy chase to make profit of the negro , let us beware , lest we " cancel and tear to pieces " even the white man 's charter of freedom .
our republican robe is soiled , and trailed in the dust .
let us repurify it .
let us turn and wash it white , in the spirit , if not the blood , of the revolution .
let us turn slavery from its claims of " moral right , " back upon its existing legal rights , and its arguments of " necessity . "
let us return it to the position our fathers gave it ; and there let it rest in peace .
let us re - adopt the declaration of independence , and with it , the practices , and policy , which harmonize with it .
let north and south --- let all americans --- let all lovers of liberty everywhere --- join in the great and good work .
if we do this , we shall not only have saved the union ; but we shall have so saved it , as to make , and to keep it , forever worthy of the saving .
we shall have so saved it , that the succeeding millions of free happy people , the world over , shall rise up , and call us blessed , to the latest generations .
at springfield , twelve days ago , where i had spoken substantially as i have here , judge douglas replied to me --- and as he is to reply to me here , i shall attempt to anticipate him , by noticing some of the points he made there .
he commenced by stating i had assumed all the way through , that the principle of the nebraska bill , would have the effect of extending slavery .
he denied that this was intended , or that this effect would follow .
i will not re - open the argument upon this point .
that such was the intention , the world believed at the start , and will continue to believe .
this was the countenance of the thing ; and , both friends and enemies , instantly recognized it as such .
that countenance can not now be changed by argument .
you can as easily argue the color out of the negroes ' skin .
like the " bloody hand " you may wash it , and wash it , the red witness of guilt still sticks , and stares horribly at you .
next he says , congressional intervention never prevented slavery , any where --- that it did not prevent it in the north west territory , now in illinois --- that in fact , illinois came into the union as a slave state --- that the principle of the nebraska bill expelled it from illinois , from several old states , from every where .
now this is mere quibbling all the way through .
if the ordinance of ' 87 did not keep slavery out of the north west territory , how happens it that the north west shore of the ohio river is entirely free from it ; while the south east shore , less than a mile distant , along nearly the whole length of the river , is entirely covered with it?if that ordinance did not keep it out of illinois , what was it that made the difference between illinois and missouri ?
they lie side by side , the mississippi river only dividing them ; while their early settlements were within the same latitude .
between 1810 and 1820 the number of slaves in missouri increased 7,211 ; while in illinois , in the same ten years , they decreased 51 .
this appears by the census returns .
during nearly all of that ten years , both were territories --- not states .
during this time , the ordinance forbid slavery to go into illinois ; and nothing forbid it to go into missouri .
it did go into missouri , and did not go into illinois .
that is the fact .
can any one doubt as to the reason of it?but , he says , illinois came into the union as a slave state .
silence , perhaps , would be the best answer to this flat contradiction of the known history of the country .
what are the facts upon which this bold assertion is based ?
when we first acquired the country , as far back as 1787 , there were some slaves within it , held by the french inhabitants at kaskaskia .
the territorial legislation , admitted a few negroes , from the slave states , as indentured servants .
one year after the adoption of the first state constitution the whole number of them was --- what do you think ?
just 117 - --while the aggregate free population was 55,094 - --about 470 to one .
upon this state of facts , the people framed their constitution prohibiting the further introduction of slavery , with a sort of guaranty to the owners of the few indentured servants , giving freedom to their children to be born thereafter , and making no mention whatever , of any supposed slave for life .
out of this small matter , the judge manufactures his argument that illinois came into the union as a slave state .
let the facts be the answer to the argument .
the principles of the nebraska bill , he says , expelled slavery from illinois ?
the principle of that bill first planted it here --- that is , it first came , because there was no law to prevent it --- first came before we owned the country ; and finding it here , and having the ordinance of ' 87 to prevent its increasing , our people struggled along , and finally got rid of it as best they could .
but the principle of the nebraska bill abolished slavery in several of the old states .
well , it is true that several of the old states , in the last quarter of the last century , did adopt systems of gradual emancipation , by which the institution has finally become extinct within their limits ; but it may or may not be true that the principle of the nebraska bill was the cause that led to the adoption of these measures .
it is now more than fifty years , since the last of these states adopted its system of emancipation .
if nebraska bill is the real author of these benevolent works , it is rather deplorable , that he has , for so long a time , ceased working all together .
is there not some reason to suspect that it was the principle of the revolution , and not the principle of nebraska bill , that led to emancipation in these old states ?
leave it to the people of those old emancipating states , and i am quite sure they will decide , that neither that , nor any other good thing , ever did , or ever will come of nebraska bill .
in the course of my main argument , judge douglas interrupted me to say , that the principle the nebraska bill was very old ; that it originated when god made man and placed good and evil before him , allowing him to choose for himself , being responsible for the choice he should make .
at the time i thought this was merely playful ; and i answered it accordingly .
but in his reply to me he renewed it , as a serious argument .
in seriousness then , the facts of this proposition are not true as stated .
god did not place good and evil before man , telling him to make his choice .
on the contrary , he did tell him there was one tree , of the fruit of which , he should not eat , upon pain of certain death .
i should scarcely wish so strong a prohibition against slavery in nebraska .
but this argument strikes me as not a little remarkable in another particular --- in its strong resemblance to the old argument for the " divine right of kings . "
by the latter , the king is to do just as he pleases with his white subjects , being responsible to god alone .
by the former the white man is to do just as he pleases with his black slaves , being responsible to god alone .
the two things are precisely alike ; and it is but natural that they should find similar arguments to sustain them .
i had argued , that the application of the principle of self - government , as contended for , would require the revival of the african slave trade --- that no argument could be made in favor of a man 's right to take slaves to nebraska , which could not be equally well made in favor of his right to bring them from the coast of africa .
the judge replied , that the constitution requires the suppression of the foreign slave trade ; but does not require the prohibition of slavery in the territories .
that is a mistake , in point of fact .
the constitution does not require the action of congress in either case ; and it does authorize it in both .
and so , there is still no difference between the cases .
in regard to what i had said , the advantage the slave states have over the free , in the matter of representation , the judge replied that we , in the free states , count five free negroes as five white people , while in the slave states , they count five slaves as three whites only ; and that the advantage , at last , was on the side of the free states .
now , in the slave states , they count free negroes just as we do ; and it so happens that besides their slaves , they have as many free negroes as we have , and thirty - three thousand over .
thus their free negroes more than balance ours ; and their advantage over us , in consequence of their slaves , still remains as i stated it .
in reply to my argument , that the compromise measures of 1850 , were a system of equivalents ; and that the provisions of no one of them could fairly be carried to other subjects , without its corresponding equivalent being carried with it , the judge denied out - right , that these measures had any connection with , or dependence upon , each other .
this is mere desperation .
if they have no connection , why are they always spoken of in connection ?
why has he so spoken of them , a thousand times ?
why has he constantly called them a series of measures ?
why does everybody call them a compromise ?
why was california kept out of the union , six or seven months , if it was not because of its connection with the other measures ?
webster 's leading definition of the verb " to compromise " is " to adjust and settle a difference , by mutual agreement with concessions of claims by the parties . "
this conveys precisely the popular understanding of the word compromise .
we knew , before the judge told us , that these measures passed separately , and in distinct bills ; and that no two of them were passed by the votes of precisely the same members .
but we also know , and so does he know , that no one of them could have passed both branches of congress but for the understanding that the others were to pass also .
upon this understanding each got votes , which it could have got in no other way .
it is this fact , that gives to the measures their true character ; and it is the universal knowledge of this fact , that has given them the name of compromise so expressive of that true character .
i had asked " if in carrying the provisions of the utah and new mexico laws to nebraska , you could clear away other objection , how can you leave nebraska " perfectly free " to introduce slavery before she forms a constitution --- during her territorial government ?--- while the utah and new mexico laws only authorize it when they form constitutions , and are admitted into the union ? "
to this judge douglas answered that the utah and new mexico laws , also authorized it before ; and to prove this , he read from one of their laws , as follows : " that the legislative power of said territory shall extend to all rightful subjects of legislation consistent with the constitution of the united states and the provisions of this act."now it is perceived from the reading of this , that there is nothing express upon the subject ; but that the authority is sought to be implied merely , for the general provision of " all rightful subjects of legislation . "
in reply to this , i insist , as a legal rule of construction , as well as the plain popular view of the matter , that the express provision for utah and new mexico coming in with slavery if they choose , when they shall form constitutions , is an exclusion of all implied authority on the same subject --- that congress , having the subject distinctly in their minds , when they made the express provision , they therein expressed their whole meaning on that subject .
the judge rather insinuated that i had found it convenient to forget the washington territorial law passed in 1853 .
this was a division of oregon , organizing the northern part , as the territory of washington .
he asserted that , by this act , the ordinance of ' 87 theretofore existing in oregon , was repealed ; that nearly all the members of congress voted for it , beginning in the h. r. , with charles allen of massachusetts , and ending with richard yates , of illinois ; and that he could not understand how those who now oppose the nebraska bill , so voted then , unless it was because it was then too soon after both the great political parties had ratified the compromises of 1850 , and the ratification therefore too fresh , to be then repudiated .
now i had seen the washington act before ; and i have carefully examined it since ; and i aver that there is no repeal of the ordinance of ' 87 , or of any prohibition of slavery , in it .
in express terms , there is absolutely nothing in the whole law upon the subject --- in fact , nothing to lead a reader to think of the subject .
to my judgment , it is equally free from every thing from which such repeal can be legally implied ; but however this may be , are men now to be entrapped by a legal implication , extracted from covert language , introduced perhaps , for the very purpose of entrapping them ?
i sincerely wish every man could read this law quite through , carefully watching every sentence , and every line , for a repeal of the ordinance of ' 87 or any thing equivalent to it .
another point on the washington act .
if it was intended to be modelled after the utah and new mexico acts , as judge douglas , insists , why was it not inserted in it , as in them , that washington was to come in with or without slavery as she may choose at the adoption of her constitution ?
it has no such provision in it ; and i defy the ingenuity of man to give a reason for the omission , other than that it was not intended to follow the utah and new mexico laws in regard to the question of slavery .
the washington act not only differs vitally from the utah and new mexico acts ; but the nebraska act differs vitally from both .
by the latter act the people are left " perfectly free " to regulate their own domestic concerns , and c. ; but in all the former , all their laws are to be submitted to congress , and if disapproved are to be null .
the washington act goes even further ; it absolutely prohibits the territorial legislation , by very strong and guarded language , from establishing banks , or borrowing money on the faith of the territory .
is this the sacred right of self - government we hear vaunted so much ?
no sir , the nebraska bill finds no model in the acts of ' 50 or the washington act .
it finds no model in any law from adam till today .
as phillips says of napoleon , the nebraska act is grand , gloomy , and peculiar ; wrapped in the solitude of its own originality ; without a model , and without a shadow upon the earth .
in the course of his reply , senator douglas remarked , in substance , that he had always considered this government was made for the white people and not for the negroes .
why , in point of mere fact , i think so too .
but in this remark of the judge , there is a significance , which i think is the key to the great mistake ( if there is any such mistake ) which he has made in this nebraska measure .
it shows that the judge has no very vivid impression that the negro is a human ; and consequently has no idea that there can be any moral question in legislating about him .
in his view , the question of whether a new country shall be slave or free , is a matter of as utter indifference , as it is whether his neighbor shall plant his farm with tobacco , or stock it with horned cattle .
now , whether this view is right or wrong , it is very certain that the great mass of mankind take a totally different view .
they consider slavery a great moral wrong ; and their feelings against it , is not evanescent , but eternal .
it lies at the very foundation of their sense of justice ; and it can not be trifled with .
it is a great and durable element of popular action , and , i think , no statesman can safely disregard it .
our senator also objects that those who oppose him in this measure do not entirely agree with one another .
he reminds me that in my firm adherence to the constitutional rights of the slave states , i differ widely from others who are co - operating with me in opposing the nebraska bill ; and he says it is not quite fair to oppose him in this variety of ways .
he should remember that he took us by surprise --- astounded us --- by this measure .
we were thunderstruck and stunned ; and we reeled and fell in utter confusion .
but we rose each fighting , grasping whatever he could first reach --- a scythe --- a pitchfork --- a chopping axe , or a butcher 's cleaver .
we struck in the direction of the sound ; and we are rapidly closing in upon him .
he must not think to divert us from our purpose , by showing us that our drill , our dress , and our weapons , are not entirely perfect and uniform .
when the storm shall be past , he shall find us still americans ; no less devoted to the continued union and prosperity of the country than heretofore .
finally , the judge invokes against me , the memory of clay and of webster .
they were great men ; and men of great deeds .
but where have i assailed them ?
for what is it , that their life - long enemy , shall now make profit , by assuming to defend them against me , their life - long friend ?
i go against the repeal of the missouri compromise ; did they ever go for it ?
they went for the compromise of 1850 ; did i ever go against them ?
they were greatly devoted to the union ; to the small measure of my ability , was i ever less so ?
clay and webster were dead before this question arose ; by what authority shall our senator say they would espouse his side of it , if alive ?
mr. clay was the leading spirit in making the missouri compromise ; is it very credible that if now alive , he would take the lead in the breaking of it ?
the truth is that some support from whigs is now a necessity with the judge , and for thus it is , that the names of clay and webster are now invoked .
his old friends have deserted him in such numbers as to leave too few to live by .
he came to his own , and his own received him not , and lo !
he turns unto the gentiles .
a word now as to the judge 's desperate assumption that the compromises of ' 50 had no connection with one another ; that illinois came into the union as a slave state , and some other similar ones .
this is no other than a bold denial of the history of the country .
if we do not know that the compromises of ' 50 were dependent on each other ; if we do not know that illinois came into the union as a free state --- we do not know any thing .
if we do not know these things , we do not know that we ever had a revolutionary war , or such a chief as washington .
to deny these things is to deny our national axioms , or dogmas , at least ; and it puts an end to all argument .
if a man will stand up and assert , and repeat , and re - assert , that two and two do not make four , i know nothing in the power of argument that can stop him .
i think i can answer the judge so long as he sticks to the premises ; but when he flies from them , i can not work an argument into the consistency of a maternal gag , and actually close his mouth with it .
in such a case i can only commend him to the seventy thousand answers just in from pennsylvania , ohio and indiana .
the repeal of the missouri compromise , and the propriety of its restoration , constitute the subject of what i am about to say .
as i desire to present my own connected view of this subject , my remarks will not be , specifically , an answer to judge douglas ; yet , as i proceed , the main points he has presented will arise , and will receive such respectful attention as i may be able to give them .
i wish further to say , that i do not propose to question the patriotism , or to assail the motives of any man , or class of men ; but rather to strictly confine myself to the naked merits of the question .
i also wish to be no less than national in all the positions i may take ; and whenever i take ground which others have thought , or may think , narrow , sectional and dangerous to the union , i hope to give a reason , which will appear sufficient , at least to some , why i think differently .
and , as this subject is no other , than part and parcel of the larger general question of domestic - slavery , i wish to make and to keep the distinction between the existing institution , and the extension of it , so broad , and so clear , that no honest man can misunderstand me , and no dishonest one , successfully misrepresent me .
in order to a clear understanding of what the missouri compromise is , a short history of the preceding kindred subjects will perhaps be proper .
when we established our independence , we did not own , or claim , the country to which this compromise applies .
indeed , strictly speaking , the confederacy then owned no country at all ; the states respectively owned the country within their limits ; and some of them owned territory beyond their strict state limits .
virginia thus owned the north - western territory -- the country out of which the principal part of ohio , all indiana , all illinois , all michigan and all wisconsin , have since been formed .
she also owned ( perhaps within her then limits ) what has since been formed into the state of kentucky .
north carolina thus owned what is now the state of tennessee ; and south carolina and georgia , in separate parts , owned what are now mississippi and alabama .
connecticut , i think , owned the little remaining part of ohio -- being the same where they now send giddings to congress , and beat all creation at making cheese .
these territories , together with the states themselves , constituted all the country over which the confederacy then claimed any sort of jurisdiction .
we were then living under the articles of confederation , which were superceded by the constitution several years afterwards .
the question of ceding these territories to the general government was set on foot .
mr. jefferson , the author of the declaration of independence , and otherwise a chief actor in the revolution ; then a delegate in congress ; afterwards twice president ; who was , is , and perhaps will continue to be , the most distinguished politician of our history ; a virginian by birth and continued residence , and withal , a slave - holder ; conceived the idea of taking that occasion , to prevent slavery ever going into the north - western territory .
he prevailed on the virginia legislature to adopt his views , and to cede the territory , making the prohibition of slavery therein , a condition of the deed .
congress accepted the cession , with the condition ; and in the first ordinance ( which the acts of congress were then called ) for the government of the territory , provided that slavery should never be permitted therein .
this is the famed ordinance of ' 87 so often spoken of .
thenceforward , for sixty - one years , and until in 1848 , the last scrap of this territory came into the union as the state of wisconsin , all parties acted in quiet obedience to this ordinance .
it is now what jefferson foresaw and intended -- the happy home of teeming millions of free , white , prosperous people , and no slave amongst them .
thus , with the author of the declaration of independence , the policy of prohibiting slavery in new territory originated .
thus , away back of the constitution , in the pure fresh , free breath of the revolution , the state of virginia , and the national congress put that policy in practice .
thus through sixty odd of the best years of the republic did that policy steadily work to its great and beneficent end .
and thus , in those five states , and five millions of free , enterprising people , we have before us the rich fruits of this policy .
but now new light breaks upon us .
now congress declares this ought never to have been ; and the like of it , must never be again .
the sacred right of self government is grossly violated by it !
we even find some men , who drew their first breath , and every other breath of their lives , under this very restriction , now live in dread of absolute suffocation , if they should be restricted in the " sacred right " of taking slaves to nebraska .
that perfect liberty they sigh for -- the liberty of making slaves of other people -- jefferson never thought of ; their own father never thought of ; they never thought of themselves , a year ago .
how fortunate for them , they did not sooner become sensible of their great misery !
oh , how difficult it is to treat with respect , such assaults upon all we have ever really held sacred .
but to return to history .
in 1803 we purchased what was then called louisiana , of france .
it included the now states of louisiana , arkansas , missouri , and iowa ; also the territory of minnesota , and the present bone of contention , kansas and nebraska .
slavery already existed among the french at new orleans ; and , to some extent , at st. louis .
in 1812 louisiana came into the union as a slave state , without controversy .
in 1818 or ' 19 , missouri showed signs of a wish to come in with slavery .
this was resisted by northern members of congress ; and thus began the first great slavery agitation in the nation .
this controversy lasted several months , and became very angry and exciting ; the house of representatives voting steadily for the prohibition of slavery in missouri , and the senate voting as steadily against it .
threats of breaking up the union were freely made ; and the ablest public men of the day became seriously alarmed .
at length a compromise was made , in which , like all compromises , both sides yielded something .
it was a law passed on the 6th day of march , 1820 , providing that missouri might come into the union with slavery , but that in all the remaining part of the territory purchased of france , which lies north of 36 degrees and 30 minutes north latitude , slavery should never be permitted .
this provision of law , is the missouri compromise .
in excluding slavery north of the line , the same language is employed as in the ordinance of ' 87 .
it directly applied to iowa , minnesota , and to the present bone of contention , kansas and nebraska .
whether there should or should not , be slavery south of that line , nothing was said in the law ; but arkansas constituted the principal remaining part , south of the line ; and it has since been admitted as a slave state without serious controversy .
more recently , iowa , north of the line , came in as a free state without controversy .
still later , minnesota , north of the line , had a territorial organization without controversy .
texas principally south of the line , and west of arkansas ; though originally within the purchase from france , had , in 1819 , been traded off to spain , in our treaty for the acquisition of florida .
it had thus become a part of mexico .
mexico revolutionized and became independent of spain .
american citizens began settling rapidly , with their slaves in the southern part of texas .
soon they revolutionized against mexico , and established an independent government of their own , adopting a constitution , with slavery , strongly resembling the constitutions of our slave states .
by still another rapid move , texas , claiming a boundary much further west , than when we parted with her in 1819 , was brought back to the united states , and admitted into the union as a slave state .
there then was little or no settlement in the northern part of texas , a considerable portion of which lay north of the missouri line ; and in the resolutions admitting her into the union , the missouri restriction was expressly extended westward across her territory .
this was in 1845 , only nine years ago .
thus originated the missouri compromise ; and thus has it been respected down to 1845 .
and even four years later , in 1849 , our distinguished senator , in a public address , held the following language in relation to it:"the missouri compromise had been in practical operation for about a quarter of a century , and had received the sanction and approbation of men of all parties in every section of the union .
it had allayed all sectional jealousies and irritations growing out of this vexed question , and harmonized and tranquilized the whole country .
it had given to henry clay , as its prominent champion , the proud sobriquet of the " great pacificator " and by that title and for that service , his political friends had repeatedly appealed to the people to rally under his standard , as a presidential candidate , as the man who had exhibited the patriotism and the power to suppress , an unholy and treasonable agitation , and preserve the union .
he was not aware that any man or any party from any section of the union , had ever urged as an objection to mr. clay , that he was the great champion of the missouri compromise .
on the contrary , the effort was made by the opponents of mr. clay , to prove that he was not entitled to the exclusive merit of that great patriotic measure , and that the honor was equally due to others as well as to him , for securing its adoption -- that it had its origin in the hearts of all patriotic men , who desired to preserve and perpetuate the blessings of our glorious union -- an origin akin that of the constitution of the united states , conceived in the same spirit of fraternal affection , and calculated to remove forever , the only danger , which seemed to threaten , at some distant day , to sever the social bond of union .
all the evidences of public opinion at that day , seemed to indicate that this compromise had been canonized in the hearts of the american people , as a sacred thing which no ruthless hand would ever be reckless enough to disturb."i do not read this extract to involve judge douglas in an inconsistency .
if he afterwards thought he had been wrong , it was right for him to change .
i bring this forward merely to show the high estimate placed on the missouri compromise by all parties up to so late as the year 1849.but , going back a little , in point of time , our war with mexico broke out in 1846 .
when congress was about adjourning that session , president polk asked them to place two millions of dollars under his control , to be used by him in the recess , if found practicable and expedient , in negociating a treaty of peace with mexico , and acquiring some part of her territory .
a bill was duly got up , for the purpose , and was progressing swimmingly , in the house of representatives , when a member by the name of david wilmot , a democrat from pennsylvania , moved as an amendment " provided that in any territory thus acquired , there shall never be slavery."this is the origin of the far - famed " wilmot proviso . "
it created a great flutter ; but it stuck like wax , was voted into the bill , and the bill passed with it through the house .
the senate , however , adjourned without final action on it and so both appropriation and proviso were lost , for the time .
the war continued , and at the next session , the president renewed his request for the appropriation , enlarging the amount , i think , to three million .
again came the proviso ; and defeated the measure .
congress adjourned again , and the war went on .
in dec. , 1847 , the new congress assembled .
i was in the lower house that term .
the " wilmot proviso " or the principle of it , was constantly coming up in some shape or other , and i think i may venture to say i voted for it at least forty times ; during the short term i was there .
the senate , however , held it in check , and it never became law .
in the spring of 1848 a treaty of peace was made with mexico ; by which we obtained that portion of her country which now constitutes the territories of new mexico and utah , and the now state of california .
by this treaty the wilmot proviso was defeated , as so far as it was intended to be , a condition of the acquisition of territory .
its friends however , were still determined to find some way to restrain slavery from getting into the new country .
this new acquisition lay directly west of our old purchase from france , and extended west to the pacific ocean -- and was so situated that if the missouri line should be extended straight west , the new country would be divided by such extended line , leaving some north and some south of it .
on judge douglas ' motion a bill , or provision of a bill , passed the senate to so extend the missouri line .
the proviso men in the house , including myself , voted it down , because by implication , it gave up the southern part to slavery , while we were bent on having it all free .
in the fall of 1848 the gold mines were discovered in california .
this attracted people to it with unprecedented rapidity , so that on , or soon after , the meeting of the new congress in dec. , 1849 , she already had a population of nearly a hundred thousand , had called a convention , formed a state constitution , excluding slavery , and was knocking for admission into the union .
the proviso men , of course were for letting her in , but the senate , always true to the other side would not consent to her admission .
and there california stood , kept out of the union , because she would not let slavery into her borders .
under all the circumstances perhaps this was not wrong .
there were other points of dispute , connected with the general question of slavery , which equally needed adjustment .
the south clamored for a more efficient fugitive slave law .
the north clamored for the abolition of a peculiar species of slave trade in the district of columbia , in connection with which , in view from the windows of the capitol , a sort of negro - livery stable , where droves of negroes were collected , temporarily kept , and finally taken to southern markets , precisely like droves of horses , had been openly maintained for fifty years .
utah and new mexico needed territorial governments ; and whether slavery should or should not be prohibited within them , was another question .
the indefinite western boundary of texas was to be settled .
she was received a slave state ; and consequently the farther west the slavery men could push her boundary , the more slave country they secured .
and the farther east the slavery opponents could thrust the boundary back , the less slave ground was secured .
thus this was just as clearly a slavery question as any of the others .
these points all needed adjustment ; and they were all held up , perhaps wisely to make them help to adjust one another .
the union , now , as in 1820 , was thought to be in danger ; and devotion to the union rightfully inclined men to yield somewhat , in points where nothing else could have so inclined them .
a compromise was finally effected .
the south got their new fugitive - slave law ; and the north got california , ( the far best part of our acquisition from mexico , ) as a free state .
the south got a provision that new mexico and utah , when admitted as states , may come in with or without slavery as they may then choose ; and the north got the slave - trade abolished in the district of columbia .
the north got the western boundary of texas , thence further back eastward than the south desired ; but , in turn , they gave texas ten millions of dollars , with which to pay her old debts .
this is the compromise of 1850.preceding the presidential election of 1852 , each of the great political parties , democrats and whigs , met in convention , and adopted resolutions endorsing the compromise of ' 50 ; as a " finality , " a final settlement , so far as these parties could make it so , of all slavery agitation .
previous to this , in 1851 , the illinois legislature had indorsed it .
during this long period of time nebraska had remained , substantially an uninhabited country , but now emigration to , and settlement within it began to take place .
it is about one third as large as the present united states , and its importance so long overlooked , begins to come into view .
the restriction of slavery by the missouri compromise directly applies to it ; in fact , was first made , and has since been maintained , expressly for it .
in 1853 , a bill to give it a territorial government passed the house of representatives , and , in the hands of judge douglas , failed of passing the senate only for want of time .
this bill contained no repeal of the missouri compromise .
indeed , when it was assailed because it did not contain such repeal , judge douglas defended it in its existing form .
on january 4th , 1854 , judge douglas introduces a new bill to give nebraska territorial government .
he accompanies this bill with a report , in which last , he expressly recommends that the missouri compromise shall neither be affirmed nor repealed .
before long the bill is so modified as to make two territories instead of one ; calling the southern one kansas .
also , about a month after the introduction of the bill , on the judge 's own motion , it is so amended as to declare the missouri compromise inoperative and void ; and , substantially , that the people who go and settle there may establish slavery , or exclude it , as they may see fit .
in this shape the bill passed both branches of congress , and became a law .
this is the repeal of the missouri compromise .
the foregoing history may not be precisely accurate in every particular ; but i am sure it is sufficiently so , for all the uses i shall attempt to make of it , and in it , we have before us , the chief material enabling us to correctly judge whether the repeal of the missouri compromise is right or wrong .
i think , and shall try to show , that it is wrong ; wrong in its direct effect , letting slavery into kansas and nebraska -- and wrong in its prospective principle , allowing it to spread to every other part of the wide world , where men can be found inclined to take it .
this declared indifference , but as i must think , covert real zeal for the spread of slavery , i can not but hate .
i hate it because of the monstrous injustice of slavery itself .
i hate it because it deprives our republican example of its just influence in the world -- enables the enemies of free institutions , with plausibility , to taunt us as hypocrites -- causes the real friends of freedom to doubt our sincerity , and especially because it forces so many really good men amongst ourselves into an open war with the very fundamental principles of civil liberty -- criticising the declaration of independence , and insisting that there is no right principle of action but self - interest .
before proceeding , let me say i think i have no prejudice against the southern people .
they are just what we would be in their situation .
if slavery did not now exist amongst them , they would not introduce it .
if it did now exist amongst us , we should not instantly give it up .
this i believe of the masses north and south .
doubtless there are individuals , on both sides , who would not hold slaves under any circumstances ; and others who would gladly introduce slavery anew , if it were out of existence .
we know that some southern men do free their slaves , go north , and become tip - top abolitionists ; while some northern ones go south , and become most cruel slave - masters .
when southern people tell us they are no more responsible for the origin of slavery , than we ; i acknowledge the fact .
when it is said that the institution exists ; and that it is very difficult to get rid of it , in any satisfactory way , i can understand and appreciate the saying .
i surely will not blame them for not doing what i should not know how to do myself .
if all earthly power were given me , i should not know what to do , as to the existing institution .
my first impulse would be to free all the slaves , and send them to liberia , -- to their own native land .
but a moment 's reflection would convince me , that whatever of high hope , ( as i think there is ) there may be in this , in the long run , its sudden execution is impossible .
if they were all landed there in a day , they would all perish in the next ten days ; and there are not surplus shipping and surplus money enough in the world to carry them there in many times ten days .
what then ?
free them all , and keep them among us as underlings ?
is it quite certain that this betters their condition ?
i think i would not hold one in slavery , at any rate ; yet the point is not clear enough for me to denounce people upon .
what next ?
free them , and make them politically and socially , our equals ?
my own feelings will not admit of this ; and if mine would , we well know that those of the great mass of white people will not .
whether this feeling accords with justice and sound judgment , is not the sole question , if indeed , it is any part of it .
a universal feeling , whether well or ill - founded , can not be safely disregarded .
we can not , then , make them equals .
it does seem to me that systems of gradual emancipation might be adopted ; but for their tardiness in this , i will not undertake to judge our brethren of the south .
when they remind us of their constitutional rights , i acknowledge them , not grudgingly , but fully , and fairly ; and i would give them any legislation for the reclaiming of their fugitives , which should not , in its stringency , be more likely to carry a free man into slavery , than our ordinary criminal laws are to hang an innocent one .
but all this ; to my judgment , furnishes no more excuse for permitting slavery to go into our own free territory , than it would for reviving the african slave trade by law .
the law which forbids the bringing of slaves from africa ; and that which has so long forbid the taking them to nebraska , can hardly be distinguished on any moral principle ; and the repeal of the former could find quite as plausible excuses as that of the latter .
the arguments by which the repeal of the missouri compromise is sought to be justified , are these : first , that the nebraska country needed a territorial government .
second , that in various ways , the public had repudiated it , and demanded the repeal ; and therefore should not now complain of it .
and lastly , that the repeal establishes a principle , which is intrinsically right .
i will attempt an answer to each of them in its turn .
first , then , if that country was in need of a territorial organization , could it not have had it as well without as with the repeal ?
iowa and minnesota , to both of which the missouri restriction applied , had , without its repeal , each in succession , territorial organizations .
and even , the year before , a bill for nebraska itself , was within an ace of passing , without the repealing clause ; and this in the hands of the same men who are now the champions of repeal .
why no necessity then for the repeal ?
but still later , when this very bill was first brought in , it contained no repeal .
but , say they , because the public had demanded , or rather commanded the repeal , the repeal was to accompany the organization , whenever that should occur .
now i deny that the public ever demanded any such thing -- ever repudiated the missouri compromise -- ever commanded its repeal .
i deny it , and call for the proof .
it is not contended , i believe , that any such command has ever been given in express terms .
it is only said that it was done in principle .
the support of the wilmot proviso , is the first fact mentioned , to prove that the missouri restriction was repudiated in principle , and the second is , the refusal to extend the missouri line over the country acquired from mexico .
these are near enough alike to be treated together .
the one was to exclude the chances of slavery from the whole new acquisition by the lump ; and the other was to reject a division of it , by which one half was to be given up to those chances .
now whether this was a repudiation of the missouri line , in principle , depends upon whether the missouri law contained any principle requiring the line to be extended over the country acquired from mexico .
i contend it did not .
i insist that it contained no general principle , but that it was , in every sense , specific .
that its terms limit it to the country purchased from france , is undenied and undeniable .
it could have no principle beyond the intention of those who made it .
they did not intend to extend the line to country which they did not own .
if they intended to extend it , in the event of acquiring additional territory , why did they not say so ?
it was just as easy to say , that `` in all the country west of the mississippi , which we now own , or may hereafter acquire there shall never be slavery , " as to say , what they did say ; and they would have said it if they had meant it .
an intention to extend the law is not only not mentioned in the law , but is not mentioned in any contemporaneous history .
both the law itself , and the history of the times are a blank as to any principle of extension ; and by neither the known rules for construing statutes and contracts , nor by common sense , can any such principle be inferred .
another fact showing the specific character of the missouri law -- showing that it intended no more than it expressed -- showing that the line was not intended as a universal dividing line between free and slave territory , present and prospective -- north of which slavery could never go -- is the fact that by that very law , missouri came in as a slave state , north of the line .
if that law contained any prospective principle , the whole law must be looked to in order to ascertain what the principle was .
and by this rule , the south could fairly contend that inasmuch as they got one slave state north of the line at the inception of the law , they have the right to have another given them north of it occasionally -- now and then in the indefinite westward extension of the line .
this demonstrates the absurdity of attempting to deduce a prospective principle from the missouri compromise line .
when we voted for the wilmot proviso , we were voting to keep slavery out of the whole missouri acquisition ; and little did we think we were thereby voting , to let it into nebraska , laying several hundred miles distant .
when we voted against extending the missouri line , little did we think we were voting to destroy the old line , then of near thirty years standing .
to argue that we thus repudiated the missouri compromise is no less absurd than it would be to argue that because we have , so far , forborne to acquire cuba , we have thereby , in principle , repudiated our former acquisitions , and determined to throw them out of the union !
no less absurd than it would be to say that because i may have refused to build an addition to my house , i thereby have decided to destroy the existing house !
and if i catch you setting fire to my house , you will turn upon me and say i instructed you to do it !
the most conclusive argument , however , that , while voting for the wilmot proviso , and while voting against the extension of the missouri line , we never thought of disturbing the original missouri compromise , is found in the facts , that there was then , and still is , an unorganized tract of fine country , nearly as large as the state of missouri , lying immediately west of arkansas , and south of the missouri compromise line ; and that we never attempted to prohibit slavery as to it .
i wish particular attention to this .
it adjoins the original missouri compromise line , by its northern boundary ; and consequently is part of the country , into which , by implication , slavery was permitted to go , by that compromise .
there it has lain open ever since , and there it still lies .
and yet no effort has been made at any time to wrest it from the south .
in all our struggles to prohibit slavery within our mexican acquisitions , we never so much as lifted a finger to prohibit it , as to this tract .
is not this entirely conclusive that at all times , we have held the missouri compromise as a sacred thing ; even when against ourselves , as well as when for us?senator douglas sometimes says the missouri line itself was , in principle , only an extension of the line of the ordinance of ' 87 -- that is to say , an extension of the ohio river .
i think this is weak enough on its face .
i will remark , however that , as a glance at the map will show , the missouri line is a long way farther south than the ohio ; and that if our senator , in proposing his extension , had stuck to the principle of jogging southward , perhaps it might not have been voted down so readily .
but next it is said that the compromises of ' 50 and the ratification of them by both political parties , in ' 52 , established a new principle , which required the repeal of the missouri compromise .
this again i deny .
i deny it , and demand the proof .
i have already stated fully what the compromises of ' 50 are .
the particular part of those measures , for which the virtual repeal of the missouri compromise is sought to be inferred ( for it is admitted they contain nothing about it , in express terms ) is the provision in the utah and new mexico laws , which permits them when they seek admission into the union as states , to come in with or without slavery as they shall then see fit .
now i insist this provision was made for utah and new mexico , and for no other place whatever .
it had no more direct reference to nebraska than it had to the territories of the moon .
but , say they , it had reference to nebraska , in principle .
let us see .
the north consented to this provision , not because they considered it right in itself ; but because they were compensated -- paid for it .
they , at the same time , got california into the union as a free state .
this was far the best part of all they had struggled for by the wilmot proviso .
they also got the area of slavery somewhat narrowed in the settlement of the boundary of texas .
also , they got the slave trade abolished in the district of columbia .
for all these desirable objects the north could afford to yield something ; and they did yield to the south the utah and new mexico provision .
i do not mean that the whole north , or even a majority , yielded , when the law passed ; but enough yielded , when added to the vote of the south , to carry the measure .
now can it be pretended that the principle of this arrangement requires us to permit the same provision to be applied to nebraska , without any equivalent at all ?
give us another free state ; press the boundary of texas still further back , give us another step toward the destruction of slavery in the district , and you present us a similar case .
but ask us not to repeat , for nothing , what you paid for in the first instance .
if you wish the thing again , pay again .
that is the principle of the compromises of ' 50 , if indeed they had any principles beyond their specific terms -- it was the system of equivalents .
again , if congress , at that time , intended that all future territories should , when admitted as states , come in with or without slavery , at their own option , why did it not say so ?
with such an universal provision , all know the bills could not have passed .
did they , then -- could they -- establish a principle contrary to their own intention ?
still further , if they intended to establish the principle that wherever congress had control , it should be left to the people to do as they thought fit with slavery why did they not authorize the people of the district of columbia at their adoption to abolish slavery within these limits ?
i personally know that this has not been left undone , because it was unthought of .
it was frequently spoken of by members of congress and by citizens of washington six years ago ; and i heard no one express a doubt that a system of gradual emancipation , with compensation to owners , would meet the approbation of a large majority of the white people of the district .
but without the action of congress they could say nothing ; and congress said " no . "
in the measures of 1850 congress had the subject of slavery in the district expressly in hand .
if they were then establishing the principle of allowing the people to do as they please with slavery , why did they not apply the principle to that people?again , it is claimed that by the resolutions of the illinois legislature , passed in 1851 , the repeal of the missouri compromise was demanded .
this i deny also .
whatever may be worked out by a criticism of the language of those resolutions , the people have never understood them as being any more than an endorsement of the compromises of 1850 ; and a release of our senators from voting for the wilmot proviso .
the whole people are living witnesses , that this only , was their view .
finally , it is asked " if we did not mean to apply the utah and new mexico provision , to all future territories , what did we mean , when we , in 1852 , endorsed the compromises of ' 50?"for myself , i can answer this question most easily .
i meant not to ask a repeal , or modification of the fugitive slave law .
i meant not to ask for the abolition of slavery in the district of columbia .
i meant not to resist the admission of utah and new mexico , even should they ask to come in as slave states .
i meant nothing about additional territories , because , as i understood , we then had no territory whose character as to slavery was not already settled .
as to nebraska , i regarded its character as being fixed , by the missouri compromise , for thirty years -- as unalterably fixed as that of my own home in illinois .
as to new acquisitions i said " sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof . "
when we make new acquaintances , we will , as heretofore , try to manage them some how .
that is my answer .
that is what i meant and said ; and i appeal to the people to say , each for himself , whether that was not also the universal meaning of the free states .
and now , in turn , let me ask a few questions .
if by any , or all these matters , the repeal of the missouri compromise was commanded , why was not the command sooner obeyed ?
why was the repeal omitted in the nebraska bill of 1853 ?
why was it omitted in the original bill of 1854 ?
why , in the accompanying report , was such a repeal characterized as a departure from the course pursued in 1850 ?
and its continued omission recommended?i am aware judge douglas now argues that the subsequent express repeal is no substantial alteration of the bill .
this argument seems wonderful to me .
it is as if one should argue that white and black are not different .
he admits , however , that there is a literal change in the bill ; and that he made the change in deference to other senators , who would not support the bill without .
this proves that those other senators thought the change a substantial one ; and that the judge thought their opinions worth deferring to .
his own opinions , therefore , seem not to rest on a very firm basis even in his own mind -- and i suppose the world believes , and will continue to believe , that precisely on the substance of that change this whole agitation has arisen .
i conclude then , that the public never demanded the repeal of the missouri compromise .
i now come to consider whether the repeal , with its avowed principle , is intrinsically right .
i insist that it is not .
take the particular case .
a controversy had arisen between the advocates and opponents of slavery , in relation to its establishment within the country we had purchased of france .
the southern , and then best part of the purchase , was already in as a slave state .
the controversy was settled by also letting missouri in as a slave state ; but with the agreement that within all the remaining part of the purchase , north of a certain line , there should never be slavery .
as to what was to be done with the remaining part south of the line , nothing was said ; but perhaps the fair implication was , that it should come in with slavery if it should so choose .
the southern part , except a portion heretofore mentioned , afterwards did come in with slavery , as the state of arkansas .
all these many years since 1820 , the northern part had remained a wilderness .
at length settlements began in it also .
in due course , iowa , came in as a free state , and minnesota was given a territorial government , without removing the slavery restriction .
finally the sole remaining part , north of the line , kansas and nebraska , was to be organized ; and it is proposed , and carried , to blot out the old dividing line of thirty - four years standing , and to open the whole of that country to the introduction of slavery .
now , this , to my mind , is manifestly unjust .
after an angry and dangerous controversy , the parties made friends by dividing the bone of contention .
the one party first appropriates her own share , beyond all power to be disturbed in the possession of it ; and then seizes the share of the other party .
it is as if two starving men had divided their only loaf ; the one had hastily swallowed his half , and then grabbed the other half just as he was putting it to his mouth!let me here drop the main argument , to notice what i consider rather an inferior matter .
it is argued that slavery will not go to kansas and nebraska , in any event .
this is a palliation -- a lullaby .
i have some hope that it will not ; but let us not be too confident .
as to climate , a glance at the map shows that there are five slave states -- delaware , maryland , virginia , kentucky , and missouri -- and also the district of columbia , all north of the missouri compromise line .
the census returns of 1850 show that , within these , there are 867,276 slaves -- being more than one - fourth of all the slaves in the nation .
it is not climate , then , that will keep slavery out of these territories .
is there any thing in the peculiar nature of the country ?
missouri adjoins these territories , by her entire western boundary , and slavery is already within every one of her western counties .
i have even heard it said that there are more slaves , in proportion to whites , in the north western county of missouri , than within any county of the state .
slavery pressed entirely up to the old western boundary of the state , and when , rather recently , a part of that boundary , at the north - west was moved out a little farther west , slavery followed on quite up to the new line .
now , when the restriction is removed , what is to prevent it from going still further ?
climate will not .
no peculiarity of the country will -- nothing in nature will .
will the disposition of the people prevent it ?
those nearest the scene , are all in favor of the extension .
the yankees , who are opposed to it may be more numerous ; but in military phrase , the battle - field is too far from their base of operations .
but it is said , there now is no law in nebraska on the subject of slavery ; and that , in such case , taking a slave there , operates his freedom .
that is good book - law ; but is not the rule of actual practice .
wherever slavery is , it has been first introduced without law .
the oldest laws we find concerning it , are not laws introducing it ; but regulating it , as an already existing thing .
a white man takes his slave to nebraska now ; who will inform the negro that he is free ?
who will take him before court to test the question of his freedom ?
in ignorance of his legal emancipation , he is kept chopping , splitting and plowing .
others are brought , and move on in the same track .
at last , if ever the time for voting comes , on the question of slavery , the institution already in fact exists in the country , and can not well be removed .
the facts of its presence , and the difficulty of its removal will carry the vote in its favor .
keep it out until a vote is taken , and a vote in favor of it , can not be got in any population of forty thousand , on earth , who have been drawn together by the ordinary motives of emigration and settlement .
to get slaves into the country simultaneously with the whites , in the incipient stages of settlement , is the precise stake played for , and won in this nebraska measure .
the question is asked us , " if slaves will go in , notwithstanding the general principle of law liberates them , why would they not equally go in against positive statute law ? --
go in , even if the missouri restriction were maintained ? "
i answer , because it takes a much bolder man to venture in , with his property , in the latter case , than in the former -- because the positive congressional enactment is known to , and respected by all , or nearly all ; whereas the negative principle that no law is free law , is not much known except among lawyers .
we have some experience of this practical difference .
in spite of the ordinance of ' 87 , a few negroes were brought into illinois , and held in a state of quasi slavery ; not enough , however to carry a vote of the people in favor of the institution when they came to form a constitution .
but in the adjoining missouri country , where there was no ordinance of ' 87 -- was no restriction -- they were carried ten times , nay a hundred times , as fast , and actually made a slave state .
this is fact -- naked fact .
another lullaby argument is , that taking slaves to new countries does not increase their number -- does not make any one slave who otherwise would be free .
there is some truth in this , and i am glad of it , but it not wholly true .
the african slave trade is not yet effectually suppressed ; and if we make a reasonable deduction for the white people amongst us , who are foreigners , and the descendants of foreigners , arriving here since 1808 , we shall find the increase of the black population out - running that of the white , to an extent unaccountable , except by supposing that some of them too , have been coming from africa .
if this be so , the opening of new countries to the institution , increases the demand for , and augments the price of slaves , and so does , in fact , make slaves of freemen by causing them to be brought from africa , and sold into bondage .
but , however this may be , we know the opening of new countries to slavery , tends to the perpetuation of the institution , and so does keep men in slavery who otherwise would be free .
this result we do not feel like favoring , and we are under no legal obligation to suppress our feelings in this respect .
equal justice to the south , it is said , requires us to consent to the extending of slavery to new countries .
that is to say , inasmuch as you do not object to my taking my hog to nebraska , therefore i must not object to you taking your slave .
now , i admit this is perfectly logical , if there is no difference between hogs and negroes .
but while you thus require me to deny the humanity of the negro , i wish to ask whether you of the south yourselves , have ever been willing to do as much ?
it is kindly provided that of all those who come into the world , only a small percentage are natural tyrants .
that percentage is no larger in the slave states than in the free .
the great majority , south as well as north , have human sympathies , of which they can no more divest themselves than they can of their sensibility to physical pain .
these sympathies in the bosoms of the southern people , manifest in many ways , their sense of the wrong of slavery , and their consciousness that , after all , there is humanity in the negro .
if they deny this , let me address them a few plain questions .
in 1820 you joined the north , almost unanimously , in declaring the african slave trade piracy , and in annexing to it the punishment of death .
why did you do this ?
if you did not feel that it was wrong , why did you join in providing that men should be hung for it ?
the practice was no more than bringing wild negroes from africa , to sell to such as would buy them .
but you never thought of hanging men for catching and selling wild horses , wild buffaloes or wild bears .
again , you have amongst you , a sneaking individual , of the class of native tyrants , known as the " slave - dealer . "
he watches your necessities , and crawls up to buy your slave , at a speculating price .
if you can not help it , you sell to him ; but if you can help it , you drive him from your door .
you despise him utterly .
you do not recognize him as a friend , or even as an honest man .
your children must not play with his ; they may rollick freely with the little negroes , but not with the " slave - dealers " children .
if you are obliged to deal with him , you try to get through the job without so much as touching him .
it is common with you to join hands with the men you meet ; but with the slave dealer you avoid the ceremony -- instinctively shrinking from the snaky contact .
if he grows rich and retires from business , you still remember him , and still keep up the ban of non - intercourse upon him and his family .
now why is this ?
you do not so treat the man who deals in corn , cattle or tobacco .
and yet again ; there are in the united states and territories , including the district of columbia , 433,643 free blacks .
at $ 500 per head they are worth over two hundred millions of dollars .
how comes this vast amount of property to be running about without owners ?
we do not see free horses or free cattle running at large .
how is this ?
all these free blacks are the descendants of slaves , or have been slaves themselves , and they would be slaves now , but for something which has operated on their white owners , inducing them , at vast pecuniary sacrifices , to liberate them .
what is that something ?
is there any mistaking it ?
in all these cases it is your sense of justice , and human sympathy , continually telling you , that the poor negro has some natural right to himself -- that those who deny it , and make mere merchandise of him , deserve kickings , contempt and death .
and now , why will you ask us to deny the humanity of the slave ?
and estimate him only as the equal of the hog ?
why ask us to do what you will not do yourselves ?
why ask us to do for nothing , what two hundred million of dollars could not induce you to do?but one great argument in the support of the repeal of the missouri compromise , is still to come .
that argument is " the sacred right of self government . "
it seems our distinguished senator has found great difficulty in getting his antagonists , even in the senate to meet him fairly on this argument -- some poet has said " fools rush in where angels fear to tread."at the hazzard of being thought one of the fools of this quotation , i meet that argument -- i rush in , i take that bull by the horns .
i trust i understand , and truly estimate the right of self - government .
my faith in the proposition that each man should do precisely as he pleases with all which is exclusively his own , lies at the foundation of the sense of justice there is in me .
i extend the principles to communities of men , as well as to individuals .
i so extend it , because it is politically wise , as well as naturally just ; politically wise , in saving us from broils about matters which do not concern us .
here , or at washington , i would not trouble myself with the oyster laws of virginia , or the cranberry laws of indiana .
the doctrine of self government is right -- absolutely and eternally right -- but it has no just application , as here attempted .
or perhaps i should rather say that whether it has such just application depends upon whether a negro is not or is a man .
if he is not a man , why in that case , he who is a man may , as a matter of self - government , do just as he pleases with him .
but if the negro is a man , is it not to that extent , a total destruction of self - government , to say that he too shall not govern himself ?
when the white man governs himself that is self - government ; but when he governs himself , and also governs another man , that is more than self - government -- that is despotism .
if the negro is a man , why then my ancient faith teaches me that " all men are created equal ; " and that there can be no moral right in connection with one man 's making a slave of another .
judge douglas frequently , with bitter irony and sarcasm , paraphrases our argument by saying " the white people of nebraska are good enough to govern themselves , but they are not good enough to govern a few miserable negroes!!"well i doubt not that the people of nebraska are , and will continue to be as good as the average of people elsewhere .
i do not say the contrary .
what i do say is , that no man is good enough to govern another man , without that other 's consent .
i say this is the leading principle -- the sheet anchor of american republicanism .
our declaration of independence says:"we hold these truths to be self evident : that all men are created equal ; that they are endowed by their creator with certain inalienable rights ; that among these are life , liberty and the pursuit of happiness .
that to secure these rights , governments are instituted among men , deriving their just powers from the consent of the governed."i have quoted so much at this time merely to show that according to our ancient faith , the just powers of governments are derived from the consent of the governed .
now the relation of masters and slaves is , pro tanto , a total violation of this principle .
the master not only governs the slave without his consent ; but he governs him by a set of rules altogether different from those which he prescribes for himself .
allow all the governed an equal voice in the government , and that , and that only is self government .
let it not be said i am contending for the establishment of political and social equality between the whites and blacks .
i have already said the contrary .
i am not now combating the argument of necessity , arising from the fact that the blacks are already amongst us ; but i am combating what is set up as moral argument for allowing them to be taken where they have never yet been -- arguing against the extension of a bad thing , which where it already exists , we must of necessity , manage as we best can .
in support of his application of the doctrine of self - government , senator douglas has sought to bring to his aid the opinions and examples of our revolutionary fathers .
i am glad he has done this .
i love the sentiments of those old - time men ; and shall be most happy to abide by their opinions .
he shows us that when it was in contemplation for the colonies to break off from great britain , and set up a new government for themselves , several of the states instructed their delegates to go for the measure provided each state should be allowed to regulate its domestic concerns in its own way .
i do not quote ; but this in substance .
this was right .
i see nothing objectionable in it .
i also think it probable that it had some reference to the existence of slavery amongst them .
i will not deny that it had .
but had it , in any reference to the carrying of slavery into new countries ?
that is the question ; and we will let the fathers themselves answer it .
this same generation of men , and mostly the same individuals of the generation , who declared this principle -- who declared independence -- who fought the war of the revolution through -- who afterwards made the constitution under which we still live -- these same men passed the ordinance of ' 87 , declaring that slavery should never go to the north - west territory .
i have no doubt judge douglas thinks they were very inconsistent in this .
it is a question of discrimination between them and him .
but there is not an inch of ground left for his claiming that their opinions -- their example -- their authority -- are on his side in this controversy .
again , is not nebraska , while a territory , a part of us ?
do we not own the country ?
and if we surrender the control of it , do we not surrender the right of self - government ?
it is part of ourselves .
if you say we shall not control it because it is only part , the same is true of every other part ; and when all the parts are gone , what has become of the whole ?
what is then left of us ?
what use for the general government , when there is nothing left for it govern?but you say this question should be left to the people of nebraska , because they are more particularly interested .
if this be the rule , you must leave it to each individual to say for himself whether he will have slaves .
what better moral right have thirty - one citizens of nebraska to say , that the thirty - second shall not hold slaves , than the people of the thirty - one states have to say that slavery shall not go into the thirty - second state at all?but if it is a sacred right for the people of nebraska to take and hold slaves there , it is equally their sacred right to buy them where they can buy them cheapest ; and that undoubtedly will be on the coast of africa ; provided you will consent to not hang them for going there to buy them .
you must remove this restriction too , from the sacred right of self - government .
i am aware you say that taking slaves from the states of nebraska , does not make slaves of freemen ; but the african slave - trader can say just as much .
he does not catch free negroes and bring them here .
he finds them already slaves in the hands of their black captors , and he honestly buys them at the rate of about a red cotton handkerchief a head .
this is very cheap , and it is a great abridgement of the sacred right of self - government to hang men for engaging in this profitable trade!another important objection to this application of the right of self - government , is that it enables the first few , to deprive the succeeding many , of a free exercise of the right of self - government .
the first few may get slavery in , and the subsequent many can not easily get it out .
how common is the remark now in the slave states -- " if we were only clear of our slaves , how much better it would be for us . "
they are actually deprived of the privilege of governing themselves as they would , by the action of a very few , in the beginning .
the same thing was true of the whole nation at the time our constitution was formed .
whether slavery shall go into nebraska , or other new territories , is not a matter of exclusive concern to the people who may go there .
the whole nation is interested that the best use shall be made of these territories .
we want them for the homes of free white people .
this they can not be , to any considerable extent , if slavery shall be planted within them .
slave states are places for poor white people to remove from ; not to remove to .
new free states are the places for poor people to go to and better their condition .
for this use , the nation needs these territories .
still further ; there are constitutional relations between the slave and free states , which are degrading to the latter .
we are under legal obligations to catch and return their runaway slaves to them -- a sort of dirty , disagreeable job , which i believe , as a general rule the slave - holders will not perform for one another .
then again , in the control of the government -- the management of the partnership affairs -- they have greatly the advantage of us .
by the constitution , each state has two senators -- each has a number of representatives ; in proportion to the number of its people -- and each has a number of presidential electors , equal to the whole number of its senators and representatives together .
but in ascertaining the number of the people , for this purpose , five slaves are counted as being equal to three whites .
the slaves do not vote ; they are only counted and so used , as to swell the influence of the white people 's votes .
the practical effect of this is more aptly shown by a comparison of the states of south carolina and maine .
south carolina has six representatives , and so has maine ; south carolina has eight presidential electors , and so has maine .
this is precise equality so far ; and , of course they are equal in senators , each having two .
thus in the control of the government , the two states are equals precisely .
but how are they in the number of their white people ?
maine has 581,813 -- while south carolina has 274,567 .
maine has twice as many as south carolina , and 32,679 over .
thus each white man in south carolina is more than the double of any man in maine .
this is all because south carolina , besides her free people , has 384,984 slaves .
the south carolinian has precisely the same advantage over the white man in every other free state , as well as in maine .
he is more than the double of any one of us in this crowd .
the same advantage , but not to the same extent , is held by all the citizens of the slave states , over those of the free ; and it is an absolute truth , without an exception , that there is no voter in any slave state , but who has more legal power in the government , than any voter in any free state .
there is no instance of exact equality ; and the disadvantage is against us the whole chapter through .
this principle , in the aggregate , gives the slave states , in the present congress , twenty additional representatives -- being seven more than the whole majority by which they passed the nebraska bill .
now all this is manifestly unfair ; yet i do not mention it to complain of it , in so far as it is already settled .
it is in the constitution ; and i do not , for that cause , or any other cause , propose to destroy , or alter , or disregard the constitution .
i stand to it , fairly , fully , and firmly .
but when i am told i must leave it altogether to other people to say whether new partners are to be bred up and brought into the firm , on the same degrading terms against me .
i respectfully demur .
i insist , that whether i shall be a whole man , or only , the half of one , in comparison with others , is a question in which i am somewhat concerned ; and one which no other man can have a sacred right of deciding for me .
if i am wrong in this -- if it really be a sacred right of self - government , in the man who shall go to nebraska , to decide whether he will be the equal of me or the double of me , then after he shall have exercised that right , and thereby shall have reduced me to a still smaller fraction of a man than i already am , i should like for some gentleman deeply skilled in the mysteries of sacred rights , to provide himself with a microscope , and peep about , and find out , if he can , what has become of my sacred rights !
they will surely be too small for detection with the naked eye .
finally , i insist , that if there is any thing which it is the duty of the whole people to never entrust to any hands but their own , that thing is the preservation and perpetuity , of their own liberties , and institutions .
and if they shall think , as i do , that the extension of slavery endangers them , more than any , or all other causes , how recreant to themselves , if they submit the question , and with it , the fate of their country , to a mere hand - full of men , bent only on temporary self - interest .
if this question of slavery extension were an insignificant one -- one having no power to do harm -- it might be shuffled aside in this way .
but being , as it is , the great behemoth of danger , shall the strong gripe of the nation be loosened upon him , to entrust him to the hands of such feeble keepers?i have done with this mighty argument , of self - government .
go , sacred thing !
go in peace .
but nebraska is urged as a great union - saving measure .
well i too , go for saving the union .
much as i hate slavery , i would consent to the extension of it rather than see the union dissolved , just as i would consent to any great evil , to avoid a greater one .
but when i go to union saving , i must believe , at least , that the means i employ has some adaptation to the end .
to my mind , nebraska has no such adaptation."it hath no relish of salvation in it."it is an aggravation , rather , of the only one thing which ever endangers the union .
when it came upon us , all was peace and quiet .
the nation was looking to the forming of new bonds of union ; and a long course of peace and prosperity seemed to lie before us .
in the whole range of possibility , there scarcely appears to me to have been any thing , out of which the slavery agitation could have been revived , except the very project of repealing the missouri compromise .
every inch of territory we owned , already had a definite settlement of the slavery question , and by which , all parties were pledged to abide .
indeed , there was no uninhabited country on the continent , which we could acquire ; if we except some extreme northern regions , which are wholly out of the question .
in this state of case , the genius of discord himself , could scarcely have invented a way of again getting us by the ears , but by turning back and destroying the peace measures of the past .
the councils of that genius seem to have prevailed , the missouri compromise was repealed ; and here we are , in the midst of a new slavery agitation , such , i think , as we have never seen before .
who is responsible for this ?
is it those who resist the measure ; or those who , causelessly , brought it forward , and pressed it through , having reason to know , and , in fact , knowing it must and would be so resisted ?
it could not but be expected by its author , that it would be looked upon as a measure for the extension of slavery , aggravated by a gross breach of faith .
argue as you will , and long as you will , this is the naked front and aspect , of the measure .
and in this aspect , it could not but produce agitation .
slavery is founded in the selfishness of man 's nature -- opposition to it , is his love of justice .
these principles are an eternal antagonism ; and when brought into collision so fiercely , as slavery extension brings them , shocks , and throes , and convulsions must ceaselessly follow .
repeal the missouri compromise -- repeal all compromises -- repeal the declaration of independence -- repeal all past history , you still can not repeal human nature .
it still will be the abundance of man 's heart , that slavery extension is wrong ; and out of the abundance of his heart , his mouth will continue to speak .
the structure , too , of the nebraska bill is very peculiar .
the people are to decide the question of slavery for themselves ; but when they are to decide ; or how they are to decide ; or whether , when the question is once decided , it is to remain so , or is it to be subject to an indefinite succession of new trials , the law does not say , is it to be decided by the first dozen settlers who arrive there ?
or is it to await the arrival of a hundred ?
is it to be decided by a vote of the people ?
or a vote of the legislature ?
or , indeed by a vote of any sort ?
to these questions , the law gives no answer .
there is a mystery about this ; for when a member proposed to give the legislature express authority to exclude slavery , it was hooted down by the friends of the bill .
this fact is worth remembering .
some yankees , in the east , are sending emigrants to nebraska , to exclude slavery from it ; and , so far as i can judge , they expect the question to be decided by voting , in some way or other .
but the missourians are awake too .
they are within a stone 's throw of the contested ground .
they hold meetings , and pass resolutions , in which not the slightest allusion to voting is made .
they resolve that slavery already exists in the territory ; that more shall go there ; that they , remaining in missouri will protect it ; and that abolitionists shall be hung , or driven away .
through all this , bowie - knives and six - shooters are seen plainly enough ; but never a glimpse of the ballot - box .
and , really , what is to be the result of this ?
each party within , having numerous and determined backers without , is it not probable that the contest will come to blows , and bloodshed ?
could there be a more apt invention to bring about collision and violence , on the slavery question , than this nebraska project is ?
i do not charge , or believe , that such was intended by congress ; but if they had literally formed a ring , and placed champions within it to fight out the controversy , the fight could be no more likely to come off , than it is .
and if this fight should begin , is it likely to take a very peaceful , union - saving turn ?
will not the first drop of blood so shed , be the real knell of the union?the missouri compromise ought to be restored .
for the sake of the union , it ought to be restored .
we ought to elect a house of representatives which will vote its restoration .
if by any means , we omit to do this , what follows ?
slavery may or may not be established in nebraska .
but whether it be or not , we shall have repudiated -- discarded from the councils of the nation -- the spirit of compromise ; for who after this will ever trust in a national compromise ?
the spirit of mutual concession -- that spirit which first gave us the constitution , and which has thrice saved the union -- we shall have strangled and cast from us forever .
and what shall we have in lieu of it ?
the south flushed with triumph and tempted to excesses ; the north , betrayed , as they believe , brooding on wrong and burning for revenge .
one side will provoke ; the other resent .
the one will taunt , the other defy ; one agrees , the other retaliates .
already a few in the north , defy all constitutional restraints , resist the execution of the fugitive slave law , and even menace the institution of slavery in the states where it exists .
already a few in the south , claim the constitutional right to take to and hold slaves in the free states -- demand the revival of the slave trade ; and demand a treaty with great britain by which fugitive slaves may be reclaimed from canada .
as yet they are but few on either side .
it is a grave question for the lovers of the union , whether the final destruction of the missouri compromise , and with it the spirit of all compromise will or will not embolden and embitter each of these , and fatally increase the numbers of both .
but restore the compromise , and what then ?
we thereby restore the national faith , the national confidence , the national feeling of brotherhood .
we thereby reinstate the spirit of concession and compromise -- that spirit which has never failed us in past perils , and which may be safely trusted for all the future .
the south ought to join in doing this .
the peace of the nation is as dear to them as to us .
in memories of the past and hopes of the future , they share as largely as we .
it would be on their part , a great act -- great in its spirit , and great in its effect .
it would be worth to the nation a hundred years ' purchase of peace and prosperity .
and what of sacrifice would they make ?
they only surrender to us , what they gave us for a consideration long , long ago ; what they have not now , asked for , struggled or cared for ; what has been thrust upon them , not less to their own astonishment than to ours .
but it is said we can not restore it ; that though we elect every member of the lower house , the senate is still against us .
it is quite true , that of the senators who passed the nebraska bill , a majority of the whole senate will retain their seats in spite of the elections of this and the next year .
but if at these elections , their several constituencies shall clearly express their will against nebraska , will these senators disregard their will ?
will they neither obey , nor make room for those who will?but even if we fail to technically restore the compromise , it is still a great point to carry a popular vote in favor of the restoration .
the moral weight of such a vote can not be estimated too highly .
the authors of nebraska are not at all satisfied with the destruction of the compromise -- an endorsement of this principle , they proclaim to be the great object .
with them , nebraska alone is a small matter -- to establish a principle , for future use , is what they particularly desire .
that future use is to be the planting of slavery wherever in the wide world , local and unorganized opposition can not prevent it .
now if you wish to give them this endorsement -- if you wish to establish this principle -- do so .
i shall regret it ; but it is your right .
on the contrary if you are opposed to the principle -- intend to give it no such endorsement -- let no wheedling , no sophistry , divert you from throwing a direct vote against it .
some men , mostly whigs , who condemn the repeal of the missouri compromise , nevertheless hesitate to go for its restoration , lest they be thrown in company with the abolitionist .
will they allow me as an old whig to tell them good humoredly , that i think this is very silly ?
stand with anybody that stands right .
stand with him while he is right and part with him when he goes wrong .
stand with the abolitionist in restoring the missouri compromise ; and stand against him when he attempts to repeal the fugitive slave law .
in the latter case you stand with the southern disunionist .
what of that ?
you are still right .
in both cases you are right .
in both cases you oppose the dangerous extremes .
in both you stand on middle ground and hold the ship level and steady .
in both you are national and nothing less than national .
this is good old whig ground .
to desert such ground , because of any company , is to be less than a whig -- less than a man -- less than an american .
i particularly object to the new position which the avowed principle of this nebraska law gives to slavery in the body politic .
i object to it because it assumes that there can be moral right in the enslaving of one man by another .
i object to it as a dangerous dalliance for a few people -- a sad evidence that , feeling prosperity we forget right -- that liberty , as a principle , we have ceased to revere .
i object to it because the fathers of the republic eschewed , and rejected it .
the argument of " necessity " was the only argument they ever admitted in favor of slavery ; and so far , and so far only as it carried them , did they ever go .
they found the institution existing among us , which they could not help ; and they cast blame upon the british king for having permitted its introduction .
before the constitution , they prohibited its introduction into the north - western territory -- the only country we owned , then free from it .
at the framing and adoption of the constitution , they forbore to so much as mention the word " slave " or " slavery " in the whole instrument .
in the provision for the recovery of fugitives , the slave is spoken of as a " person held to service or labor . "
in that prohibiting the abolition of the african slave trade for twenty years , that trade is spoken of as " the migration or importation of such persons as any of the states now existing , shall think proper to admit , " and c. these are the only provisions alluding to slavery .
thus , the thing is hid away , in the constitution , just as an afflicted man hides away a wen or a cancer , which he dares not cut out at once , lest he bleed to death ; with the promise , nevertheless , that the cutting may begin at the end of a given time .
less than this our fathers could not do ; and now they would not do .
necessity drove them so far , and farther , they would not go .
but this is not all .
the earliest congress , under the constitution , took the same view of slavery .
they hedged and hemmed it in to the narrowest limits of necessity .
in 1794 , they prohibited an out - going slave - trade -- that is , the taking of slaves from the united states to sell .
in 1798 , they prohibited the bringing of slaves from africa , into the mississippi territory -- this territory then comprising what are now the states of mississippi and alabama .
this was ten years before they had the authority to do the same thing as to the states existing at the adoption of the constitution .
in 1800 they prohibited american citizens from trading in slaves between foreign countries -- as , for instance , from africa to brazil .
in 1803 they passed a law in aid of one or two state laws , in restraint of the internal slave trade .
in 1807 , in apparent hot haste , they passed the law , nearly a year in advance to take effect the first day of 1808 -- the very first day the constitution would permit -- prohibiting the african slave trade by heavy pecuniary and corporal penalties .
in 1820 , finding these provisions ineffectual , they declared the trade piracy , and annexed to it , the extreme penalty of death .
while all this was passing in the general government , five or six of the original slave states had adopted systems of gradual emancipation ; and by which the institution was rapidly becoming extinct within these limits .
thus we see , the plain unmistakable spirit of that age , towards slavery , was hostility to the principle , and toleration , only by necessity .
but now it is to be transformed into a " sacred right . "
nebraska brings it forth , places it on the high road to extension and perpetuity ; and , with a pat on its back , says to it , " go , and god speed you . "
henceforth it is to be the chief jewel of the nation -- the very figure - head of the ship of state .
little by little , but steadily as man 's march to the grave , we have been giving up the old for the new faith .
near eighty years ago we began by declaring that all men are created equal ; but now from that beginning we have run down to the other declaration , that for some men to enslave others is a " sacred right of self - government . "
these principles can not stand together .
they are as opposite as god and mammon ; and whoever holds to the one , must despise the other .
when pettit , in connection with his support of the nebraska bill , called the declaration of independence " a self - evident lie " he only did what consistency and candor require all other nebraska men to do .
of the forty odd nebraska senators who sat present and heard him , no one rebuked him .
nor am i apprized that any nebraska newspaper , or any nebraska orator , in the whole nation , has ever yet rebuked him .
if this had been said among marion 's men , southerners though they were , what would have become of the man who said it ?
if this had been said to the men who captured andre , the man who said it , would probably have been hung sooner than andre was .
if it had been said in old independence hall , seventy - eight years ago , the very door - keeper would have throttled the man , and thrust him into the street .
let no one be deceived .
the spirit of seventy - six and the spirit of nebraska , are utter antagonisms ; and the former is being rapidly displaced by the latter .
fellow countrymen -- americans south , as well as north , shall we make no effort to arrest this ?
already the liberal party throughout the world , express the apprehension " that the one retrograde institution in america , is undermining the principles of progress , and fatally violating the noblest political system the world ever saw . "
this is not the taunt of enemies , but the warning of friends .
is it quite safe to disregard it -- to despise it ?
is there no danger to liberty itself , in discarding the earliest practice , and first precept of our ancient faith ?
in our greedy chase to make profit of the negro , let us beware , lest we " cancel and tear to pieces " even the white man 's charter of freedom .
our republican robe is soiled , and trailed in the dust .
let us repurify it .
let us turn and wash it white , in the spirit , if not the blood , of the revolution .
let us turn slavery from its claims of " moral right , " back upon its existing legal rights , and its arguments of " necessity . "
let us return it to the position our fathers gave it ; and there let it rest in peace .
let us re - adopt the declaration of independence , and with it , the practices , and policy , which harmonize with it .
let north and south -- let all americans -- let all lovers of liberty everywhere -- join in the great and good work .
if we do this , we shall not only have saved the union ; but we shall have so saved it , as to make , and to keep it , forever worthy of the saving .
we shall have so saved it , that the succeeding millions of free happy people , the world over , shall rise up , and call us blessed , to the latest generations .
at springfield , twelve days ago , where i had spoken substantially as i have here , judge douglas replied to me -- and as he is to reply to me here , i shall attempt to anticipate him , by noticing some of the points he made there .
he commenced by stating i had assumed all the way through , that the principle of the nebraska bill , would have the effect of extending slavery .
he denied that this was intended , or that this effect would follow .
i will not re - open the argument upon this point .
that such was the intention , the world believed at the start , and will continue to believe .
this was the countenance of the thing ; and , both friends and enemies , instantly recognized it as such .
that countenance can not now be changed by argument .
you can as easily argue the color out of the negroes ' skin .
like the " bloody hand " you may wash it , and wash it , the red witness of guilt still sticks , and stares horribly at you .
next he says , congressional intervention never prevented slavery , any where -- that it did not prevent it in the north west territory , now in illinois -- that in fact , illinois came into the union as a slave state -- that the principle of the nebraska bill expelled it from illinois , from several old states , from every where .
now this is mere quibbling all the way through .
if the ordinance of ' 87 did not keep slavery out of the north west territory , how happens it that the north west shore of the ohio river is entirely free from it ; while the south east shore , less than a mile distant , along nearly the whole length of the river , is entirely covered with it?if that ordinance did not keep it out of illinois , what was it that made the difference between illinois and missouri ?
they lie side by side , the mississippi river only dividing them ; while their early settlements were within the same latitude .
between 1810 and 1820 the number of slaves in missouri increased 7,211 ; while in illinois , in the same ten years , they decreased 51 .
this appears by the census returns .
during nearly all of that ten years , both were territories -- not states .
during this time , the ordinance forbid slavery to go into illinois ; and nothing forbid it to go into missouri .
it did go into missouri , and did not go into illinois .
that is the fact .
can any one doubt as to the reason of it?but , he says , illinois came into the union as a slave state .
silence , perhaps , would be the best answer to this flat contradiction of the known history of the country .
what are the facts upon which this bold assertion is based ?
when we first acquired the country , as far back as 1787 , there were some slaves within it , held by the french inhabitants at kaskaskia .
the territorial legislation , admitted a few negroes , from the slave states , as indentured servants .
one year after the adoption of the first state constitution the whole number of them was -- what do you think ?
just 117 -- while the aggregate free population was 55,094 -- about 470 to one .
upon this state of facts , the people framed their constitution prohibiting the further introduction of slavery , with a sort of guaranty to the owners of the few indentured servants , giving freedom to their children to be born thereafter , and making no mention whatever , of any supposed slave for life .
out of this small matter , the judge manufactures his argument that illinois came into the union as a slave state .
let the facts be the answer to the argument .
the principles of the nebraska bill , he says , expelled slavery from illinois ?
the principle of that bill first planted it here -- that is , it first came , because there was no law to prevent it -- first came before we owned the country ; and finding it here , and having the ordinance of ' 87 to prevent its increasing , our people struggled along , and finally got rid of it as best they could .
but the principle of the nebraska bill abolished slavery in several of the old states .
well , it is true that several of the old states , in the last quarter of the last century , did adopt systems of gradual emancipation , by which the institution has finally become extinct within their limits ; but it may or may not be true that the principle of the nebraska bill was the cause that led to the adoption of these measures .
it is now more than fifty years , since the last of these states adopted its system of emancipation .
if nebraska bill is the real author of these benevolent works , it is rather deplorable , that he has , for so long a time , ceased working all together .
is there not some reason to suspect that it was the principle of the revolution , and not the principle of nebraska bill , that led to emancipation in these old states ?
leave it to the people of those old emancipating states , and i am quite sure they will decide , that neither that , nor any other good thing , ever did , or ever will come of nebraska bill .
in the course of my main argument , judge douglas interrupted me to say , that the principle the nebraska bill was very old ; that it originated when god made man and placed good and evil before him , allowing him to choose for himself , being responsible for the choice he should make .
at the time i thought this was merely playful ; and i answered it accordingly .
but in his reply to me he renewed it , as a serious argument .
in seriousness then , the facts of this proposition are not true as stated .
god did not place good and evil before man , telling him to make his choice .
on the contrary , he did tell him there was one tree , of the fruit of which , he should not eat , upon pain of certain death .
i should scarcely wish so strong a prohibition against slavery in nebraska .
but this argument strikes me as not a little remarkable in another particular -- in its strong resemblance to the old argument for the " divine right of kings . "
by the latter , the king is to do just as he pleases with his white subjects , being responsible to god alone .
by the former the white man is to do just as he pleases with his black slaves , being responsible to god alone .
the two things are precisely alike ; and it is but natural that they should find similar arguments to sustain them .
i had argued , that the application of the principle of self - government , as contended for , would require the revival of the african slave trade -- that no argument could be made in favor of a man 's right to take slaves to nebraska , which could not be equally well made in favor of his right to bring them from the coast of africa .
the judge replied , that the constitution requires the suppression of the foreign slave trade ; but does not require the prohibition of slavery in the territories .
that is a mistake , in point of fact .
the constitution does not require the action of congress in either case ; and it does authorize it in both .
and so , there is still no difference between the cases .
in regard to what i had said , the advantage the slave states have over the free , in the matter of representation , the judge replied that we , in the free states , count five free negroes as five white people , while in the slave states , they count five slaves as three whites only ; and that the advantage , at last , was on the side of the free states .
now , in the slave states , they count free negroes just as we do ; and it so happens that besides their slaves , they have as many free negroes as we have , and thirty - three thousand over .
thus their free negroes more than balance ours ; and their advantage over us , in consequence of their slaves , still remains as i stated it .
in reply to my argument , that the compromise measures of 1850 , were a system of equivalents ; and that the provisions of no one of them could fairly be carried to other subjects , without its corresponding equivalent being carried with it , the judge denied out - right , that these measures had any connection with , or dependence upon , each other .
this is mere desperation .
if they have no connection , why are they always spoken of in connection ?
why has he so spoken of them , a thousand times ?
why has he constantly called them a series of measures ?
why does everybody call them a compromise ?
why was california kept out of the union , six or seven months , if it was not because of its connection with the other measures ?
webster 's leading definition of the verb " to compromise " is " to adjust and settle a difference , by mutual agreement with concessions of claims by the parties . "
this conveys precisely the popular understanding of the word compromise .
we knew , before the judge told us , that these measures passed separately , and in distinct bills ; and that no two of them were passed by the votes of precisely the same members .
but we also know , and so does he know , that no one of them could have passed both branches of congress but for the understanding that the others were to pass also .
upon this understanding each got votes , which it could have got in no other way .
it is this fact , that gives to the measures their true character ; and it is the universal knowledge of this fact , that has given them the name of compromise so expressive of that true character .
i had asked " if in carrying the provisions of the utah and new mexico laws to nebraska , you could clear away other objection , how can you leave nebraska " perfectly free " to introduce slavery before she forms a constitution -- during her territorial government ? --
while the utah and new mexico laws only authorize it when they form constitutions , and are admitted into the union ? "
to this judge douglas answered that the utah and new mexico laws , also authorized it before ; and to prove this , he read from one of their laws , as follows : " that the legislative power of said territory shall extend to all rightful subjects of legislation consistent with the constitution of the united states and the provisions of this act."now it is perceived from the reading of this , that there is nothing express upon the subject ; but that the authority is sought to be implied merely , for the general provision of " all rightful subjects of legislation . "
in reply to this , i insist , as a legal rule of construction , as well as the plain popular view of the matter , that the express provision for utah and new mexico coming in with slavery if they choose , when they shall form constitutions , is an exclusion of all implied authority on the same subject -- that congress , having the subject distinctly in their minds , when they made the express provision , they therein expressed their whole meaning on that subject .
the judge rather insinuated that i had found it convenient to forget the washington territorial law passed in 1853 .
this was a division of oregon , organizing the northern part , as the territory of washington .
he asserted that , by this act , the ordinance of ' 87 theretofore existing in oregon , was repealed ; that nearly all the members of congress voted for it , beginning in the h. r. , with charles allen of massachusetts , and ending with richard yates , of illinois ; and that he could not understand how those who now oppose the nebraska bill , so voted then , unless it was because it was then too soon after both the great political parties had ratified the compromises of 1850 , and the ratification therefore too fresh , to be then repudiated .
now i had seen the washington act before ; and i have carefully examined it since ; and i aver that there is no repeal of the ordinance of ' 87 , or of any prohibition of slavery , in it .
in express terms , there is absolutely nothing in the whole law upon the subject -- in fact , nothing to lead a reader to think of the subject .
to my judgment , it is equally free from every thing from which such repeal can be legally implied ; but however this may be , are men now to be entrapped by a legal implication , extracted from covert language , introduced perhaps , for the very purpose of entrapping them ?
i sincerely wish every man could read this law quite through , carefully watching every sentence , and every line , for a repeal of the ordinance of ' 87 or any thing equivalent to it .
another point on the washington act .
if it was intended to be modelled after the utah and new mexico acts , as judge douglas , insists , why was it not inserted in it , as in them , that washington was to come in with or without slavery as she may choose at the adoption of her constitution ?
it has no such provision in it ; and i defy the ingenuity of man to give a reason for the omission , other than that it was not intended to follow the utah and new mexico laws in regard to the question of slavery .
the washington act not only differs vitally from the utah and new mexico acts ; but the nebraska act differs vitally from both .
by the latter act the people are left " perfectly free " to regulate their own domestic concerns , and c. ; but in all the former , all their laws are to be submitted to congress , and if disapproved are to be null .
the washington act goes even further ; it absolutely prohibits the territorial legislation , by very strong and guarded language , from establishing banks , or borrowing money on the faith of the territory .
is this the sacred right of self - government we hear vaunted so much ?
no sir , the nebraska bill finds no model in the acts of ' 50 or the washington act .
it finds no model in any law from adam till today .
as phillips says of napoleon , the nebraska act is grand , gloomy , and peculiar ; wrapped in the solitude of its own originality ; without a model , and without a shadow upon the earth .
in the course of his reply , senator douglas remarked , in substance , that he had always considered this government was made for the white people and not for the negroes .
why , in point of mere fact , i think so too .
but in this remark of the judge , there is a significance , which i think is the key to the great mistake ( if there is any such mistake ) which he has made in this nebraska measure .
it shows that the judge has no very vivid impression that the negro is a human ; and consequently has no idea that there can be any moral question in legislating about him .
in his view , the question of whether a new country shall be slave or free , is a matter of as utter indifference , as it is whether his neighbor shall plant his farm with tobacco , or stock it with horned cattle .
now , whether this view is right or wrong , it is very certain that the great mass of mankind take a totally different view .
they consider slavery a great moral wrong ; and their feelings against it , is not evanescent , but eternal .
it lies at the very foundation of their sense of justice ; and it can not be trifled with .
it is a great and durable element of popular action , and , i think , no statesman can safely disregard it .
our senator also objects that those who oppose him in this measure do not entirely agree with one another .
he reminds me that in my firm adherence to the constitutional rights of the slave states , i differ widely from others who are co - operating with me in opposing the nebraska bill ; and he says it is not quite fair to oppose him in this variety of ways .
he should remember that he took us by surprise -- astounded us -- by this measure .
we were thunderstruck and stunned ; and we reeled and fell in utter confusion .
but we rose each fighting , grasping whatever he could first reach -- a scythe -- a pitchfork -- a chopping axe , or a butcher 's cleaver .
we struck in the direction of the sound ; and we are rapidly closing in upon him .
he must not think to divert us from our purpose , by showing us that our drill , our dress , and our weapons , are not entirely perfect and uniform .
when the storm shall be past , he shall find us still americans ; no less devoted to the continued union and prosperity of the country than heretofore .
finally , the judge invokes against me , the memory of clay and of webster .
they were great men ; and men of great deeds .
but where have i assailed them ?
for what is it , that their life - long enemy , shall now make profit , by assuming to defend them against me , their life - long friend ?
i go against the repeal of the missouri compromise ; did they ever go for it ?
they went for the compromise of 1850 ; did i ever go against them ?
they were greatly devoted to the union ; to the small measure of my ability , was i ever less so ?
clay and webster were dead before this question arose ; by what authority shall our senator say they would espouse his side of it , if alive ?
mr. clay was the leading spirit in making the missouri compromise ; is it very credible that if now alive , he would take the lead in the breaking of it ?
the truth is that some support from whigs is now a necessity with the judge , and for thus it is , that the names of clay and webster are now invoked .
his old friends have deserted him in such numbers as to leave too few to live by .
he came to his own , and his own received him not , and lo !
he turns unto the gentiles .
a word now as to the judge 's desperate assumption that the compromises of ' 50 had no connection with one another ; that illinois came into the union as a slave state , and some other similar ones .
this is no other than a bold denial of the history of the country .
if we do not know that the compromises of ' 50 were dependent on each other ; if we do not know that illinois came into the union as a free state -- we do not know any thing .
if we do not know these things , we do not know that we ever had a revolutionary war , or such a chief as washington .
to deny these things is to deny our national axioms , or dogmas , at least ; and it puts an end to all argument .
if a man will stand up and assert , and repeat , and re - assert , that two and two do not make four , i know nothing in the power of argument that can stop him .
i think i can answer the judge so long as he sticks to the premises ; but when he flies from them , i can not work an argument into the consistency of a maternal gag , and actually close his mouth with it .
in such a case i can only commend him to the seventy thousand answers just in from pennsylvania , ohio and indiana .

four score and seven years ago our fathers brought forth on this continent , a new nation , conceived in liberty , and dedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal .
now we are engaged in a great civil war , testing whether that nation , or any nation so conceived and so dedicated , can long endure .
we are met on a great battle - field of that war .
we have come to dedicate a portion of that field , as a final resting place for those who here gave their lives that that nation might live .
it is altogether fitting and proper that we should do this .
but , in a larger sense , we can not dedicate -- we can not consecrate -- we can not hallow -- this ground .
the brave men , living and dead , who struggled here , have consecrated it , far above our poor power to add or detract .
the world will little note , nor long remember what we say here , but it can never forget what they did here .
it is for us the living , rather , to be dedicated here to the unfinished work which they who fought here have thus far so nobly advanced .
it is rather for us to be here dedicated to the great task remaining before us -- that from these honored dead we take increased devotion to that cause for which they gave the last full measure of devotion -- that we here highly resolve that these dead shall not have died in vain -- that this nation , under god , shall have a new birth of freedom -- and that government of the people , by the people , for the people , shall not perish from the earth .

fellow - countrymen : at this second appearing to take the oath of the presidential office there is less occasion for an extended address than there was at the first .
then a statement somewhat in detail of a course to be pursued seemed fitting and proper .
now , at the expiration of four years , during which public declarations have been constantly called forth on every point and phase of the great contest which still absorbs the attention and engrosses the energies of the nation , little that is new could be presented .
the progress of our arms , upon which all else chiefly depends , is as well known to the public as to myself , and it is , i trust , reasonably satisfactory and encouraging to all .
with high hope for the future , no prediction in regard to it is ventured .
on the occasion corresponding to this four years ago all thoughts were anxiously directed to an impending civil war .
all dreaded it , all sought to avert it .
while the inaugural address was being delivered from this place , devoted altogether to saving the union without war , insurgent agents were in the city seeking to destroy it without war - seeking to dissolve the union and divide effects by negotiation .
both parties deprecated war , but one of them would make war rather than let the nation survive , and the other would accept war rather than let it perish , and the war came .
one - eighth of the whole population were colored slaves , not distributed generally over the union .
but localized in the southern part of it .
these slaves constituted a peculiar and powerful interest .
all knew that this interest was somehow the cause of the war .
to strengthen , perpetuate , and extend this interest was the object for which the insurgents would rend the union even by war , while the government claimed no right to do more than to restrict the territorial enlargement of it .
neither party expected for the war the magnitude or the duration which it has already attained .
neither anticipated that the cause of the conflict might cease with or even before the conflict itself should cease .
each looked for an easier triumph , and a result less fundamental and astounding .
both read the same bible and pray to the same god , and each invokes his aid against the other .
it may seem strange that any men should dare to ask a just god 's assistance in wringing their bread from the sweat of other men 's faces , but let us judge not , that we be not judged .
the prayers of both could not be answered .
that of neither has been answered fully .
the almighty has his own purposes . "
woe unto the world because of offenses ; for it must needs be that offenses come , but woe to that man by whom the offense cometh . "
if we shall suppose that american slavery is one of those offenses which , in the providence of god , must needs come , but which , having continued through his appointed time , he now wills to remove , and that he gives to both north and south this terrible war as the woe due to those by whom the offense came , shall we discern therein any departure from those divine attributes which the believers in a living god always ascribe to him ?
fondly do we hope , fervently do we pray , that this mighty scourge of war may speedily pass away .
yet , if god wills that it continue until all the wealth piled by the bondsman 's two hundred and fifty years of unrequited toil shall be sunk , and until every drop of blood drawn with the lash shall be paid by another drawn with the sword , as was said three thousand years ago , so still it must be said " the judgments of the lord are true and righteous altogether."with malice toward none , with charity for all , with firmness in the fight as god gives us to see the right , let us strive on to finish the work we are in , to bind up the nation 's wounds , to care for him who shall have borne the battle and for his widow and his orphan , to do all which may achieve and cherish a just and lasting peace among ourselves and with all nations .

mr .
president and fellow - citizens of new - york : the facts with which i shall deal this evening are mainly old and familiar ; nor is there anything new in the general use i shall make of them .
if there shall be any novelty , it will be in the mode of presenting the facts , and the inferences and observations following that presentation .
in his speech last autumn , at columbus , ohio , as reported in the new york times , senator douglas said : " our fathers , when they framed the government under which we live , understood this question just as well , and even better , than we do now . "
i fully indorse this , and i adopt it as a text for this discourse .
i so adopt it because it furnishes a precise and an agreed starting point for a discussion between republicans and that wing of the democracy headed by senator douglas .
it simply leaves the inquiry : " what was the understanding those fathers had of the question mentioned ? " "
our fathers , when they framed the government under which we live , understood this question just as well , and even better , than we do now."i fully indorse this , and i adopt it as a text for this discourse .
i so adopt it because it furnishes a precise and an agreed starting point for a discussion between republicans and that wing of the democracy headed by senator douglas .
it simply leaves the inquiry : " what was the understanding those fathers had of the question mentioned?"what is the frame of government under which we live?the answer must be : " the constitution of the united states . "
that constitution consists of the original , framed in 1787 , ( and under which the present government first went into operation , ) and 12 subsequently framed amendments , the first 10 of which were framed in 1789.who were our fathers that framed the constitution ?
i suppose the " 39 " who signed the original instrument may be fairly called our fathers who framed that part of the present government .
it is almost exactly true to say they framed it , and it is altogether true to say they fairly represented the opinion and sentiment of the whole nation at that time .
their names , being familiar to nearly all , and accessible to quite all , need not now be repeated .
i take these " 39 " for the present , as being " our fathers who framed the government under which we live . "
what is the question which , according to the text , those fathers understood " just as well , and even better than we do now?"upon this , senator douglas holds the affirmative , and republicans the negative .
this affirmation and denial form an issue ; and this issue -- this question -- is precisely what the text declares our fathers understood " better than we . "
let us now inquire whether the " 39 , " or any of them , ever acted upon this question ; and if they did , how they acted upon it -- how they expressed that better understanding ?
in 1784 , three years before the constitution -- the united states then owning the northwestern territory , and no other , the congress of the confederation had before them the question of prohibiting slavery in that territory ; and four of the " 39 , " who afterward framed the constitution , were in that congress , and voted on that question .
of these , roger sherman , thomas mifflin , and hugh williamson voted for the prohibition , thus showing that , in their understanding , no line dividing local from federal authority , nor anything else , properly forbade the federal government to control as to slavery in federal territory .
the other of the four -- james m. henry -- voted against the prohibition , showing that , for some cause , he thought it improper to vote for it .
in 1787 , still before the constitution , but while the convention was in session framing it , and while the northwestern territory still was the only territory owned by the united states , the same question of prohibiting slavery in the territory again came before the congress of the confederation ; and two more of the " 39 " who afterward signed the constitution , were in that congress , and voted on the question .
they were william blount and william few ; and they both voted for the prohibition -- thus showing that , in their understanding , no line dividing local from federal authority , nor anything else , properly forbade the federal government to control as to slavery in federal territory .
this time the prohibition became a law , being part of what is now well known as the ordinance of ' 87.the question of federal control of slavery in the territories , seems not to have been directly before the convention which framed the original constitution ; and hence it is not recorded that the " 39 , " or any of them , while engaged on that instrument , expressed any opinion of that precise question .
this shows that , in their understanding , no line dividing local from federal authority , nor anything in the constitution , properly forbade congress to prohibit slavery in the federal territory ; else both their fidelity to correct principle , and their oath to support the constitution , would have constrained them to oppose the prohibition .
again , george washington , another of the " 39 , " was then president of the united states , and , as such , approved and signed the bill ; thus completing its validity as a law , and thus showing that , in his understanding , no line dividing local from federal authority , nor anything in the constitution , forbade the federal government , to control as to slavery in federal territory .
no great while after the adoption of the original constitution , north carolina ceded to the federal government the country now constituting the state of tennessee ; and a few years later georgia ceded that which now constitutes the states of mississippi and alabama .
in both deeds of cession it was made a condition by the ceding states that the federal government should not prohibit slavery in the ceded country .
besides this , slavery was then actually in the ceded country .
under these circumstances , congress , on taking charge of these countries , did not absolutely prohibit slavery within them .
but they did interfere with it -- take control of it -- even there , to a certain extent .
in 1798 , congress organized the territory of mississippi .
in the act of organization , they prohibited the bringing of slaves into the territory , from any place without the united states , by fine , and giving freedom to slaves so brought .
this act passed both branches of congress without yeas and nays .
in that congress were three of the " 39 " who framed the original constitution .
they were john langdon , george read and abraham baldwin .
they all , probably , voted for it .
certainly they would have placed their opposition to it upon record , if , in their understanding , any line dividing local from federal authority , or anything in the constitution , properly forbade the federal government to control as to slavery in federal territory .
in 1803 , the federal government purchased the louisiana country .
our former territorial acquisitions came from certain of our own states ; but this louisiana country was acquired from a foreign nation .
in 1804 , congress gave a territorial organization to that part of it which now constitutes the state of louisiana .
new orleans , lying within that part , was an old and comparatively large city .
there were other considerable towns and settlements , and slavery was extensively and thoroughly intermingled with the people .
congress did not , in the territorial act , prohibit slavery ; but they did interfere with it -- take control of it -- in a more marked and extensive way than they did in the case of mississippi .
the substance of the provision therein made , in relation to slaves , was : this act also was passed without yeas and nays .
in the congress which passed it , there were two of the " 39 . "
they were abraham baldwin and jonathan dayton .
as stated in the case of mississippi , it is probable they both voted for it .
they would not have allowed it to pass without recording their opposition to it , if , in their understanding , it violated either the line properly dividing local from federal authority , or any provision of the constitution .
in 1819 -- 20 , came and passed the missouri question .
many votes were taken , by yeas and nays , in both branches of congress , upon the various phases of the general question .
two of the " 39 " -- rufus king and charles pinckney -- were members of that congress .
mr. king steadily voted for slavery prohibition and against all compromises , while mr. pinckney as steadily voted against slavery prohibition and against all compromises .
by this , mr. king showed that , in his understanding , no line dividing local from federal authority , nor anything in the constitution , was violated by congress prohibiting slavery in federal territory ; while mr. pinckney , by his votes , showed that , in his understanding , there was some sufficient reason for opposing such prohibition in that case .
the cases i have mentioned are the only acts of the " 39 , " or of any of them , upon the direct issue , which i have been able to discover .
to enumerate the persons who thus acted , as being four in 1784 , two in 1787 , 17 in 1789 , three in 1798 , two in 1804 , and two in 1819 -- 20 -- there would be 30 of them .
but this would be counting john langdon , roger sherman , william few , rufus king , and george read , each twice , and abraham baldwin , three times .
the true number of those of the " 39 " whom i have shown to have acted upon the question , which , by the text , they understood better than we , is 23 , leaving 16 not shown to have acted upon it in any way .
here , then , we have 23 out of our 39 fathers " who framed the government under which we live , " who have , upon their official responsibility and their corporal oaths , acted upon the very question which the text affirms they " understood just as well , and even better than we do now ; " and 21 of them -- a clear majority of the whole " 39 " -- so acting upon it as to make them guilty of gross political impropriety and wilful perjury , if , in their understanding , any proper division between local and federal authority , or anything in the constitution they had made themselves , and sworn to support , forbade the federal government to control as to slavery in the federal territories .
thus the 21 acted ; and , as actions speak louder than words , so actions , under such responsibility , speak still louder .
two of the 23 voted against congressional prohibition of slavery in the federal territories , in the instances in which they acted upon the question .
but for what reasons they so voted is not known .
they may have done so because they thought a proper division of local from federal authority , or some provision or principle of the constitution , stood in the way ; or they may , without any such question , have voted against the prohibition , on what appeared to them to be sufficient grounds of expediency .
no one who has sworn to support the constitution , can conscientiously vote for what he understands to be an unconstitutional measure , however expedient he may think it ; but one may and ought to vote against a measure which he deems constitutional , if , at the same time , he deems it inexpedient .
it , therefore , would be unsafe to set down even the two who voted against the prohibition , as having done so because , in their understanding , any proper division of local from federal authority , or anything in the constitution , forbade the federal government to control as to slavery in federal territory .
the remaining 16 of the " 39 , " so far as i have discovered , have left no record of their understanding upon the direct question of federal control of slavery in the federal territories .
but there is much reason to believe that their understanding upon that question would not have appeared different from that of their 23 compeers , had it been manifested at all .
for the purpose of adhering rigidly to the text , i have purposely omitted whatever understanding may have been manifested by any person , however distinguished , other than the 39 fathers who framed the original constitution ; and , for the same reason , i have also omitted whatever understanding may have been manifested by any of the " 39 " even , on any other phase of the general question of slavery .
if we should look into their acts and declarations on those other phases , as the foreign slave trade , and the morality and policy of slavery generally , it would appear to us that on the direct question of federal control of slavery in federal territories , the 16 , if they had acted at all , would probably have acted just as the 23 did .
among that 16 were several of the most noted anti - slavery men of those times -- as dr. franklin , alexander hamilton and gouverneur morris -- while there was not one now known to have been otherwise , unless it may be john rutledge , of south carolina .
the sum of the whole is , that of our 39 fathers who framed the original constitution , 21 -- a clear majority of the whole -- certainly understood that no proper division of local from federal authority , nor any part of the constitution , forbade the federal government to control slavery in the federal territories ; while all the rest probably had the same understanding .
such , unquestionably , was the understanding of our fathers who framed the original constitution ; and the text affirms that they understood the question " better than we."but , so far , i have been considering the understanding of the question manifested by the framers of the original constitution .
in and by the original instrument , a mode was provided for amending it ; and , as i have already stated , the present frame of " the government under which we live " consists of that original , and 12 amendatory articles framed and adopted since .
those who now insist that federal control of slavery in federal territories violates the constitution , point us to the provisions which they suppose it thus violates ; and , as i understand , they all fix upon provisions in these amendatory articles , and not in the original instrument .
the supreme court , in the dred scott case , plant themselves upon the fifth amendment , which provides that no person shall be deprived of " life , liberty or property without due process of law ; " while senator douglas and his peculiar adherents plant themselves upon the tenth amendment , providing that " the powers not delegated to the united states by the constitution , " " are reserved to the states respectively , or to the people."now , it so happens that these amendments were framed by the first congress which sat under the constitution -- the identical congress which passed the act already mentioned , enforcing the prohibition of slavery in the northwestern territory .
not only was it the same congress , but they were the identical , same individual men who , at the same session , and at the same time within the session , had under consideration , and in progress toward maturity , these constitutional amendments , and this act prohibiting slavery in all the territory the nation then owned .
the constitutional amendments were introduced before , and passed after the act enforcing the ordinance of ' 87 ; so that , during the whole pendency of the act to enforce the ordinance , the constitutional amendments were also pending .
the 76 members of that congress , including 16 of the framers of the original constitution , as before stated , were preeminently our fathers who framed that part of " the government under which we live , " which is now claimed as forbidding the federal government to control slavery in the federal territories .
is it not a little presumptuous in any one at this day to affirm that the two things which that congress deliberately framed , and carried to maturity at the same time , are absolutely inconsistent with each other ?
and does not such affirmation become impudently absurd when coupled with the other affirmation from the same mouth , that those who did the two things , alleged to be inconsistent , understood whether they really were inconsistent better than we -- better than he who affirms that they are inconsistent?it is surely safe to assume that the 39 framers of the original constitution , and the 76 members of the congress which framed the amendments thereto , taken together , do certainly include those who may be fairly called " our fathers who framed the government under which we live . "
and so assuming , i defy any man to show that any one of them ever , in his whole life , declared that , in his understanding , any proper division of local from federal authority , or any part of the constitution , forbade the federal government to control as to slavery in the federal territories .
i go a step further .
i defy any one to show that any living man in the whole world ever did , prior to the beginning of the present century , ( and i might almost say prior to the beginning of the last half of the present century , ) declare that , in his understanding , any proper division of local from federal authority , or any part of the constitution , forbade the federal government to control as to slavery in the federal territories .
to those who now so declare , i give , not only " our fathers who framed the government under which we live , " but with them all other living men within the century in which it was framed , among whom to search , and they shall not be able to find the evidence of a single man agreeing with them .
now , and here , let me guard a little against being misunderstood .
i do not mean to say we are bound to follow implicitly in whatever our fathers did .
to do so , would be to discard all the lights of current experience -- to reject all progress -- all improvement .
what i do say is , that if we would supplant the opinions and policy of our fathers in any case , we should do so upon evidence so conclusive , and argument so clear , that even their great authority , fairly considered and weighed , can not stand ; and most surely not in a case whereof we ourselves declare they understood the question better than we .
if any man at this day sincerely believes that a proper division of local from federal authority , or any part of the constitution , forbids the federal government to control as to slavery in the federal territories , he is right to say so , and to enforce his position by all truthful evidence and fair argument which he can .
but he has no right to mislead others , who have less access to history , and less leisure to study it , into the false belief that " our fathers , who framed the government under which we live , " were of the same opinion -- thus substituting falsehood and deception for truthful evidence and fair argument .
if any man at this day sincerely believes " our fathers who framed the government under which we live , " used and applied principles , in other cases , which ought to have led them to understand that a proper division of local from federal authority or some part of the constitution , forbids the federal government to control as to slavery in the federal territories , he is right to say so .
but he should , at the same time , brave the responsibility of declaring that , in his opinion , he understands their principles better than they did themselves ; and especially should he not shirk that responsibility by asserting that they " understood the question just as well , and even better , than we do now."and now , if they would listen -- as i suppose they will not -- i would address a few words to the southern people .
i would say to them : you consider yourselves a reasonable and a just people ; and i consider that in the general qualities of reason and justice you are not inferior to any other people .
still , when you speak of us republicans , you do so only to denounce us as reptiles , or , at the best , as no better than outlaws .
you will grant a hearing to pirates or murderers , but nothing like it to " black republicans . "
in all your contentions with one another , each of you deems an unconditional condemnation of " black republicanism " as the first thing to be attended to .
indeed , such condemnation of us seems to be an indispensable prerequisite -- license , so to speak -- among you to be admitted or permitted to speak at all .
now , can you , or not , be prevailed upon to pause and to consider whether this is quite just to us , or even to yourselves ?
bring forward your charges and specifications , and then be patient long enough to hear us deny or justify .
you say we are sectional .
we deny it .
that makes an issue ; and the burden of proof is upon you .
you produce your proof ; and what is it ?
why , that our party has no existence in your section -- gets no votes in your section .
the fact is substantially true ; but does it prove the issue ?
if it does , then in case we should , without change of principle , begin to get votes in your section , we should thereby cease to be sectional .
you can not escape this conclusion ; and yet , are you willing to abide by it ?
if you are , you will probably soon find that we have ceased to be sectional , for we shall get votes in your section this very year .
you will then begin to discover , as the truth plainly is , that your proof does not touch the issue .
the fact that we get no votes in your section , is a fact of your making , and not of ours .
and if there be fault in that fact , that fault is primarily yours , and remains so until you show that we repel you by some wrong principle or practice .
if we do repel you by any wrong principle or practice , the fault is ours ; but this brings you to where you ought to have started -- to a discussion of the right or wrong of our principle .
if our principle , put in practice , would wrong your section for the benefit of ours , or for any other object , then our principle , and we with it , are sectional , and are justly opposed and denounced as such .
meet us , then , on the question of whether our principle , put in practice , would wrong your section ; and so meet us as if it were possible that something may be said on our side .
do you accept the challenge ?
no !
then you really believe that the principle which " our fathers who framed the government under which we live " thought so clearly right as to adopt it , and indorse it again and again , upon their official oaths , is in fact so clearly wrong as to demand your condemnation without a moment 's consideration .
some of you delight to flaunt in our faces the warning against sectional parties given by washington in his farewell address .
less than eight years before washington gave that warning , he had , as president of the united states , approved and signed an act of congress , enforcing the prohibition of slavery in the northwestern territory , which act embodied the policy of the government upon that subject up to and at the very moment he penned that warning ; and about one year after he penned it , he wrote la fayette that he considered that prohibition a wise measure , expressing in the same connection his hope that we should at some time have a confederacy of free states .
bearing this in mind , and seeing that sectionalism has since arisen upon this same subject , is that warning a weapon in your hands against us , or in our hands against you ?
could washington himself speak , would he cast the blame of that sectionalism upon us , who sustain his policy , or upon you who repudiate it ?
we respect that warning of washington , and we commend it to you , together with his example pointing to the right application of it .
but you say you are conservative -- eminently conservative -- while we are revolutionary , destructive , or something of the sort .
what is conservatism ?
is it not adherence to the old and tried , against the new and untried ?
we stick to , contend for , the identical old policy on the point in controversy which was adopted by " our fathers who framed the government under which we live ; " while you with one accord reject , and scout , and spit upon that old policy , and insist upon substituting something new .
true , you disagree among yourselves as to what that substitute shall be .
you are divided on new propositions and plans , but you are unanimous in rejecting and denouncing the old policy of the fathers .
some of you are for reviving the foreign slave trade ; some for a congressional slave - code for the territories ; some for congress forbidding the territories to prohibit slavery within their limits ; some for maintaining slavery in the territories through the judiciary ; some for the " gur - reat pur - rinciple " that " if one man would enslave another , no third man should object , " fantastically called " popular sovereignty ; " but never a man among you in favor of federal prohibition of slavery in federal territories , according to the practice of " our fathers who framed the government under which we live . "
not one of all your various plans can show a precedent or an advocate in the century within which our government originated .
consider , then , whether your claim of conservatism for yourselves , and your charge of destructiveness against us , are based on the most clear and stable foundations .
again , you say we have made the slavery question more prominent than it formerly was .
we deny it .
we admit that it is more prominent , but we deny that we made it so .
it was not we , but you , who discarded the old policy of the fathers .
we resisted , and still resist , your innovation ; and thence comes the greater prominence of the question .
would you have that question reduced to its former proportions ?
go back to that old policy .
what has been will be again , under the same conditions .
if you would have the peace of the old times , readopt the precepts and policy of the old times .
you charge that we stir up insurrections among your slaves .
we deny it ; and what is your proof ?
harper 's ferry !
john brown ! !
john brown was no republican ; and you have failed to implicate a single republican in his harper 's ferry enterprise .
if any member of our party is guilty in that matter , you know it or you do not know it .
if you do know it , you are inexcusable for not designating the man and proving the fact .
if you do not know it , you are inexcusable for asserting it , and especially for persisting in the assertion after you have tried and failed to make the proof .
you need not be told that persisting in a charge which one does not know to be true , is simply malicious slander .
some of you admit that no republican designedly aided or encouraged the harper 's ferry affair ; but still insist that our doctrines and declarations necessarily lead to such results .
we do not believe it .
we know we hold to no doctrine , and make no declaration , which were not held to and made by " our fathers who framed the government under which we live . "
you never dealt fairly by us in relation to this affair .
when it occurred , some important state elections were near at hand , and you were in evident glee with the belief that , by charging the blame upon us , you could get an advantage of us in those elections .
the elections came , and your expectations were not quite fulfilled .
every republican man knew that , as to himself at least , your charge was a slander , and he was not much inclined by it to cast his vote in your favor .
republican doctrines and declarations are accompanied with a continual protest against any interference whatever with your slaves , or with you about your slaves .
surely , this does not encourage them to revolt .
true , we do , in common with " our fathers , who framed the government under which we live , " declare our belief that slavery is wrong ; but the slaves do not hear us declare even this .
for anything we say or do , the slaves would scarcely know there is a republican party .
i believe they would not , in fact , generally know it but for your misrepresentations of us , in their hearing .
in your political contests among yourselves , each faction charges the other with sympathy with black republicanism ; and then , to give point to the charge , defines black republicanism to simply be insurrection , blood and thunder among the slaves .
mr. jefferson did not mean to say , nor do i , that the power of emancipation is in the federal government .
he spoke of virginia ; and , as to the power of emancipation , i speak of the slaveholding states only .
the federal government , however , as we insist , has the power of restraining the extension of the institution -- the power to insure that a slave insurrection shall never occur on any american soil which is now free from slavery .
john brown 's effort was peculiar .
it was not a slave insurrection .
it was an attempt by white men to get up a revolt among slaves , in which the slaves refused to participate .
in fact , it was so absurd that the slaves , with all their ignorance , saw plainly enough it could not succeed .
that affair , in its philosophy , corresponds with the many attempts , related in history , at the assassination of kings and emperors .
an enthusiast broods over the oppression of a people till he fancies himself commissioned by heaven to liberate them .
he ventures the attempt , which ends in little else than his own execution .
orsini 's attempt on louis napoleon , and john brown 's attempt at harper 's ferry were , in their philosophy , precisely the same .
the eagerness to cast blame on old england in the one case , and on new england in the other , does not disprove the sameness of the two things .
and how much would it avail you , if you could , by the use of john brown , helper 's book , and the like , break up the republican organization ?
human action can be modified to some extent , but human nature can not be changed .
there is a judgment and a feeling against slavery in this nation , which cast at least a million and a half of votes .
you can not destroy that judgment and feeling -- that sentiment -- by breaking up the political organization which rallies around it .
you can scarcely scatter and disperse an army which has been formed into order in the face of your heaviest fire ; but if you could , how much would you gain by forcing the sentiment which created it out of the peaceful channel of the ballot - box , into some other channel ?
what would that other channel probably be ?
would the number of john browns be lessened or enlarged by the operation?but you will break up the union rather than submit to a denial of your constitutional rights .
that has a somewhat reckless sound ; but it would be palliated , if not fully justified , were we proposing , by the mere force of numbers , to deprive you of some right , plainly written down in the constitution .
but we are proposing no such thing .
when you make these declarations , you have a specific and well - understood allusion to an assumed constitutional right of yours , to take slaves into the federal territories , and to hold them there as property .
but no such right is specifically written in the constitution .
that instrument is literally silent about any such right .
we , on the contrary , deny that such a right has any existence in the constitution , even by implication .
your purpose , then , plainly stated , is , that you will destroy the government , unless you be allowed to construe and enforce the constitution as you please , on all points in dispute between you and us .
you will rule or ruin in all events .
this , plainly stated , is your language .
perhaps you will say the supreme court has decided the disputed constitutional question in your favor .
not quite so .
but waiving the lawyer 's distinction between dictum and decision , the court have decided the question for you in a sort of way .
the court have substantially said , it is your constitutional right to take slaves into the federal territories , and to hold them there as property .
when i say the decision was made in a sort of way , i mean it was made in a divided court , by a bare majority of the judges , and they not quite agreeing with one another in the reasons for making it ; that it is so made as that its avowed supporters disagree with one another about its meaning , and that it was mainly based upon a mistaken statement of fact -- the statement in the opinion that " the right of property in a slave is distinctly and expressly affirmed in the constitution."to show all this , is easy and certain .
when this obvious mistake of the judges shall be brought to their notice , is it not reasonable to expect that they will withdraw the mistaken statement , and reconsider the conclusion based upon it?and then it is to be remembered that " our fathers , who framed the government under which we live " -- the men who made the constitution -- decided this same constitutional question in our favor , long ago -- decided it without division among themselves , when making the decision ; without division among themselves about the meaning of it after it was made , and , so far as any evidence is left , without basing it upon any mistaken statement of facts .
under all these circumstances , do you really feel yourselves justified to break up this government , unless such a court decision as yours is , shall be at once submitted to as a conclusive and final rule of political action ?
but you will not abide the election of a republican president !
in that supposed event , you say , you will destroy the union ; and then , you say , the great crime of having destroyed it will be upon us !
that is cool .
a highwayman holds a pistol to my ear , and mutters through his teeth , " stand and deliver , or i shall kill you , and then you will be a murderer!"to be sure , what the robber demanded of me -- my money -- was my own ; and i had a clear right to keep it ; but it was no more my own than my vote is my own ; and the threat of death to me , to extort my money , and the threat of destruction to the union , to extort my vote , can scarcely be distinguished in principle .
will they be satisfied if the territories be unconditionally surrendered to them ?
we know they will not .
in all their present complaints against us , the territories are scarcely mentioned .
invasions and insurrections are the rage now .
will it satisfy them , if , in the future , we have nothing to do with invasions and insurrections ?
we know it will not .
we so know , because we know we never had anything to do with invasions and insurrections ; and yet this total abstaining does not exempt us from the charge and the denunciation .
the question recurs , what will satisfy them ?
simply this : we must not only let them alone , but we must , somehow , convince them that we do let them alone .
this , we know by experience , is no easy task .
we have been so trying to convince them from the very beginning of our organization , but with no success .
in all our platforms and speeches we have constantly protested our purpose to let them alone ; but this has had no tendency to convince them .
alike unavailing to convince them , is the fact that they have never detected a man of us in any attempt to disturb them .
wrong as we think slavery is , we can yet afford to let it alone where it is , because that much is due to the necessity arising from its actual presence in the nation ; but can we , while our votes will prevent it , allow it to spread into the national territories , and to overrun us here in these free states ?
if our sense of duty forbids this , then let us stand by our duty , fearlessly and effectively .
let us be diverted by none of those sophistical contrivances wherewith we are so industriously plied and belabored -- contrivances such as groping for some middle ground between the right and the wrong , vain as the search for a man who should be neither a living man nor a dead man -- such as a policy of " do n't care " on a question about which all true men do care -- such as union appeals beseeching true union men to yield to disunionists , reversing the divine rule , and calling , not the sinners , but the righteous to repentance -- such as invocations to washington , imploring men to unsay what washington said , and undo what washington did .
neither let us be slandered from our duty by false accusations against us , nor frightened from it by menaces of destruction to the government nor of dungeons to ourselves .
let us have faith that right makes might , and in that faith , let us , to the end , dare to do our duty as we understand it .

fellow - citizens of the senate and house of representatives : 
 since your last annual assembling another year of health and bountiful harvests has passed , and while it has not pleased the almighty to bless us with a return of peace , we can but press on , guided by the best light he gives us , trusting that in his own good time and wise way all will yet be well .
the correspondence touching foreign affairs which has taken place during the last year is herewith submitted , in virtual compliance with a request to that effect made by the house of representatives near the close of the last session of congress .
if the condition of our relations with other nations is less gratifying than it has usually been at former periods , it is certainly more satisfactory than a nation so unhappily distracted as we are might reasonably have apprehended .
in the month of june last there were some grounds to expect that the maritime powers which at the beginning of our domestic difficulties so unwisely and unnecessarily , as we think , recognized the insurgents as a belligerent would soon recede from that position , which has proved only less injurious to themselves than to our own country .
but the temporary reverses which afterwards befell the national arms , and which were exaggerated by our own disloyal citizens abroad , have hitherto delayed that act of simple justice .
the civil war , which has so radically changed for the moment the occupations and habits of the american people , has necessarily disturbed the social condition and affected very deeply the prosperity of the nations with which we have carried on a commerce that has been steadily increasing throughout a period of half a century .
it has at the same time excited political ambitions and apprehensions which have produced a profound agitation throughout the civilized world .
in this unusual agitation we have forborne from taking part in any controversy between foreign states and between parties or factions in such states .
we have attempted no propagandism and acknowledged no revolution .
but we have left to every nation the exclusive conduct and management of its own affairs .
our struggle has been , of course , contemplated by foreign nations with reference less to its own merits than to its supposed and often exaggerated effects and consequences resulting to those nations themselves .
nevertheless , complaint on the part of this government , even if it were just , would certainly be unwise .
the treaty with great britain for the suppression of the slave trade has been put into operation with a good prospect of complete success .
it is an occasion of special pleasure to acknowledge that the execution of it on the part of her majesty 's government has been marked with a jealous respect for the authority of the united states and the rights of their moral and loyal citizens .
the convention with hanover for the abolition of the stade dues has been carried into full effect under the act of congress for that purpose .
a blockade of 3,000 miles of seacoast could not be established and vigorously enforced in a season of great commercial activity like the present without committing occasional mistakes and inflicting unintentional injuries upon foreign nations and their subjects .
a civil war occurring in a country , where foreigners reside and carry on trade under treaty stipulations is necessarily fruitful of complaints of the violation of neutral rights .
all such collisions tend to excite misapprehensions , and possibly to produce mutual reclamations between nations which have a common interest in preserving peace and friendship .
in clear cases of these kinds i have so far as possible heard and redressed complaints which have been presented by friendly powers .
there is still , however , a large and an augmenting number of doubtful cases upon which the government is unable to agree with the governments whose protection is demanded by the claimants .
there are , moreover , many cases in which the united states or their citizens suffer wrongs from the naval or military authorities of foreign nations which the governments of those states are not at once prepared to redress .
i have proposed to some of the foreign states thus interested mutual conventions to examine and adjust such complaints .
this proposition has been made especially to great britain , to france , to spain , and to prussia .
in each case it has been kindly received , but has not yet been formally adopted .
i deem it my duty to recommend an appropriation in behalf of the owners of the norwegian bark admiral p. tordenskiold , which vessel was in may , 1861 , prevented by the commander of the blockading force off charleston from leaving that port with cargo , notwithstanding a similar privilege had shortly before been granted to an english vessel .
i have directed the secretary of state to cause the papers in the case to be communicated to the proper committees .
applications have been made to me by many free americans of african descent to favor their emigration , with a view to such colonization as was contemplated in recent acts of congress .
other parties , at home and abroad -- some from interested motives , others upon patriotic considerations , and still others influenced by philanthropic sentiments -- have suggested similar measures , while , on the other hand , several of the spanish american republics have protested against the sending of such colonies to their respective territories .
under these circumstances i have declined to move any such colony to any state without first obtaining the consent of its government , with an agreement on its part to receive and protect such emigrants in all the rights of freemen ; and i have at the same time offered to the several states situated within the tropics , or having colonies there , to negotiate with them , subject to the advice and consent of the senate , to favor the voluntary emigration of persons of that class to their respective territories , upon conditions which shall be equal , just , and humane .
liberia and hayti are as yet the only countries to which colonists of african descent from here could go with certainty of being received and adopted as citizens ; and i regret to say such persons contemplating colonization do not seem so willing to migrate to those countries as to some others , nor so willing as i think their interest demands .
i believe , however , opinion among them in this respect is improving , and that ere long there will be an augmented and considerable migration to both these countries from the united states .
the new commercial treaty between the united states and the sultan of turkey has been carried into execution .
a commercial and consular treaty has been negotiated , subject to the senate 's consent , with liberia , and a similar negotiation is now pending with the republic of hayti .
a considerable improvement of the national commerce is expected to result from these measures .
our relations with great britain , france , spain , portugal , russia , prussia , denmark , sweden , austria , the netherlands , italy , rome , and the other european states remain undisturbed .
very favorable relations also continue to be maintained with turkey , morocco , china , and japan .
during the last year there has not only been no change of our previous relations with the independent states of our own continent , but more friendly sentiments than have heretofore existed are believed to be entertained by these neighbors , whose safety and progress are so intimately connected with our own .
this statement especially applies to mexico , nicaragua , costa rica , honduras , peru , and chile .
the commission under the convention with the republic of new granada closed its session without having audited and passed upon all the claims which were submitted to it .
a proposition is pending to revive the convention , that it may be able to do more complete justice .
the joint commission between the united states and the republic of costa rica has completed its labors and submitted its report .
i have favored the project for connecting the united states with europe by an atlantic telegraph , and a similar project to extend the telegraph from san francisco to connect by a pacific telegraph with the line which is being extended across the russian empire .
the territories of the united states , with unimportant exceptions have remained undisturbed by the civil war ; and they are exhibiting such evidence of prosperity as justifies an expectation that some of them will soon be in a condition to be organized as states and be constitutionally admitted into the federal union .
the immense mineral resources of some of those territories ought to be developed as rapidly as possible .
every step in that direction would have a tendency to improve the revenues of the government and diminish the burdens of the people .
it is worthy of your serious consideration whether some extraordinary measures to promote that end can not be adopted .
the means which suggests itself as most likely to be effective is a scientific exploration of the mineral regions in those territories with a view to the publication of its results at home and in foreign countries -- results which can not fail to be auspicious .
the condition of the finances will claim your most diligent consideration .
the vast expenditures incident to the military and naval operations required for the suppression of the rebellion have hitherto been met with a promptitude and certainty unusual in similar circumstances , and the public credit has been fully maintained .
the continuance of the war , however , and the increased disbursements made necessary by the augmented forces now in the field demand your best reflections as to the best modes of providing the necessary revenue without injury to business and with the least possible burdens upon labor .
the suspension of specie payments by the banks soon after the commencement of your last session made large issues of united states notes unavoidable .
in no other way could the payment of the troops and the satisfaction of other just demands be so economically or so well provided for .
the judicious legislation of congress , securing the receivability of these notes for loans and internal duties and making them a legal tender for other debts , has made them an universal currency , and has satisfied , partially at least , and for the time , the long - felt want of an uniform circulating medium , saving thereby to the people immense sums in discounts and exchanges .
a return to specie payments , however , at the earliest period compatible with due regard to all interests concerned should ever be kept in view .
fluctuations in the value of currency are always injurious , and to reduce these fluctuations to the lowest possible point will always be a leading purpose in wise legislation .
convertibility , prompt and certain convertibility , into coin is generally acknowledged to be the best and surest safeguard against them ; and it is extremely doubtful whether a circulation of united states notes payable in coin and sufficiently large for the wants of the people can be permanently , usefully , and safely maintained .
is there , then , any other mode in which the necessary provision for the public wants can be made and the great advantages of a safe and uniform currency secured ?
i know of none which promises so certain results and is at the same time so unobjectionable as the organization of banking associations , under a general act of congress , well guarded in its provisions .
to such associations the government might furnish circulating notes , on the security of united states bonds deposited in the treasury .
these notes , prepared under the supervision of proper officers , being uniform in appearance and security and convertible always into coin , would at once protect labor against the evils of a vicious currency and facilitate commerce by cheap and safe exchanges .
a moderate reservation from the interest on the bonds would compensate the united states for the preparation and distribution of the notes and a general supervision of the system , and would lighten the burden of that part of the public debt employed as securities .
the public credit , moreover , would be greatly improved and the negotiation of new loans greatly facilitated by the steady market demand for government bonds which the adoption of the proposed system would create .
it is an additional recommendation of the measure , of considerable weight , in my judgment , that it would reconcile as far as possible all existing interests by the opportunity offered to existing institutions to reorganize under the act , substituting only the secured uniform national circulation for the local and various circulation , secured and unsecured , now issued by them .
the receipts into the treasury from all sources , including loans and balance from the preceding year , for the fiscal year ending on the 30th june , 1862 , were $ 583,885,247.06 , of which sum $ 49,056,397.62 were derived from customs ; $ 1,795,331.73 from the direct tax ; from public lands , $ 152,203.77 ; from miscellaneous sources , $ 931,787.64 ; from loans in all forms , $ 529,692,460.50 .
the remainder , : $ 2,257,065.80 , was the balance from last year .
the disbursements during the same period were : for congressional , executive , and judicial purposes , $ 5,939.009.29 ; for foreign intercourse , $ 1,339,710.35 ; for miscellaneous expenses , including the mints , loans , post - office deficiencies , collection of revenue , and other like charges , $ 14,129,771.50 ; for expenses under the interior department , 985.52 ; under the war department , $ 394,368,407.36 ; under the navy department , $ 42,674,569.69 ; for interest on public debt , $ 13,190,324.45 ; and for payment of public debt , including reimbursement of temporary loan and redemptions , $ 96,096,922.09 ; making an aggregate of $ 570,841,700.25 , and leaving a balance in the treasury on the 1st day of july , 1862 , of $ 13,043,546.81 .
it should be observed that the sum of $ 96,096,922.09 , expended for reimbursements and redemption of public debt , being included also in the loans made , may be properly deducted both from receipts and expenditures , leaving the actual receipts for the year $ 487,788,324.97 , and the expenditures $ 474,744,778.16 .
other information on the subject of the finances will be found in the report of the secretary of the treasury , to whose statements and views i invite your most candid and considerate attention .
the reports of the secretaries of war and of the navy are herewith transmitted .
these reports , though lengthy , are scarcely more than brief abstracts of the very numerous and extensive transactions and operations conducted through those departments .
nor could i give a summary of them here upon any principle which would admit of its being much shorter than the reports themselves .
i therefore content myself with laying the reports before you and asking your attention to them .
it gives me pleasure to report a decided improvement in the financial condition of the post - office department as compared with several preceding years .
the receipts for the fiscal year 1861 amounted to $ 8,349,296.40 , which embraced the revenue from all the states of the union for three quarters of that year .
notwithstanding the cessation of revenue from the so - called seceded states during the last fiscal year , the increase of the correspondence of the loyal states has been sufficient to produce a revenue during the same year of $ 8,299,820.90 , being only $ 50,000 less than was derived from all the states of the union during the previous year .
the expenditures show a still more favorable result .
the amount expended in 1861 was $ 13,606,759.11 .
for the last year the amount has been reduced to $ 11,125,364.13 , showing a decrease of about $ 2,481,000 in the expenditures as compared with the preceding year , and about $ 3,750,000 as compared with the fiscal year 1860 .
the deficiency in the department for the previous year was $ 4,551,966.98 .
for the last fiscal year it was reduced to $ 2,112,814.57 .
these favorable results are in part owing to the cessation of mail service in the insurrectionary states and in part to a careful review of all expenditures in that department in the interest of economy .
the efficiency of the postal service , it is believed , has also been much improved .
the postmaster - general has also opened a correspondence through the department of state with foreign governments proposing a convention of postal representatives for the purpose of simplifying the rates of foreign postage and to expedite the foreign mails .
this proposition , equally important to our adopted citizens and to the commercial interests of this country , has been favorably entertained and agreed to by all the governments from whom replies have been received .
i ask the attention of congress to the suggestions of the postmaster - general in his report respecting the further legislation required , in his opinion , for the benefit of the postal service .
the secretary of the interior reports as follows in regard to the public lands : 
 the public lands have ceased to be a source of revenue .
from the 1st july , 1861 , to the 30th september , 1862 , the entire cash receipts from the sale of lands were $ 137,476.26 -- a sum much less than the expenses of our land system during the same period .
the homestead law , which will take effect on the 1st of january next , offers such inducements to settlers that sales for cash can not be expected to an extent sufficient to meet the expenses of the general land office and the cost of surveying and bringing the land into market .
the discrepancy between the sum here stated as arising from the sales of the public lands and the sum derived from the same source as reported from the treasury department arises , as i understand , from the fact that the periods of time , though apparently , were not really coincident at the beginning point , the treasury report including a considerable sum now which had previously been reported from the interior , sufficiently large to greatly overreach the sum derived from the three months now reported upon by the interior and not by the treasury .
the indian tribes upon our frontiers have during the past year manifested a spirit of insubordination , and at several points have engaged in open hostilities against the white settlements in their vicinity .
the tribes occupying the indian country south of kansas renounced their allegiance to the united states and entered into treaties with the insurgents .
those who remained loyal to the united states were driven from the country .
the chief of the cherokees has visited this city for the purpose of restoring the former relations of the tribe with the united states .
he alleges that they were constrained by superior force to enter into treaties with the insurgents , and that the united states neglected to furnish the protection which their treaty stipulations required .
in the month of august last the sioux indians in minnesota attacked the settlements in their vicinity with extreme ferocity , killing indiscriminately men , women , and children .
this attack was wholly unexpected , and therefore no means of defense had been prodded .
it is estimated that not less than 800 persons were killed by the indians , and a large amount of property was destroyed .
how this outbreak was induced is not definitely known , and suspicions , which may be unjust , need not to be stated .
information was received by the indian bureau from different sources about the time hostilities were commenced that a simultaneous attack was to be made upon the white settlements by all the tribes between the mississippi river and the rocky mountains .
the state of minnesota has suffered great injury from this indian war .
a large portion of her territory has been depopulated , and a severe loss has been sustained by the destruction of property .
the people of that state manifest much anxiety for the removal of the tribes beyond the limits of the state as a guaranty against future hostilities .
the commissioner of indian affairs will furnish full details .
i submit for your especial consideration whether our indian system shall not be remodeled .
many wise and good men have impressed me with the belief that this can be profitably done .
i submit a statement of the proceedings of commissioners , which shows the progress that has been made in the enterprise of constructing the pacific railroad .
and this suggests the earliest completion of this road , and also the favorable action of congress upon the projects now pending before them for enlarging the capacities of the great canals in new york and illinois , as being of vital and rapidly increasing importance to the whole nation , and especially to the vast interior region hereinafter to be noticed at some greater length .
i purpose having prepared and laid before you at an early day some interesting and valuable statistical information upon this subject .
the military and commercial importance of enlarging the illinois and michigan canal and improving the illinois river is presented in the report of colonel webster to the secretary of war , and now transmitted to congress .
i respectfully ask attention to it .
to carry out the provisions of the act of congress of the 15th of may last , i have caused the department of agriculture of the united states to be organized .
the commissioner informs me that within the period of a few months this department has established an extensive system of correspondence and exchanges , both at home and abroad , which promises to effect highly beneficial results in the development of a correct knowledge of recent improvements in agriculture , in the introduction of new products , and in the collection of the agricultural statistics of the different states .
also , that it will soon be prepared to distribute largely seeds , cereals , plants , and cuttings , and has already published and liberally diffused much valuable information in anticipation of a more elaborate report , which will in due time be furnished , embracing some valuable tests in chemical science now in progress in the laboratory .
the creation of this department was for the more immediate benefit of a large class of our most valuable citizens , and i trust that the liberal basis upon which it has been organized will not only meet your approbation , but that it will realize at no distant day all the fondest anticipations of its most sanguine friends and become the fruitful source of advantage to all our people .
on the 22d day of september last a proclamation was issued by the executive , a copy of which is herewith submitted .
in accordance with the purpose expressed in the second paragraph of that paper , i now respectfully recall your attention to what may be called " compensated emancipation . "
a nation may be said to consist of its territory , its people , and its laws .
the territory is the only part which is of certain durability . "
one generation passeth away and another generation cometh , but the earth abideth forever . "
it is of the first importance to duly consider and estimate this ever - enduring part .
that portion of the earth 's surface which is owned and inhabited by the people of the united states is well adapted to be the home of one national family , and it is not well adapted for two or more .
its vast extent and its variety of climate and productions are of advantage in this age for one people , whatever they might have been in former ages .
steam , telegraphs , and intelligence have brought these to be an advantageous combination for one united people .
in the inaugural address i briefly pointed out the total inadequacy of disunion as a remedy for the differences between the people of the two sections .
i did so in language which i can not improve , and which , therefore , i beg to repeat : 
 one section of our country believes slavery is right and ought to be extended , while the other believes it is wrong and ought not to be extended .
this is the only substantial dispute .
the fugitive - slave clause of the constitution and the law for the suppression of the foreign slave trade are each as well enforced , perhaps , as any law can ever be in a community where the moral sense of the people imperfectly supports the law itself .
the great body of the people abide by the dry legal obligation in both cases , and a few break over in each .
this i think , can not be perfectly cured , and it would be worse in both cases after the separation of the sections than before .
the foreign slave trade , now imperfectly suppressed , would be ultimately revived without restriction in one section , while fugitive slaves , now only partially surrendered , would not be surrendered at all by the other .
physically speaking , we can not separate .
we can not remove our respective sections from each other nor build an impassable wall between them .
a husband and wife may be divorced and go out of the presence and beyond the reach of each other , but the different parts of our country can not do this .
they can not but remain face to face , and intercourse , either amicable or hostile , must continue between them , is it possible , then , to make that intercourse more advantageous or more satisfactory after separation than before ?
can aliens make treaties easier than friends can make laws ?
can treaties be more faithfully enforced between aliens than laws can among friends ?
suppose you go to war , you can not fight always ; and when , after much loss on both sides and no gain on either , you cease fighting , the identical old questions , as to terms of intercourse , are again upon you .
there is no line , straight or crooked , suitable for a national boundary upon which to divide .
trace through , from east to west , upon the line between the free and slave country .
and we shall find a little more than one - third of its length are rivers , easy to be crossed , and populated , or soon to be populated , thickly upon both sides ; while nearly all its remaining length are merely surveyors ' lines , over which people may walk back and forth without any consciousness of their presence .
no part of this line can be made any more difficult to pass by writing it down on paper or parchment as a national boundary .
the fact of separation , if it comes , gives up on the part of the seceding section the fugitive - slave clause , along with all other constitutional obligations upon the section seceded from , while i should expect no treaty stipulation would ever be made to take its place .
but there is another difficulty .
the great interior region bounded east by the alleghanies , north by the british dominions , west by the rocky mountains , and south by the line along which the culture of corn and cotton meets , and which includes part of virginia , part of tennessee , all of kentucky , ohio , indiana , michigan , wisconsin , illinois , missouri , kansas , iowa , minnesota , and the territories of dakota , nebraska , and part of colorado , already has above 10,000,000 people , and will have 50,000,000 within fifty years if not prevented by any political folly or mistake .
it contains more than one - third of the country owned by the united states -- certainly more than 1,000,000 square miles .
once half as populous as massachusetts already is , it would have more than 75,000,000 people .
a glance at the map shows that , territorially speaking , it is the great body of the republic .
the other parts are but marginal borders to it .
the magnificent region sloping west from the rocky mountains to the pacific being the deepest and also the richest in undeveloped resources .
in the production of provisions grains , grasses , and all which proceed from them this great interior region is naturally one of the most important in the world .
ascertain from the statistics the small proportion of the region which has as yet been brought into cultivation , and also the large and rapidly increasing amount of its products , and we shall be overwhelmed with the magnitude of the prospect presented .
and yet this region has no seacoast -- touches no ocean anywhere .
as part of one nation , its people now find , and may forever find , their way to europe by new york , to south america and africa by new orleans , and to asia by san francisco ; but separate our common country into two nations , as designed by the present rebellion , and every man of this great interior region is thereby cut off from some one or more of these outlets , not perhaps by a physical barrier , but by embarrassing and onerous trade regulations .
and this is true , wherever a dividing or boundary line may be fixed .
place it between the now free and slave country , or place it south of kentucky or north of ohio , and still the truth remains that none south of it can trade to any port or place north of it , and none north of it can trade to any port or place south of it , except upon terms dictated by a government foreign to them .
these outlets , east , west , and south , are indispensable to the well - being of the people inhabiting and to inhabit this vast interior region .
which of the three may be the best is no proper question .
all are better than either , and all of right belong to that people and to their successors forever .
true to themselves , they will not ask where a line of separation shall be , but will vow rather that there shall be no such line .
nor are the marginal regions less interested in these communications to and through them to the great outside world .
they , too , and each of them , must have access to this egypt of the west without paying toll at the crossing of any national boundary .
our national strife springs not from our permanent part ; not from the land we inhabit : not from our national homestead .
there is no possible severing of this but would multiply and not mitigate evils among us .
in all its adaptations and aptitudes it demands union and abhors separation .
in fact , it would ere long force reunion , however much of blood and treasure the separation might have cost .
our strife pertains to ourselves -- to the passing generations of men -- and it can without convulsion be hushed forever with the passing of one generation .
in this view i recommend the adoption of the following resolution and articles amendatory to the constitution of the united states : 
 resolved by the senate and house of representatives of the united states of america in congress assembled ( two - thirds of both houses 
 concurring ) , that the following articles be proposed to the legislatures ( or conventions ) of the several states as amendments to the 
 constitution of the united states , all or any of which articles , when ratified by three - fourths of the said legislatures ( or conventions ) , to be 
 valid as part or parts of the said constitution , viz : 
 art . -- .
every state wherein slavery now exists which shall abolish the same therein at any time or times before the 1st day of january . ,
a. d. 1900 , shall receive compensation from the united states as follows , to wit : 
 the president of the united states shall deliver to every such state bonds of the united states bearing interest at the rate of per cent per annum to an amount equal to the aggregate sum of____for each slave shown to have been therein by the eighth census of the united states , said bonds to be delivered to such state by installments or in one parcel at the completion of the abolishment , accordingly as the same shall have been gradual or at one time within such state ; and interest shall begin to run upon any such bond only from the proper time of its delivery as aforesaid .
any state having received bonds as aforesaid and afterwards reintroducing or tolerating slavery therein shall refund to the united states the bonds so received , or the value thereof , and all interest paid thereon .
art -- all slaves who shall have enjoyed actual freedom by the chances of the war at any time before the end of the rebellion shall be forever free ; but all owners of such who shall not have been disloyal shall be compensated for them at the same rates as is provided for states adopting abolishment of slavery , but in such way that no slave shall be twice accounted for .
art . --
congress may appropriate money and otherwise provide for colonizing free colored persons with their own consent at any place or places without the united states .
i beg indulgence to discuss these proposed articles at some length .
without slavery the rebellion could never have existed ; without slavery it could not continue .
among the friends of the union there is great diversity of sentiment and of policy in regard to slavery and the african race amongst us .
some would perpetuate slavery ; some would abolish it suddenly and without compensation ; some would abolish it gradually and with compensation : some would remove the freed people from us , and some would retain them with us ; and there are yet other minor diversities .
because of these diversities we waste much strength in struggles among ourselves .
by mutual concession we should harmonize and act together .
this would be compromise , but it would be compromise among the friends and not with the enemies of the union .
these articles are intended to embody a plan of such mutual concessions .
if the plan shall be adopted , it is assumed that emancipation will follow , at least in several of the states .
as to the first article , the main points are , first , the emancipation ; secondly , the length of time for consummating it ( thirty - seven years ) ; and , thirdly , the compensation .
the emancipation will be unsatisfactory to the advocates of perpetual slavery , but the length of time should greatly mitigate their dissatisfaction .
the time spares both races from the evils of sudden derangement -- in fact , from the necessity of any derangement -- while most of those whose habitual course of thought will be disturbed by the measure will have passed away before its consummation .
they will never see it .
another class will hail the prospect of emancipation , but will deprecate the length of time .
they will feel that it gives too little to the now living slaves .
but it really gives them much .
it saves them from the vagrant destitution which must largely attend immediate emancipation in localities where their numbers are very great , and it gives the inspiring assurance that their posterity shall be free forever .
the plan leaves to each state choosing to act under it to abolish slavery now or at the end of the century , or at any intermediate time , or by degrees extending over the whole or any part of the period , and it obliges no two states to proceed alike .
it also provides for compensation , and generally the mode of making it .
this , it would seem , must further mitigate the dissatisfaction of those who favor perpetual slavery , and especially of those who are to receive the compensation .
doubtless some of those who are to pay and not to receive will object .
yet the measure is both just and economical .
in a certain sense the liberation of slaves is the destruction of property -- property acquired by descent or by purchase , the same as any other property .
it is no less true for having been often said that the people of the south are not more responsible for the original introduction of this property than are the people of the north ; and when it is remembered how unhesitatingly we all use cotton and sugar and share the profits of dealing in them , it may not be quite safe to say that the south has been more responsible than the north for its continuance .
if , then , for a common object this property is to be sacrificed , is it not just that it be done at a common charge ?
and if with less money , or money more easily paid , we can preserve the benefits of the union by this means than we can by the war alone , is it not also economical to do it ?
let us consider it , then .
let us ascertain the sum we have expended in the war since compensated emancipation was proposed last march , and consider whether if that measure had been promptly accepted by even some of the slave states the same sum would not have done more to close the war than has been otherwise done .
if so , the measure would save money , and in that view would be a prudent and economical measure .
certainly it is not so easy to pay something as it is to pay nothing , but it is easier to pay a large sum than it is to pay a larger one .
and it is easier to pay any sum when we are able than it is to pay it before we are able .
the war requires large sums , and requires them at once .
the aggregate sum necessary for compensated emancipation of course would be large .
but it would require no ready cash , nor the bonds even any faster than the emancipation progresses .
this might not , and probably would not , close before the end of the thirty - seven years .
at that time we shall probably have a hundred millions of people to share the burden , instead of thirty - one millions as now .
and not only so , but the increase of our population may be expected to continue for a long time after that period as rapidly as before , because our territory will not have become full .
i do not state this inconsiderately .
at the same ratio of increase which we have maintained , on an average , from our first national census , in 1790 , until that of 1860 , we should in 1900 have a population of 103,208,415 .
and why may we not continue that ratio far beyond that period ?
our abundant room , our broad national homestead , is our ample resource .
were our territory as limited as are the british isles , very certainly our population could not expand as stated .
instead of receiving the foreign born as now , we should be compelled to send part of the native born away .
but such is not our condition .
we have 2,963,000 square miles .
europe has 3,800,000 , with a population averaging 73 1/3 persons to the square mile .
why may not our country at some time average as many ?
is it less fertile ?
has it more waste surface by mountains , rivers , lakes , deserts , or other causes ?
is it inferior to europe in any natural advantage ?
if , then , we are at some time to be as populous as europe , how soon ?
as to when this may be , we can judge by the past and the present ; as to when it will be , if ever , depends much on whether we maintain the union .
several of our states are already above the average of europe 73 1/3 to the square mile .
massachusetts has 157 ; rhode island , 133 ; connecticut , 99 ; new york and new jersey , each 80 .
also two other great states , pennsylvania and ohio , are not far below , the former having 63 and the latter 59 .
the states already above the european average , except new york , have increased in as rapid a ratio since passing that point as ever before , while no one of them is equal to some other parts of our country in natural capacity for sustaining a dense population .
taking the nation in the aggregate , and we find its population and ratio of increase for the several decennial periods to be as follows : 
 year population ratio of increase .
percent .
1790 3,929,827 .......... 
 1800 5,304,937 35.02 
 1810 7,239,814 36.45 
 1820 9,638,131 36.45 
 1830 12,866,020 33.49 
 1840 17,069,453 32.67 
 1850 23,191,876 35.87 
 1860 31,443,790 35.58 
 this shows an average decennial increase of 34.60 per cent in population through the seventy years from our first to our last census vet taken .
it is seen that the ratio of increase at no one of these seven periods is either 2 per cent below or 2 per cent above the average , thus showing how inflexible , and consequently how reliable , the law of increase in our case is .
assuming that it will continue , it gives the following results : 
 year population 
 1870 42,323,341 
 1880 56,967,216 
 1890 76,677,872 
 1900 103,208,415 
 1910 138,918,526 
 1920 186,984,335 
 1930 251,680,914 
 these figures show that our country may be as populous as europe now is at some point between 1920 and 1930 -- say about 1925 -- our territory , at 73 1/3 persons to the square mile , being of capacity to contain 217,186,000 .
and we will reach this , too , if we do not ourselves relinquish the chance by the folly and evils of disunion or by long and exhausting war springing from the only great element of national discord among us .
while it can not be foreseen exactly how much one huge example of secession , breeding lesser ones indefinitely , would retard population , civilization , and prosperity , no one can doubt that the extent of it would be very great and injurious .
the proposed emancipation would shorten the war , perpetuate peace , insure this increase of population , and proportionately the wealth of the country .
with these we should pay all the emancipation would cost , together with our other debt , easier than we should pay our other debt without it .
if we had allowed our old national debt to run at 6 per cent per annum , simple interest , from the end of our revolutionary struggle until to - day , without paying anything on either principal or interest , each man of us would owe less upon that debt now than each man owed upon it then ; and this because our increase of men through the whole period has been greater than 6 per cent -- has run faster than the interest upon the debt .
thus time alone relieves a debtor nation , so long as its population increases faster than unpaid interest accumulates on its debt .
this fact would be no excuse for delaying payment of what is justly due , but it shows the great importance of time in this connection -- the great advantage of a policy by which we shall not have to pay until we number 100,000,000 what by a different policy we would have to pay now , when we number but 31,000,000 .
in a word , it shows that a dollar will be much harder to pay for the war than will be a dollar for emancipation on the proposed plan .
and then the latter will cost no blood , no precious life .
it will be a saving of both .
as to the second article , i think it would be impracticable to return to bondage the class of persons therein contemplated .
some of them , doubtless , in the property sense belong to loyal owners , and hence provision is made in this article for compensating such .
the third article relates to the future of the freed people .
it does not oblige , but merely authorizes congress to aid in colonizing such as may consent .
this ought not to be regarded as objectionable on the one hand or on the other , insomuch as it comes to nothing unless by the mutual consent of the people to be deported and the american voters , through their representatives in congress .
i can not make it better known than it already is that i strongly favor colonization ; and yet i wish to say there is an objection urged against free colored persons remaining in the country which is largely imaginary , if not sometimes malicious .
it is insisted that their presence would injure and displace white labor and white laborers .
if there ever could be a proper time for mere catch arguments , that time surely is not now .
in times like the present men should utter nothing for which they would not willingly be responsible through time and in eternity .
is it true , then , that colored people can displace any more white labor by being free than by remaining slaves ?
if they stay in their old places , they jostle no white laborers ; if they leave their old places , they leave them open to white laborers .
logically , there is neither more nor less of it .
emancipation , even without deportation , would probably enhance the wages of white labor , and very surely would not reduce them .
thus the customary amount of labor would still have to be performed -- the freed people would surely not do more than their old proportion of it , and very probably for a time would do less , leaving an increased part to white laborers , bringing their labor into greater demand , and consequently enhancing the wages of it .
with deportation , even to a limited extent , enhanced wages to white labor is mathematically certain .
labor is like any other commodity in the market -- increase the demand for it and you increase the price of it .
reduce the supply of black labor by colonizing the black laborer out of the country , and by precisely so much you increase the demand for and wages of white labor .
but it is dreaded that the freed people will swarm forth and cover the whole land .
are they not already in the land ?
will liberation make them any more numerous ?
equally distributed among the whites of the whole country , and there would be but one colored to seven whites .
could the one in any way greatly disturb the seven ?
there are many communities now having more than one free colored person to seven whites and this without any apparent consciousness of evil from it .
the district of columbia and the states of maryland and delaware are all in this condition .
the district has more than one free colored to six whites , and yet in its frequent petitions to congress i believe it has never presented the presence of free colored persons as one of its grievances .
but why should emancipation south send the free people north ?
people of any color seldom run unless there be something to run from .
hertofore colored people to some extent have fled north from bondage , and now , perhaps , from both bondage and destitution .
but if gradual emancipation and deportation be adopted , they will have neither to flee from .
their old masters will give them wages at least until new laborers can be procured , and the freedmen in turn will gladly give their labor for the wages till new homes can be found for them in congenial climes and with people of their own blood and race .
this proposition can be trusted on the mutual interests involved .
and in any event , can not the north decide for itself whether to receive them ?
again , as practice proves more than theory in any case , has there been any irruption of colored people northward because of the abolishment of slavery in this district last spring ?
what i have said of the proportion of free colored persons to the whites in the district is from the census of 1860 , having no reference to persons called contrabands nor to those made free by the act of congress abolishing slavery here .
the plan consisting of these articles is recommended , not but that a restoration of the national authority would be accepted without its adoption .
nor will the war nor proceedings under the proclamation of september 22 , 1862 , be stayed because of the recommendation of this plan .
its timely adoption , i doubt not , would bring restoration , and thereby stay both .
and notwithstanding this plan , the recommendation that congress provide by law for compensating any state which may adopt emancipation before this plan shall have been acted upon is hereby earnestly renewed .
such would be only an advance part of the plan , and the same arguments apply to both .
this plan is recommended as a means , not in exclusion of , but additional to , all others for restoring and preserving the national authority throughout the union .
the subject is presented exclusively in its economical aspect .
the plan would , i am confident , secure peace more speedily and maintain it more permanently than can be done by force alone , while all it would cost , considering amounts and manner of payment and times of payment , would be easier paid than will be the additional cost of the war if we rely solely upon force .
it is much , very much , that it would cost no blood at all .
the plan is proposed as permanent constitutional law .
it can not become such without the concurrence of , first , two - thirds of congress , and afterwards three - fourths of the states .
the requisite three - fourths of the states will necessarily include seven of the slave states .
their concurrence , if obtained , will give assurance of their severally adopting emancipation at no very distant day upon the new constitutional terms .
this assurance would end the struggle now and save the union forever .
i do not forget the gravity which should characterize a paper addressed to the congress of the nation by the chief magistrate of the nation , nor do i forget that some of you are my seniors , nor that many of you have more experience than i in the conduct of public affairs .
yet i trust that in view of the great responsibility resting upon me you will perceive no want of respect to yourselves in any undue earnestness i may seem to display .
is it doubted , then , that the plan i propose , if adopted , would shorten the war , and thus lessen its expenditure of money and of blood ?
is it doubted that it would restore the national authority and national prosperity and perpetuate both indefinitely ?
is it doubted that we here -- congress and executive can secure its adoption ?
will not the good people respond to a united and earnest appeal from us ?
can we , can they , by any other means so certainly or so speedily assure these vital objects ?
we can succeed only by concert .
it is not " can any of us imagine better ? "
but " can we all do better ? "
object whatsoever is possible , still the question recurs , " can we do better ? "
the dogmas of the quiet past are inadequate to the stormy present .
the occasion is piled high with difficulty , and we must rise with the occasion .
as our case is new , so we must think anew and act anew .
we must disenthrall ourselves , and then we shall save our country .
fellow - citizens , we can not escape history .
we of this congress and this administration will be remembered in spite of ourselves .
no personal significance or insignificance can spare one or another of us .
the fiery trial through which we pass will light us down in honor or dishonor to the latest generation .
we say we are for the union .
the world will not forget that we say this .
we know how to save the union .
the world knows we do know how to save it .
we , even we here , hold the power and bear the responsibility .
in giving freedom to the slave we assure freedom to the free -- honorable alike in what we give and what we preserve .
we shall nobly save or meanly lose the last best hope of earth .
other means may succeed ; this could not fail .
the way is plain , peaceful , generous , just -- a way which if followed the world will forever applaud and god must forever bless .

by the president of the united states of america : a proclamation .
whereas , on the twenty second day of september , in the year of our lord one thousand eight hundred and sixty two , a proclamation was issued by the president of the united states , containing , among other things , the following , towit : `` that on the first day of january , in the year of our lord one thousand eight hundred and sixty - three , all persons held as slaves within any state or designated part of a state , the people whereof shall then be in rebellion against the united states , shall be then , thenceforward , and forever free ; and the executive government of the united states , including the military and naval authority thereof , will recognize and maintain the freedom of such persons , and will do no act or acts to repress such persons , or any of them , in any efforts they may make for their actual freedom .
`` that the executive will , on the first day of january aforesaid , by proclamation , designate the states and parts of states , if any , in which the people thereof , respectively , shall then be in rebellion against the united states ; and the fact that any state , or the people thereof , shall on that day be , in good faith , represented in the congress of the united states by members chosen thereto at elections wherein a majority of the qualified voters of such state shall have participated , shall , in the absence of strong countervailing testimony , be deemed conclusive evidence that such state , and the people thereof , are not then in rebellion against the united states . ''
now , therefore i , abraham lincoln , president of the united states , by virtue of the power in me vested as commander - in - chief , of the army and navy of the united states in time of actual armed rebellion against authority and government of the united states , and as a fit and necessary war measure for suppressing said rebellion , do , on this first day of january , in the year of our lord one thousand eight hundred and sixty three , and in accordance with my purpose so to do publicly proclaimed for the full period of one hundred days , from the day first above mentioned , order and designate as the states and parts of states wherein the people thereof respectively , are this day in rebellion against the united states , the following , towit : arkansas , texas , louisiana , ( except the parishes of st. bernard , plaquemines , jefferson , st. johns , st. charles , st. james [ , ] ascension , assumption , terrebonne , lafourche , st. mary , st. martin , and orleans , including the city of new - orleans ) mississippi , alabama , florida , georgia , south - carolina , north - carolina , and virginia , ( except the fortyeight counties designated as west virginia , and also the counties of berkley , accomac , northampton , elizabeth - city , york , princess ann , and norfolk , including the cities of norfolk and portsmouth [ ) ] ; and which excepted parts are , for the present , left precisely as if this proclamation were not issued .
and by virtue of the power , and for the purpose aforesaid , i do order and declare that all persons held as slaves within said designated states , and parts of states , are , and henceforward shall be free ; and that the executive government of the united states , including the military and naval authorities thereof , will recognize and maintain the freedom of said persons .
and i hereby enjoin upon the people so declared to be free to abstain from all violence , unless in necessary self - defence ; and i recommend to them that , in all cases when allowed , they labor faithfully for reasonable wages .
and i further declare and make known , that such persons of suitable condition , will be received into the armed service of the united states to garrison forts , positions , stations , and other places , and to man vessels of all sorts in said service .
and upon this act , sincerely believed to be an act of justice , warranted by the constitution , upon military necessity , i invoke the considerate judgment of mankind , and the gracious favor of almighty god .
in witness whereof , i have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the united states to be affixed .
done at the city of washington , this first day of january , in the year of our lord one thousand eight hundred and sixty three , and of the independence of the united states of america the eighty - seventh .

fellow - citizens of the senate and house of representatives : in the midst of unprecedented political troubles we have cause of great gratitude to god for unusual good health and most abundant harvests .
you will not be surprised to learn that in the peculiar exigencies of the times our intercourse with foreign nations has been attended with profound solicitude , chiefly turning upon our own domestic affairs .
a disloyal portion of the american people have during the whole year been engaged in an attempt to divide and destroy the union .
a nation which endures factious domestic division is exposed to disrespect abroad , and one party , if not both , is sure sooner or later to invoke foreign intervention .
nations thus tempted to interfere are not always able to resist the counsels of seeming expediency and ungenerous ambition , although measures adopted under such influences seldom fail to be unfortunate and injurious to those adopting them .
the disloyal citizens of the united states who have offered the ruin of our country in return for the aid and comfort which they have invoked abroad have received less patronage and encouragement than they probably expected .
if it were just to suppose , as the insurgents have seemed to assume , that foreign nations in this case , discarding all moral , social , and treaty obligations , would act solely and selfishly for the most speedy restoration of commerce , including especially the acquisition of cotton , those nations appear as yet not to have seen their way to their object more directly or clearly through the destruction than through the preservation of the union .
if we could dare to believe that foreign nations are actuated by no higher principle than this , i am quite sure a sound argument could be made to show them that they can reach their aim more readily and easily by aiding to crush this rebellion than by giving encouragement to it .
the principal lever relied on by the insurgents for exciting foreign nations to hostility against us , as already intimated , is the embarrassment of commerce .
those nations , however , not improbably saw from the first that it was the union which made as well our foreign as our domestic commerce .
they can scarcely have failed to perceive that the effort for disunion produces the existing difficulty , and that one strong nation promises more durable peace and a more extensive , valuable , and reliable commerce than can the same nation broken into hostile fragments .
it is not my purpose to review our discussions with foreign states , because , whatever might be their wishes or dispositions , the integrity of our country and the stability of our government mainly depend not upon them , but on the loyalty , virtue , patriotism , and intelligence of the american people .
the correspondence itself , with the usual reservations , is herewith submitted .
i venture to hope it will appear that we have practiced prudence and liberality toward foreign powers , averting causes of irritation and with firmness maintaining our own rights and honor .
since , however , it is apparent that here , as in every other state , foreign dangers necessarily attend domestic difficulties , i recommend that adequate and ample measures be adopted for maintaining the public defenses on every side .
while under this general recommendation provision for defending our seacoast line readily occurs to the mind , i also in the same connection ask the attention of congress to our great lakes and rivers .
it is believed that some fortifications and depots of arms and munitions , with harbor and navigation improvements , all at well - selected points upon these , would be of great importance to the national defense and preservation .
i ask attention to the views of the secretary of war , expressed in his report , upon the same general subject .
i deem it of importance that the loyal regions of east tennessee and western north carolina should be connected with kentucky and other faithful parts of the union by railroad .
i therefore recommend , as a military measure , that congress provide for the construction of such road as speedily as possible .
kentucky no doubt will cooperate , and through her legislature make the most judicious selection of a line .
the northern terminus must connect with some existing railroad , and whether the route shall be from lexington or nicholasville to the cumberland gap , or from lebanon to the tennessee line , in the direction of knoxville , or on some still different line , can easily be determined .
kentucky and the general government cooperating , the work can be completed in a very short time , and when done it will be not only of vast present usefulness , but also a valuable permanent improvement , worth its cost in all the future .
some treaties , designed chiefly for the interests of commerce , and having no grave political importance , have been negotiated , and will be submitted to the senate for their consideration .
although we have failed to induce some of the commercial powers to adopt a desirable melioration of the rigor of maritime war , we have removed all obstructions from the way of this humane reform except such as are merely of temporary and accidental occurrence .
i invite your attention to the correspondence between her britannic majesty 's minister accredited to this government and the secretary of state relative to the detention of the british ship perthshire in june last by the united states steamer massachusetts for a supposed breach of the blockade .
as this detention was occasioned by an obvious misapprehension of the facts , and as justice requires that we should commit no belligerent act not rounded in strict right as sanctioned by public law , i recommend that an appropriation be made to satisfy the reasonable demand of the owners of the vessel for her detention .
i repeat the recommendation of my predecessor in his annual message to congress in december last in regard to the disposition of the surplus which will probably remain after satisfying the claims of american citizens against china , pursuant to the awards of the commissioners under the act of the 3d of march , 1859 .
if , however , it should not be deemed advisable to carry that recommendation into effect , i would suggest that authority be given for investing the principal , over the proceeds of the surplus referred to , in good securities , with a view to the satisfaction of such other just claims of our citizens against china as are not unlikely to arise hereafter in the course of our extensive trade with that empire .
by the act of the 5th of august last congress authorized the president to instruct the commanders of suitable vessels to defend themselves against and to capture pirates .
this authority has been exercised in a single instance only .
for the more effectual protection of our extensive and valuable commerce in the eastern seas especially , it seems to me that it would also be advisable to authorize the commanders of sailing vessels to recapture any prizes which pirates may make of united states vessels and their cargoes , and the consular courts now established by law in eastern countries to adjudicate the cases in the event that this should not be objected to by the local authorities .
if any good reason exists why we should persevere longer in withholding our recognition of the independence and sovereignty of hayti and liberia , i am unable to discern it .
unwilling , however , to inaugurate a novel policy in regard to them without the approbation of congress , i submit for your consideration the expediency of an appropriation for maintaining a charge ' d'affaires near each of those new states .
it does not admit of doubt that important commercial advantages might be secured by favorable treaties with them .
the operations of the treasury during the period which has elapsed since your adjournment have been conducted with signal success .
the patriotism of the people has placed at the disposal of the government the large means demanded by the public exigencies .
much of the national loan has been taken by citizens of the industrial classes , whose confidence in their country 's faith and zeal for their country 's deliverance from present peril have induced them to contribute to the support of the government the whole of their limited acquisitions .
this fact imposes peculiar obligations to economy in disbursement and energy in action .
the revenue from all sources , including loans , for the financial year ending on the 30th of june , 1861 , was $ 86,835,900.27 , and the expenditures for the same period , including payments on account of the public debt , were $ 84,578,834.47 , leaving a balance in the treasury on the 1st of july of 52,257,065.80 .
for the first quarter of the financial year ending on the 30th of september , 1861 , the receipts from all sources , including the balance of the 1st of july , were $ 102,532,509.27 , and the expenses $ 98,239,733.09 , leaving a balance on the 1st of october , 1861 , of $ 4,292,776.18.estimates for the remaining three quarters of the year and for the financial year 1863 , together with his views of ways and means for meeting the demands contemplated by them , will be submitted to congress by the secretary of the treasury .
it is gratifying to know that the expenditures made necessary by the rebellion are not beyond the resources of the loyal people , and to believe that the same patriotism which has thus far sustained the government will continue to sustain it till peace and union shall again bless the land .
i respectfully refer to the report of the secretary of war for information respecting the numerical strength of the army and for recommendations having in view an increase of its efficiency and the well - being of the various branches of the service intrusted to his care .
it is gratifying to know that the patriotism of the people has proved equal to the occasion , and that the number of troops tendered greatly exceeds the force which congress authorized me to call into the field .
i refer with pleasure to those portions of his report which make allusion to the creditable degree of discipline already attained by our troops and to the excellent sanitary condition of the entire army .
the recommendation of the secretary for an organization of the militia upon a uniform basis is a subject of vital importance to the future safety of the country , and is commended to the serious attention of congress .
the large addition to the regular army , in connection with the defection that has so considerably diminished the number of its officers , gives peculiar importance to his recommendation for increasing the corps of cadets to the greatest capacity of the military academy .
by mere omission , i presume , congress has failed to provide chaplains for hospitals occupied by volunteers .
this subject was brought to my notice , and i was induced to draw up the form of a letter , one copy of which , properly addressed , has been delivered to each of the persons , and at the dates respectively named and stated in a schedule , containing also the form of the letter marked a , and herewith transmitted .
these gentlemen , i understand , entered upon the duties designated at the times respectively stated in the schedule , and have labored faithfully therein ever since .
i therefore recommend that they be compensated at the same rate as chaplains in the army .
i further suggest that general provision be made for chaplains to serve at hospitals , as well as with regiments .
the report of the secretary of the navy presents in detail the operations of that branch of the service , the activity and energy which have characterized its administration , and the results of measures to increase its efficiency and power .
such have been the additions , by construction and purchase , that it may almost be said a navy has been created and brought into service since our difficulties commenced .
besides blockading our extensive coast , squadrons larger than ever before assembled under our flag have been put afloat and performed deeds which have increased our naval renown .
i would invite special attention to the recommendation of the secretary for a more perfect organization of the navy by introducing additional grades in the service .
the present organization is defective and unsatisfactory , and the suggestions submitted by the department will , it is believed , if adopted , obviate the difficulties alluded to , promote harmony , and increase the efficiency of the navy .
there are three vacancies on the bench of the supreme court -- two by the decease of justices daniel and mclean and one by the resignation of justice campbell .
i have so far forborne making nominations to fill these vacancies for reasons which i will now state .
two of the outgoing judges resided within the states now overrun by revolt , so that if successors were appointed in the same localities they could not now serve upon their circuits ; and many of the most competent men there probably would not take the personal hazard of accepting to serve , even here , upon the supreme bench .
i have been unwilling to throw all the appointments northward , thus disabling myself from doing justice to the south on the return of peace ; although i may remark that to transfer to the north one which has heretofore been in the south would not , with reference to territory and population , be unjust .
during the long and brilliant judicial career of judge mclean his circuit grew into an empire altogether too large for any one judge to give the courts therein more than a nominal attendance -- rising in population from 1,470,018 in 1830 to 6,151,405 in 1860.besides this , the country generally has outgrown our present judicial system .
if uniformity was at all intended , the system requires that all the states shall be accommodated with circuit courts , attended by supreme judges , while , in fact , wisconsin , minnesota , iowa , kansas , florida , texas , california , and oregon have never had any such courts .
nor can this well be remedied without a change in the system , because the adding of judges to the supreme court , enough for the accommodation of all parts of the country with circuit courts , would create a court altogether too numerous for a judicial body of any sort .
and the evil , if it be one , will increase as new states come into the union .
circuit courts are useful or they are not useful .
if useful , no state should be denied them ; if not useful , no state should have them .
let them be provided for all or abolished as to all .
three modifications occur to me , either of which , i think , would be an improvement upon our present system .
let the supreme court be of convenient number in every event ; then , first , let the whole country be divided into circuits of convenient size , the supreme judges to serve in a number of them corresponding to their own number , and independent circuit judges be provided for all the rest ; or , secondly , let the supreme judges be relieved from circuit duties and circuit judges provided for all the circuits ; or , thirdly , dispense with circuit courts altogether , leaving the judicial functions wholly to the district courts and an independent supreme court .
i respectfully recommend to the consideration of congress the present condition of the statute laws , with the hope that congress will be able to find an easy remedy for many of the inconveniences and evils which constantly embarrass those engaged in the practical administration of them .
since the organization of the government congress has enacted some 5,000 acts and joint resolutions , which fill more than 6,000 closely printed pages and are scattered through many volumes .
many of these acts have been drawn in haste and without sufficient caution , so that their provisions are often obscure in themselves or in conflict with each other , or at least so doubtful as to render it very difficult for even the best - informed persons to ascertain precisely what the statute law really is .
it seems to me very important that the statute laws should be made as plain and intelligible as possible , and be reduced to as small a compass as may consist with the fullness and precision of the will of the legislature and the perspicuity of its language .
this well done would , i think , greatly facilitate the labors of those whose duty it is to assist in the administration of the laws , and would be a lasting benefit to the people , by placing before them in a more accessible and intelligible form the laws which so deeply concern their interests and their duties .
i am informed by some whose opinions i respect that all the acts of congress now in force and of a permanent and general nature might be revised and rewritten so as to be embraced in one volume ( or at most two volumes ) of ordinary and convenient size ; and i respectfully recommend to congress to consider of the subject , and if my suggestion be approved to devise such plan as to their wisdom shall seem most proper for the attainment of the end proposed .
one of the unavoidable consequences of the present insurrection is the entire suppression in many places of all the ordinary means of administering civil justice by the officers and in the forms of existing law .
this is the case , in whole or in part , in all the insurgent states ; and as our armies advance upon and take possession of parts of those states the practical evil becomes more apparent .
there are no courts nor officers to whom the citizens of other states may apply for the enforcement of their lawful claims against citizens of the insurgent states , and there is a vast amount of debt constituting such claims .
some have estimated it as high as $ 200,000,000 , due in large part from insurgents in open rebellion to loyal citizens who are even now making great sacrifices in the discharge of their patriotic duty to support the government .
under these circumstances i have been urgently solicited to establish by military power courts to administer summary justice in such cases i have thus far declined to do it , not because i had any doubt that the end proposed -- the collection of the debts -- was just and right in itself , but because i have been unwilling to go beyond the pressure of necessity in the unusual exercise of power .
but the powers of congress , i suppose , are equal to the anomalous occasion , and therefore i refer the whole matter to congress , with the hope that a plan may be devised for the administration of justice in all such parts of the insurgent states and territories as may be under the control of this government , whether by a voluntary return to allegiance and order or by the power of our arms ; this , however , not to be a permanent institution , but a temporary substitute , and to cease as soon as the ordinay courts can be reestablished in peace .
it is important that some more convenient means should be provided , if possible , for the adjustment of claims against the government , especially in view of their increased number by reason of the war .
it is as much the duty of government to render prompt justice against itself in favor of citizens as it is to administer the same between private individuals .
the investigation and adjudication of claims in their nature belong to the judicial department .
besides , it is apparent that the attention of congress will be more than usually engaged for some time to come with great national questions .
it was intended by the organization of the court of claims mainly to remove this branch of business from the halls of congress : but while the court has proved to be an effective and valuable means of investigation , it in great degree fails to effect the object of its creation for want of power to make its judgments final .
fully aware of the delicacy , not to say the danger , of the subject , i commend to your careful consideration whether this power of making judgments final may not properly be given to the court , reserving the right of appeal on questions of law to the supreme court , with such other provisions as experience may have shown to be necessary .
i ask attention to the report of the postmaster - general , the following being a summary statement of the condition of the department : the revenue from all sources during the fiscal year ending june 30 , 1861 , including the annual permanent appropriation of $ 700,000 for the transportation of " free mail matter , " was $ 9,049,296.40 , being about 2 per cent less than the revenue for 1860.the expenditures were $ 13,606,759.11 , showing a decrease of more than 8 per cent as compared with those of the previous year and leaving an excess of expenditure over the revenue for the last fiscal year of $ 4,557,462.71.the gross revenue for the year ending june 30 , 1863 , is estimated at an increase of 4 per cent on that of 1861 , making $ 8,683,000 , to which should be added the earnings of the department in carrying free matter , viz , $ 700,000 , making $ 9,383,000.the total expenditures for 1863 are estimated at $ 12,528,000 , leaving an estimated deficiency of $ 3,145,000 to be supplied from the treasury in addition to the permanent appropriation .
the present insurrection shows , i think , that the extension of this district across the potomac river at the time of establishing the capital here was eminently wise , and consequently that the relinquishment of that portion of it which lies within the state of virginia was unwise and dangerous .
i submit for your consideration the expediency of regaining that part of the district and the restoration of the original boundaries thereof through negotiations with the state of virginia .
the report of the secretary of the interior , with the accompanying documents , exhibits the condition of the several branches of the public business pertaining to that department .
the depressing influences of the insurrection have been specially felt in the operations of the patent and general land offices .
the cash receipts from the sales of public lands during the past year have exceeded the expenses of our land system only about $ 200,000 .
the sales have been entirely suspended in the southern states , while the interruptions to the business of the country and the diversion of large numbers of men from labor to military service have obstructed settlements in the new states and territories of the northwest .
the receipts of the patent office have declined in nine months about $ 100,000 , rendering a large reduction of the force employed necessary to make it self - sustaining .
the demands upon the pension office will be largely increased by the insurrection .
numerous applications for pensions , based upon the casualties of the existing war , have already been made .
there is reason to believe that many who are now upon the pension rolls and in receipt of the bounty of the government are in the ranks of the insurgent army or giving them aid and comfort .
the secretary of the interior has directed a suspension of the payment of the pensions of such persons upon proof of their disloyalty .
i recommend that congress authorize that officer to cause the names of such persons to be stricken from the pension rolls .
the relations of the government with the indian tribes have been greatly disturbed by the insurrection , especially in the southern superintendency and in that of new mexico .
the indian country south of kansas is in the possession of insurgents from texas and arkansas .
the agents of the united states appointed since the 4th of march for this superintendency have been unable to reach their posts , while the most of those who were in office before that time have espoused the insurrectionary cause , and assume to exercise the powers of agents by virtue of commissions from the insurrectionists .
it has been stated in the public press that a portion of those indians have been organized as a military force and are attached to the army of the insurgents .
although the government has no official information upon this subject , letters have been written to the commissioner of indian affairs by several prominent chiefs giving assurance of their loyalty to the united states and expressing a wish for the presence of federal troops to protect them .
it is believed that upon the repossession of the country by the federal forces the indians will readily cease all hostile demonstrations and resume their former relations to the government .
agriculture , confessedly the largest interest of the nation , has not a department nor a bureau , but a clerkship only , assigned to it in the government .
while it is fortunate that this great interest is so independent in its nature as to not have demanded and extorted more from the government , i respectfully ask congress to consider whether something more can not be given voluntarily with general advantage .
annual reports exhibiting the condition of our agriculture , commerce , and manufactures would present a fund of information of great practical value to the country .
while i make no suggestion as to details , i venture the opinion that an agricultural and statistical bureau might profitably be organized .
the execution of the laws for the suppression of the african slave trade has been confided to the department of the interior .
it is a subject of gratulation that the efforts which have been made for the suppression of this inhuman traffic have been recently attended with unusual success .
five vessels being fitted out for the slave trade have been seized and condemned .
two mates of vessels engaged in the trade and one person in equipping a vessel as a slaver have been convicted and subjected to the penalty of fine and imprisonment , and one captain , taken with a cargo of africans on board his vessel , has been convicted of the highest grade of offense under our laws , the punishment of which is death .
the territories of colorado , dakota , and nevada , created by the last congress , have been organized , and civil administration has been inaugurated therein under auspices especially gratifying when it is considered that the leaven of treason was found existing in some of these new countries when the federal officers arrived there .
the abundant natural resources of these territories , with the security and protection afforded by organized government , will doubtless invite to them a large immigration when peace shall restore the business of the country to its accustomed channels .
i submit the resolutions of the legislature of colorado , which evidence the patriotic spirit of the people of the territory .
so far the authority of the united states has been upheld in all the territories , as it is hoped it will be in the future .
i commend their interests and defense to the enlightened and generous care of congress .
i recommend to the favorable consideration of congress the interests of the district of columbia .
the insurrection has been the cause of much suffering and sacrifice to its inhabitants , and as they have no representative in congress that body should not overlook their just claims upon the government .
at your late session a joint resolution was adopted authorizing the president to take measures for facilitating a proper representation of the industrial interests of the united states at the exhibition of the industry of all nations to be holden at london in the year 1862 .
i regret to say i have been unable to give personal attention to this subject -- a subject at once so interesting in itself and so extensively and intimately connected with the material prosperity of the world .
through the secretaries of state and of the interior a plan or system has been devised and partly matured , and which will be laid before you .
under and by virtue of the act of congress entitled " an act to confiscate property used for insurrectionary purposes , " approved august 6 , 1861 , the legal claims of certain persons to the labor and service of certain other persons have become forfeited , and numbers of the latter thus liberated are already dependent on the united states and must be provided for in some way .
besides this , it is not impossible that some of the states will pass similar enactments for their own benefit respectively , and by operation of which persons of the same class will be thrown upon them for disposal .
in such case i recommend that congress provide for accepting such persons from such states , according to some mode of valuation , in lieu , pro tanto , of direct taxes , or upon some other plan to be agreed on with such states respectively ; that such persons , on such acceptance by the general government , be at once deemed free , and that in any event steps be taken for colonizing both classes ( or the one first mentioned if the other shall not be brought into existence ) at some place or places in a climate congenial to them .
it might be well to consider , too , whether the free colored people already in the united states could not , so far as individuals may desire , be included in such colonization .
to carry out the plan of colonization may involve the acquiring of territory , and also the appropriation of money beyond that to be expended in the territorial acquisition .
having practiced the acquisition of territory for nearly sixty years , the question of constitutional power to do so is no longer an open one with us .
the power was questioned at first by mr. jefferson , who , however , in the purchase of louisiana , yielded his scruples on the plea of great expediency .
if it be said that the only legitimate object of acquiring territory is to furnish homes for white men , this measure effects that object , for the emigration of colored men leaves additional room for white men remaining or coming here .
mr. jefferson , however , placed the importance of procuring louisiana more on political and commercial grounds than on providing room for population .
on this whole proposition , including the appropriation of money with the acquisition of territory , does not the expediency amount to absolute necessity -- that without which the government itself can not be perpetuated ?
the war continues .
in considering the policy to be adopted for suppressing the insurrection i have been anxious and careful that the inevitable conflict for this purpose shall not degenerate into a violent and remorseless revolutionary struggle .
i have therefore in every case thought it proper to keep the integrity of the union prominent as the primary object of the contest on our pan , leaving all questions which are not of vital military importance to the more deliberate action of the legislature .
in the exercise of my best discretion i have adhered to the blockade of the ports held by the insurgents , instead of putting in force by proclamation the law of congress enacted .at the late session for closing those ports .
so also , obeying the dictates of prudence , as well as the obligations of law , instead of transcending i have adhered to the act of congress to confiscate property used for insurrectionary purposes .
if a new law upon the same subject shall be proposed , its propriety will be duly considered .
the union must be preserved , and hence all indispensable means must be employed .
we should not be in haste to determine that radical and extreme measures , which may reach the loyal as well as the disloyal , are indispensable .
the inaugural address at the beginning of the administration and the message to congress at the late special session were both mainly devoted to the domestic controversy out of which the insurrection and consequent war have sprung .
nothing now occurs to add or subtract to or from the principles or general purposes stated and expressed in those documents .
the last ray of hope for preserving the union peaceably expired at the assault upon fort sumter , and a general review of what has occurred since may not be unprofitable .
what was painfully uncertain then is much better defined and more distinct now , and the progress of events is plainly in the right direction .
the insurgents confidently claimed a strong support from north of mason and dixon 's line , and the friends of the union were not free from apprehension on the point .
this , however , was soon settled definitely , and on the right side .
south of the line noble little delaware led off right from the first .
maryland was made to seem against the union .
our soldiers were assaulted , bridges were burned , and railroads torn up within her limits , and we were many days at one time without the ability to bring a single regiment over her soil to the capital .
now her bridges and railroads are repaired and open to the government ; she already gives seven regiments to the cause of the union , and none to the enemy ; and her people , at a regular election , have sustained the union by a larger majority and a larger aggregate vote than they ever before gave to any candidate or any question .
kentucky , too , for some time in doubt , is now decidedly and , i think , unchangeably ranged on the side of the union .
missouri is comparatively quiet , and , i believe , can not again be overrun by the insurrectionists .
these three states of maryland , kentucky , and missouri , neither of which would promise a single soldier at first , have now an aggregate of not less than 40,000 in the field for the union , while of their citizens certainly not more than a third of that number , and they of doubtful whereabouts and doubtful existence , are in arms against us .
after a somewhat bloody struggle of months , winter closes on the union people of western virginia , leaving them masters of their own country .
an insurgent force of about 1,500 , for months dominating the narrow peninsular region constituting the counties of accomac and northampton , and known as eastern shore of virginia , together with some contiguous parts of maryland , have laid down their arms , and the people there have renewed their allegiance to and accepted the protection of the old flag .
this leaves no armed insurrectionist north of the potomac or east of the chesapeake .
also we have obtained a footing at each of the isolated points on the southern coast of hatteras , port royal , tybee island ( near savannah ) , and ship island ; and we likewise have some general accounts of popular movements in behalf of the union in north carolina and tennessee .
these things demonstrate that the cause of the union is advancing steadily and certainly southward .
since your last adjournment lieutenant - general scott has retired from the head of the army .
during his long life the nation has not been unmindful of his merit ; yet on calling to mind how faithfully , ably , and brilliantly he has served the country , from a time far back in our history , when few of the now living had been born , and thenceforward continually , i can not but think we are still his debtors .
i submit , therefore , for your consideration what further mark of recognition is due to him , and to ourselves as a grateful people .
with the retirement of general scott came the executive duty of appointing in his stead a general in chief of the army .
it is a fortunate circumstance that neither in council nor country was there , so far as i know , any difference of opinion as to the proper person to be selected .
the retiring chief repeatedly expressed his judgment in favor of general mcclellan for the position , and in this the nation seemed to give a unanimous concurrence .
the designation of general mcclellan is therefore in considerable degree the selection of the country as well as of the executive , and hence there is better reason to hope there will be given him the confidence and cordial support thus by fair implication promised , and without which he can not with so full efficiency serve the country .
it has been said that one bad general is better than two good ones , and the saying is true if taken to mean no more than that an army is better directed by a single mind , though inferior , than by two superior ones at variance and cross - purposes with each other .
and the same is true in all joint operations wherein those engaged can have none but a common end in view and can differ only as to the choice of means .
in a storm at sea no one on board can wish the ship to sink , and yet not unfrequently all go down together because too many will direct and no single mind can be allowed to control .
it continues to develop that the insurrection is largely , if not exclusively , a war upon the first principle of popular government -- the rights of the people .
conclusive evidence of this is found in the most grave and maturely considered public documents , as well as in the general tone of the insurgents .
in those documents we find the abridgment of the existing right of suffrage and the denial to the people of all right to participate in the selection of public officers except the legislative boldly advocated , with labored arguments to prove that large control of the people in government is the source of all political evil .
monarchy itself is sometimes hinted at as a possible refuge from the power of the people .
in my present position i could scarcely be justified were i to omit raising a warning voice against this approach of returning despotism .
it is not needed nor fitting here that a general argument should be made in favor of popular institutions , but there is one point , with its connections , not so hackneyed as most others , to which i ask a brief attention .
it is the effort to place capital on an equal footing with , if not above , labor in the structure of government .
it is assumed that labor is available only in connection with capital ; that nobody labors unless somebody else , owning capital , somehow by the use of it induces him to labor .
this assumed , it is next considered whether it is best that capital shall hire laborers , and thus induce them to work by their own consent , or buy them and drive them to it without their consent .
having proceeded so far , it is naturally concluded that all laborers are either hired laborers or what we call slaves .
and further , it is assumed that whoever is once a hired laborer is fixed in that condition for life .
now there is no such relation between capital and labor as assumed , nor is there any such thing as a free man being fixed for life in the condition of a hired laborer .
both these assumptions are false , and all inferences from them are groundless .
labor is prior to and independent of capital .
capital is only the fruit of labor , and could never have existed if labor had not first existed .
labor is the superior of capital , and deserves much the higher consideration .
capital has its rights , which are as worthy of protection as any other rights .
nor is it denied that there is , and probably always will be , a relation between labor and capital producing mutual benefits .
the error is in assuming that the whole labor of community exists within that relation .
a few men own capital , and that few avoid labor themselves , and with their capital hire or buy another few to labor for them .
a large majority belong to neither class -- neither work for others nor have others working for them .
in most of the southern states a majority of the whole people of all colors are neither slaves nor masters , while in the northern a large majority are neither hirers nor hired .
men , with their families -- wives , sons , and daughters -- work for themselves on their farms , in their houses , and in their shops , taking the whole product to themselves , and asking no favors of capital on the one hand nor of hired laborers or slaves on the other .
it is not forgotten that a considerable number of persons mingle their own labor with capital ; that is , they labor with their own hands and also buy or hire others to labor for them ; but this is only a mixed and not a distinct class .
no principle stated is disturbed by the existence of this mixed class .
again , as has already been said , there is not of necessity any such thing as the free hired laborer being fixed to that condition for life .
many independent men everywhere in these states a few years back in their lives were hired laborers .
the prudent , penniless beginner in the world labors for wages awhile , saves a surplus with which to buy tools or land for himself , then labors on his own account another while , and at length hires another new beginner to help him .
this is the just and generous and prosperous system which opens the way to all , gives hope to all , and consequent energy and progress and improvement of condition to all .
no men living are more worthy to be trusted than those who toil up from poverty ; none less inclined to take or touch aught which they have not honestly earned .
let them beware of surrendering a political power which they already possess , and which if surrendered will surely be used to close the door of advancement against such as they and to fix new disabilities and burdens upon them till all of liberty shall be lost .
from the first taking of our national census to the last are seventy years , and we find our population at the end of the period eight times as great as it was at the beginning .
the increase of those other things which men deem desirable has been even greater .
we thus have at one view what the popular principle , applied to government through the machiney , of the states and the union , has produced in a given time , and also what if firmly maintained it promises for the future .
there are already among us those who if the union be preserved will live to see it contain 250,000,000 .
the struggle of to - day is not altogether for to - day ; it is for a vast future also .
with a reliance on providence all the more firm and earnest , let us proceed in the great task which events have devolved upon us .

executive mansion , washington , august 26 , 1863 .
hon .
james c. conkling 
 my dear sir .
your letter inviting me to attend a mass - meeting of unconditional union - men , to be held at the capital of illinois , on the 3d day of september , has been received .
it would be very agreeable to me , to thus meet my old friends , at my own home ; but i can not , just now , be absent from here , so long as a visit there , would require .
the meeting is to be of all those who maintain unconditional devotion to the union ; and i am sure my old political friends will thank me for tendering , as i do , the nation 's gratitude to those other noble men , whom no partizan malice , or partizan hope , can make false to the nation 's life .
there are those who are dissatisfied with me .
to such i would say : you desire peace ; and you blame me that we do not have it .
but how can we attain it ?
there are but three conceivable ways .
first , to suppress the rebellion by force of arms .
this , i am trying to do .
are you for it ?
if you are , so far we are agreed .
if you are not for it , a second way is , to give up the union .
i am against this .
are you for it ?
if you are , you should say so plainly .
if you are not for force , nor yet for dissolution , there only remains some imaginable compromise .
i do not believe any compromise , embracing the maintenance of the union , is now possible .
all i learn , leads to a directly opposite belief .
the strength of the rebellion , is its military --- its army .
that army dominates all the country , and all the people , within its range .
any offer of terms made by any man or men within that range , in opposition to that army , is simply nothing for the present ; because such man or men , have no power whatever to enforce their side of a compromise , if one were made with them .
to illustrate --- suppose refugees from the south , and peace men of the north , get together in convention , and frame and proclaim a compromise embracing a restoration of the union ; in what way can that compromise be used to keep lee 's army out of pennsylvania ?
meade 's army can keep lee 's army out of pennsylvania ; and , i think , can ultimately drive it out of existence .
but no paper compromise , to which the controllers of lee 's army are not agreed , can , at all , affect that army .
in an effort at such compromise we should waste time , which the enemy would improve to our disadvantage ; and that would be all .
a compromise , to be effective , must be made either with those who control the rebel army , or with the people first liberated from the domination of that army , by the success of our own army .
now allow me to assure you , that no word or intimation , from that rebel army , or from any of the men controlling it , in relation to any peace compromise , has ever come to my knowledge or belief .
all charges and insinuations to the contrary , are deceptive and groundless .
and i promise you , that if any such proposition shall hereafter come , it shall not be rejected , and kept a secret from you .
i freely acknowledge myself the servant of the people , according to the bond of service --- the united states constitution ; and that , as such , i am responsible to them .
but , to be plain , you are dissatisfied with me about the negro .
quite likely there is a difference of opinion between you and myself upon that subject .
i certainly wish that all men could be free , while i suppose you do not .
yet i have neither adopted , nor proposed any measure , which is not consistent with even your view , provided you are for the union .
i suggested compensated emancipation ; to which you replied you wished not to be taxed to buy negroes .
but i had not asked you to be taxed to buy negroes , except in such way , as to save you from greater taxation to save the union exclusively by other means .
you dislike the emancipation proclamation ; and , perhaps , would have it retracted .
you say it is unconstitutional --- i think differently .
i think the constitution invests its commander - in - chief , with the law of war , in time of war .
the most that can be said , if so much , is , that slaves are property .
is there --- has there ever been --- any question that by the law of war , property , both of enemies and friends , may be taken when needed ?
and is it not needed whenever taking it , helps us , or hurts the enemy ?
armies , the world over , destroy enemies ' property when they can not use it ; and even destroy their own to keep it from the enemy .
civilized belligerents do all in their power to help themselves , or hurt the enemy , except a few things regarded as barbarous or cruel .
among the exceptions are the massacre of vanquished foes , and non - combatants , male and female .
but the proclamation , as law , either is valid , or is not valid .
if it is not valid , it needs no retraction .
if it is valid , it can not be retracted , any more than the dead can be brought to life .
some of you profess to think its retraction would operate favorably for the union .
why better after the retraction , than before the issue ?
there was more than a year and a half of trial to suppress the rebellion before the proclamation issued , the last one hundred days of which passed under an explicit notice that it was coming , unless averted by those in revolt , returning to their allegiance .
the war has certainly progressed as favorably for us , since the issue of the proclamation as before .
i know as fully as one can know the opinions of others , that some of the commanders of our armies in the field who have given us our most important successes , believe the emancipation policy , and the use of colored troops , constitute the heaviest blow yet dealt to the rebellion ; and that , at least one of those important successes , could not have been achieved when it was , but for the aid of black soldiers .
among the commanders holding these views are some who have never had any affinity with what is called abolitionism , or with republican party politics ; but who hold them purely as military opinions .
i submit these opinions as being entitled to some weight against the objections , often urged , that emancipation , and arming the blacks , are unwise as military measures , and were not adopted , as such , in good faith .
you say you will not fight to free negroes .
some of them seem willing to fight for you ; but , no matter .
fight you , then , exclusively to save the union .
i issued the proclamation on purpose to aid you in saving the union .
whenever you shall have conquered all resistance to the union , if i shall urge you to continue fighting , it will be an apt time , then , for you to declare you will not fight to free negroes .
i thought that in your struggle for the union , to whatever extent the negroes should cease helping the enemy , to that extent it weakened the enemy in his resistance to you .
do you think differently ?
i thought that whatever negroes can be got to do as soldiers , leaves just so much less for white soldiers to do , in saving the union .
does it appear otherwise to you ?
but negroes , like other people , act upon motives .
why should they do any thing for us , if we will do nothing for them ?
if they stake their lives for us , they must be prompted by the strongest motive --- even the promise of freedom .
and the promise being made , must be kept .
the signs look better .
the father of waters again goes unvexed to the sea .
thanks to the great north - west for it .
nor yet wholly to them .
three hundred miles up , they met new - england , empire , key - stone , and jersey , hewing their way right and left .
the sunny south too , in more colors than one , also lent a hand .
on the spot , their part of the history was jotted down in black and white .
the job was a great national one ; and let none be banned who bore an honorable part in it .
and while those who have cleared the great river may well be proud , even that is not all .
it is hard to say that anything has been more bravely , and well done , than at antietam , murfreesboro , gettysburg , and on many fields of lesser note .
nor must uncle sam 's web - feet be forgotten .
at all the watery margins they have been present .
not only on the deep sea , the broad bay , and the rapid river , but also up the narrow muddy bayou , and wherever the ground was a little damp , they have been , and made their tracks .
thanks to all .
for the great republic --- for the principle it lives by , and keeps alive --- for man 's vast future,--- thanks to all .
peace does not appear so distant as it did .
i hope it will come soon , and come to stay ; and so come as to be worth the keeping in all future time .
it will then have been proved that , among free men , there can be no successful appeal from the ballot to the bullet ; and that they who take such appeal are sure to lose their case , and pay the cost .
and then , there will be some black men who can remember that , with silent tongue , and clenched teeth , and steady eye , and well - poised bayonet , they have helped mankind on to this great consummation ; while , i fear , there will be some white ones , unable to forget that , with malignant heart , and deceitful speech , they have strove to hinder it .
still let us not be over - sanguine of a speedy final triumph .
let us be quite sober .
let us diligently apply the means , never doubting that a just god , in his own good time , will give us the rightful result .
yours very trulya. lincoln .
executive mansion , washington , august 26 , 1863.hon .
james c. conklingmy dear sir .
your letter inviting me to attend a mass - meeting of unconditional union - men , to be held at the capital of illinois , on the 3d day of september , has been received .
it would be very agreeable to me , to thus meet my old friends , at my own home ; but i can not , just now , be absent from here , so long as a visit there , would require .
the meeting is to be of all those who maintain unconditional devotion to the union ; and i am sure my old political friends will thank me for tendering , as i do , the nation 's gratitude to those other noble men , whom no partizan malice , or partizan hope , can make false to the nation 's life .
there are those who are dissatisfied with me .
to such i would say : you desire peace ; and you blame me that we do not have it .
but how can we attain it ?
there are but three conceivable ways .
first , to suppress the rebellion by force of arms .
this , i am trying to do .
are you for it ?
if you are , so far we are agreed .
if you are not for it , a second way is , to give up the union .
i am against this .
are you for it ?
if you are , you should say so plainly .
if you are not for force , nor yet for dissolution , there only remains some imaginable compromise .
i do not believe any compromise , embracing the maintenance of the union , is now possible .
all i learn , leads to a directly opposite belief .
the strength of the rebellion , is its military -- its army .
that army dominates all the country , and all the people , within its range .
any offer of terms made by any man or men within that range , in opposition to that army , is simply nothing for the present ; because such man or men , have no power whatever to enforce their side of a compromise , if one were made with them .
to illustrate -- suppose refugees from the south , and peace men of the north , get together in convention , and frame and proclaim a compromise embracing a restoration of the union ; in what way can that compromise be used to keep lee 's army out of pennsylvania ?
meade 's army can keep lee 's army out of pennsylvania ; and , i think , can ultimately drive it out of existence .
but no paper compromise , to which the controllers of lee 's army are not agreed , can , at all , affect that army .
in an effort at such compromise we should waste time , which the enemy would improve to our disadvantage ; and that would be all .
a compromise , to be effective , must be made either with those who control the rebel army , or with the people first liberated from the domination of that army , by the success of our own army .
now allow me to assure you , that no word or intimation , from that rebel army , or from any of the men controlling it , in relation to any peace compromise , has ever come to my knowledge or belief .
all charges and insinuations to the contrary , are deceptive and groundless .
and i promise you , that if any such proposition shall hereafter come , it shall not be rejected , and kept a secret from you .
i freely acknowledge myself the servant of the people , according to the bond of service -- the united states constitution ; and that , as such , i am responsible to them .
but , to be plain , you are dissatisfied with me about the negro .
quite likely there is a difference of opinion between you and myself upon that subject .
i certainly wish that all men could be free , while i suppose you do not .
yet i have neither adopted , nor proposed any measure , which is not consistent with even your view , provided you are for the union .
i suggested compensated emancipation ; to which you replied you wished not to be taxed to buy negroes .
but i had not asked you to be taxed to buy negroes , except in such way , as to save you from greater taxation to save the union exclusively by other means .
you dislike the emancipation proclamation ; and , perhaps , would have it retracted .
you say it is unconstitutional -- i think differently .
i think the constitution invests its commander - in - chief , with the law of war , in time of war .
the most that can be said , if so much , is , that slaves are property .
is there -- has there ever been -- any question that by the law of war , property , both of enemies and friends , may be taken when needed ?
and is it not needed whenever taking it , helps us , or hurts the enemy ?
armies , the world over , destroy enemies ' property when they can not use it ; and even destroy their own to keep it from the enemy .
civilized belligerents do all in their power to help themselves , or hurt the enemy , except a few things regarded as barbarous or cruel .
among the exceptions are the massacre of vanquished foes , and non - combatants , male and female .
but the proclamation , as law , either is valid , or is not valid .
if it is not valid , it needs no retraction .
if it is valid , it can not be retracted , any more than the dead can be brought to life .
some of you profess to think its retraction would operate favorably for the union .
why better after the retraction , than before the issue ?
there was more than a year and a half of trial to suppress the rebellion before the proclamation issued , the last one hundred days of which passed under an explicit notice that it was coming , unless averted by those in revolt , returning to their allegiance .
the war has certainly progressed as favorably for us , since the issue of the proclamation as before .
i know as fully as one can know the opinions of others , that some of the commanders of our armies in the field who have given us our most important successes , believe the emancipation policy , and the use of colored troops , constitute the heaviest blow yet dealt to the rebellion ; and that , at least one of those important successes , could not have been achieved when it was , but for the aid of black soldiers .
among the commanders holding these views are some who have never had any affinity with what is called abolitionism , or with republican party politics ; but who hold them purely as military opinions .
i submit these opinions as being entitled to some weight against the objections , often urged , that emancipation , and arming the blacks , are unwise as military measures , and were not adopted , as such , in good faith .
you say you will not fight to free negroes .
some of them seem willing to fight for you ; but , no matter .
fight you , then , exclusively to save the union .
i issued the proclamation on purpose to aid you in saving the union .
whenever you shall have conquered all resistance to the union , if i shall urge you to continue fighting , it will be an apt time , then , for you to declare you will not fight to free negroes .
i thought that in your struggle for the union , to whatever extent the negroes should cease helping the enemy , to that extent it weakened the enemy in his resistance to you .
do you think differently ?
i thought that whatever negroes can be got to do as soldiers , leaves just so much less for white soldiers to do , in saving the union .
does it appear otherwise to you ?
but negroes , like other people , act upon motives .
why should they do any thing for us , if we will do nothing for them ?
if they stake their lives for us , they must be prompted by the strongest motive -- even the promise of freedom .
and the promise being made , must be kept .
the signs look better .
the father of waters again goes unvexed to the sea .
thanks to the great north - west for it .
nor yet wholly to them .
three hundred miles up , they met new - england , empire , key - stone , and jersey , hewing their way right and left .
the sunny south too , in more colors than one , also lent a hand .
on the spot , their part of the history was jotted down in black and white .
the job was a great national one ; and let none be banned who bore an honorable part in it .
and while those who have cleared the great river may well be proud , even that is not all .
it is hard to say that anything has been more bravely , and well done , than at antietam , murfreesboro , gettysburg , and on many fields of lesser note .
nor must uncle sam 's web - feet be forgotten .
at all the watery margins they have been present .
not only on the deep sea , the broad bay , and the rapid river , but also up the narrow muddy bayou , and wherever the ground was a little damp , they have been , and made their tracks .
thanks to all .
for the great republic -- for the principle it lives by , and keeps alive -- for man 's vast future , -- thanks to all .
peace does not appear so distant as it did .
i hope it will come soon , and come to stay ; and so come as to be worth the keeping in all future time .
it will then have been proved that , among free men , there can be no successful appeal from the ballot to the bullet ; and that they who take such appeal are sure to lose their case , and pay the cost .
and then , there will be some black men who can remember that , with silent tongue , and clenched teeth , and steady eye , and well - poised bayonet , they have helped mankind on to this great consummation ; while , i fear , there will be some white ones , unable to forget that , with malignant heart , and deceitful speech , they have strove to hinder it .
still let us not be over - sanguine of a speedy final triumph .
let us be quite sober .
let us diligently apply the means , never doubting that a just god , in his own good time , will give us the rightful result .
yours very trulya. lincoln .

mr. president and gentlemen of the convention .
if we could first know where we are , and whither we are tending , we could then better judge what to do , and how to do it .
we are now far into the fifth year , since a policy was initiated , with the avowed object , and confident promise , of putting an end to slavery agitation .
under the operation of that policy , that agitation has not only , not ceased , but has constantly augmented .
in my opinion , it will not cease , until a crisis shall have been reached and passed."a house divided against itself can not stand."i believe this government can not endure , permanently half slave and half free .
i do not expect the union to be dissolved -- i do not expect the house to fall -- but i do expect it will cease to be divided .
it will become all one thing , or all the other .
either the opponents of slavery , will arrest the further spread of it , and place it where the public mind shall rest in the belief that it is in course of ultimate extinction ; or its advocates will push it forward , till it shall become alike lawful in all the states , old as well as new -- north as well as south .
have we no tendency to the latter condition?let any one who doubts , carefully contemplate that now almost complete legal combination -- piece of machinery so to speak -- compounded of the nebraska doctrine , and the dred scott decision .
let him consider not only what work the machinery is adapted to do , and how well adapted ; but also , let him study the history of its construction , and trace , if he can , or rather fail , if he can , to trace the evidences of design , and concert of action , among its chief bosses , from the beginning .
but , so far , congress only , had acted ; and an indorsement by the people , real or apparent , was indispensable , to save the point already gained , and give chance for more .
the new year of 1854 found slavery excluded from more than half the states by state constitutions , and from most of the national territory by congressional prohibition .
four days later , commenced the struggle , which ended in repealing that congressional prohibition .
this opened all the national territory to slavery , and was the first point gained .
this necessity had not been overlooked ; but had been provided for , as well as might be , in the notable argument of " squatter sovereignty,"otherwise called " sacred right of self government,"which latter phrase , though expressive of the only rightful basis of any government , was so perverted in this attempted use of it as to amount to just this : that if any one man , choose to enslave another , no third man shall be allowed to object .
that argument was incorporated into the nebraska bill itself , in the language which follows : " it being the true intent and meaning of this act not to legislate slavery into any territory or state , not exclude it therefrom ; but to leave the people thereof perfectly free to form and regulate their domestic institutions in their own way , subject only to the constitution of the united states."then opened the roar of loose declamation in favor of " squatter sovereignty,"and " sacred right of self government.""but,"said opposition members , " let us be more specific -- let us amend the bill so as to expressly declare that the people of the territory may exclude slavery . " "
not we,"said the friends of the measure ; and down they voted the amendment .
while the nebraska bill was passing through congress , a law case , involving the question of a negroe 's freedom , by reason of his owner having voluntarily taken him first into a free state and then a territory covered by the congressional prohibition , and held him as a slave , for a long time in each , was passing through the u. s. circuit court for the district of missouri ; and both nebraska bill and law suit were brought to a decision in the same month of may , 1854 .
the negroe 's name was " dred scott,"which name now designates the decision finally made in the case .
before the then next presidential election , the law case came to , and was argued in the supreme court of the united states ; but the decision of it was deferred until after the election .
still , before the election , senator trumbull , on the floor of the senate , requests the leading advocate of the nebraska bill to state his opinion whether the people of a territory can constitutionally exclude slavery from their limits ; and the latter answers , " that is a question for the supreme court."the election came .
mr. buchanan was elected , and the indorsement , such as it was , secured .
that was the second point gained .
the indorsement , however , fell short of a clear popular majority by nearly four hundred thousand votes , and so , perhaps , was not overwhelmingly reliable and satisfactory .
the outgoing president , in his last annual message , as impressively as possible echoed back upon the people the weight and authority of the indorsement .
the supreme court met again ; did not announce their decision , but ordered a re - argument .
the presidential inauguration came , and still no decision of the court ; but the incoming president , in his inaugural address , fervently exhorted the people to abide by the forthcoming decision , whatever it might be .
then , in a few days , came the decision .
the reputed author of the nebraska bill finds an early occasion to make a speech at this capitol indorsing the dred scott decision , and vehemently denouncing all opposition to it .
the new president , too , seizes the early occasion of the silliman letter to indorse and strongly construe that decision , and to express his astonishment that any different view had ever been entertained .
at length a squabble springs up between the president and the author of the nebraska bill , on the mere question of fact , whether the lecompton constitution was or was not , in any just sense , made by the people of kansas ; and in that squabble the latter declares that all he wants is a fair vote for the people , and that he cares not whether slavery be voted down or voted up .
i do not understand his declaration that he cares not whether slavery be voted down or voted up , to be intended by him other than as an apt definition of the policy he would impress upon the public mind -- the principle for which he declares he has suffered much , and is ready to suffer to the end .
and well may he cling to that principle .
if he has any parental feeling , well may he cling to it .
that principle , is the only shred left of his original nebraska doctrine .
under the dred scott decision , " squatter sovereignty"squatted out of existence , tumbled down like temporary scaffolding -- like the mould at the foundry served through one blast and fell back into loose sand -- helped to carry an election , and then was kicked to the winds .
his late joint struggle with the republicans , against the lecompton constitution , involves nothing of the original nebraska doctrine .
that struggle was made on a point , the right of a people to make their own constitution , upon which he and the republicans have never differed .
the several points of the dred scott decision , in connection with senator douglas ' " care not"policy , constitute the piece of machinery , in its present state of advancement .
this was the third point gained .
the working points of that machinery are : first , that no negro slave , imported as such from africa , and no descendant of such slave can ever be a citizen of any state , in the sense of that term as used in the constitution of the united states .
this point is made in order to deprive the negro , in every possible event , of the benefit of this provision of the united states constitution , which declares that--"the citizens of each state shall be entitled to all privileges and immunities of citizens in the several states."secondly , that " subject to the constitution of the united states,"neither congress nor a territorial legislature can exclude slavery from any united states territory .
this point is made in order that individual men may fill up the territories with slaves , without danger of losing them as property , and thus to enhance the chances of permanency to the institution through all the future .
thirdly , that whether the holding a negro in actual slavery in a free state , makes him free , as against the holder , the united states courts will not decide , but will leave to be decided by the courts of any slave state the negro may be forced into by the master .
this point is made , not to be pressed immediately ; but , if acquiesced in for a while , and apparently indorsed by the people at an election , then to sustain the logical conclusion that what dred scott 's master might lawfully do with dred scott , in the free state of illinois , every other master may lawfully do with any other one , or one thousand slaves , in illinois , or in any other free state .
auxiliary to all this , and working hand in hand with it , the nebraska doctrine , or what is left of it , is to educate and mould public opinion , at least northern public opinion , to not care whether slavery is voted down or voted up .
this shows exactly where we now are ; and partially also , whither we are tending .
it will throw additional light on the latter , to go back , and run the mind over the string of historical facts already stated .
several things will now appear less dark and mysterious than they did when they were transpiring .
the people were to be left " perfectly free""subject only to the constitution."what the constitution had to do with it , outsiders could not then see .
plainly enough now , it was an exactly fitted niche , for the dred scott decision to afterwards come in , and declare the perfect freedom of the people , to be just no freedom at all .
why was the amendment , expressly declaring the right of the people to exclude slavery , voted down ?
plainly enough now , the adoption of it , would have spoiled the niche for the dred scott decision .
why was the court decision held up ?
why , even a senator 's individual opinion withheld , till after the presidential election ?
plainly enough now , the speaking out then would have damaged the " perfectly free"argument upon which the election was to be carried .
why the outgoing president 's felicitation on the indorsement ?
why the delay of a reargument ?
why the incoming president 's advance exhortation in favor of the decision?these things look like the cautious patting and petting a spirited horse , preparatory to mounting him , when it is dreaded that he may give the rider a fall .
and why the hasty after indorsements of the decision by the president and others?we can not absolutely know that all these exact adaptations are the result of preconcert .
but when we see a lot of framed timbers , different portions of which we know have been gotten out at different times and places and by different workmen -- stephen , franklin , roger and james , for instance -- and when we see these timbers joined together , and see they exactly make the frame of a house or a mill , all the tenons and mortices exactly fitting , and all the lengths and proportions of the different pieces exactly adapted to their respective places , and not a piece too many or too few -- not omitting even scaffolding -- or , if a single piece be lacking , we can see the place in the frame exactly fitted and prepared to yet bring such piece in -- in such a case , we find it impossible to not believe that stephen and franklin and roger and james all understood one another from the beginning , and all worked upon a common plan or draft drawn up before the first lick was struck .
it should not be overlooked that , by the nebraska bill , the people of a state as well as territory , were to be left " perfectly free " " subject only to the constitution."why mention a state ?
they were legislating for territories , and not for or about states .
certainly the people of a state are and ought to be subject to the constitution of the united states ; but why is mention of this lugged into this merely territorial law ?
why are the people of a territory and the people of a state therein lumped together , and their relation to the constitution therein treated as being precisely the same?while the opinion of the court , by chief justice taney , in the dred scott case , and the separate opinions of all the concurring judges , expressly declare that the constitution of the united states neither permits congress nor a territorial legislature to exclude slavery from any united states territory , they all omit to declare whether or not the same constitution permits a state , or the people of a state , to exclude it .
possibly , this was a mere omission ; but who can be quite sure , if mclean or curtis had sought to get into the opinion a declaration of unlimited power in the people of a state to exclude slavery from their limits , just as chase and macy sought to get such declaration , in behalf of the people of a territory , into the nebraska bill -- i ask , who can be quite sure that it would not have been voted down , in the one case , as it had been in the other .
the nearest approach to the point of declaring the power of a state over slavery , is made by judge nelson .
he approaches it more than once , using the precise idea , and almost the language too , of the nebraska act .
on one occasion his exact language is , " except in cases where the power is restrained by the constitution of the united states , the law of the state is supreme over the subject of slavery within its jurisdiction."in what cases the power of the states is so restrained by the u. s. constitution , is left an open question , precisely as the same question , as to the restraint on the power of the territories was left open in the nebraska act .
put that and that together , and we have another nice little niche , which we may , ere long , see filled with another supreme court decision , declaring that the constitution of the united states does not permit a state to exclude slavery from its limits .
and this may especially be expected if the doctrine of " care not whether slavery be voted down or voted up,"shall gain upon the public mind sufficiently to give promise that such a decision can be maintained when made .
such a decision is all that slavery now lacks of being alike lawful in all the states .
welcome or unwelcome , such decision is probably coming , and will soon be upon us , unless the power of the present political dynasty shall be met and overthrown .
we shall lie down pleasantly dreaming that the people of missouri are on the verge of making their state free ; and we shall awake to the reality , instead , that the supreme court has made illinois a slave state .
to meet and overthrow the power of that dynasty , is the work now before all those who would prevent that consummation .
that is what we have to do .
but how can we best do it?there are those who denounce us openly to their own friends , and yet whisper us softly , that senator douglas is the aptest instrument there is , with which to effect that object .
they do not tell us , nor has he told us , that he wishes any such object to be effected .
they wish us to infer all , from the facts , that he now has a little quarrel with the present head of the dynasty ; and that he has regularly voted with us , on a single point , upon which , he and we , have never differed .
they remind us that he is a very great man , and that the largest of us are very small ones .
let this be granted .
but " a living dog is better than a dead lion."judge douglas , if not a dead lion for this work , is at least a caged and toothless one .
how can he oppose the advances of slavery ?
he do n't care anything about it .
his avowed mission is impressing the " public heart"to care nothing about it .
a leading douglas democratic newspaper thinks douglas ' superior talent will be needed to resist the revival of the african slave trade .
does douglas believe an effort to revive that trade is approaching ?
he has not said so .
does he really think so ?
but if it is , how can he resist it ?
for years he has labored to prove it a sacred right of white men to take negro slaves into the new territories .
can he possibly show that it is less a sacred right to buy them where they can be bought cheapest ?
and , unquestionably they can be bought cheaper in africa than in virginia .he has done all in his power to reduce the whole question of slavery to one of a mere right of property ; and as such , how can he oppose the foreign slave trade -- how can he refuse that trade in that " property"shall be " perfectly free "-- unless he does it as a protection to the home production ?
and as the home producers will probably not ask the protection , he will be wholly without a ground of opposition .
senator douglas holds , we know , that a man may rightfully be wiser to - day than he was yesterday -- that he may rightfully change when he finds himself wrong .
but , can we for that reason , run ahead , and infer that he will make any particular change , of which he , himself , has given no intimation ?
can we safely base our action upon any such vague inference?now , as ever , i wish to not misrepresent judge douglas ' position , question his motives , or do ought that can be personally offensive to him .
whenever , if ever , he and we can come together on principle so that our great cause may have assistance from his great ability , i hope to have interposed no adventitious obstacle .
but clearly , he is not now with us -- he does not pretend to be -- he does not promise to ever be .
our cause , then , must be intrusted to , and conducted by its own undoubted friends -- those whose hands are free , whose hearts are in the work -- who do care for the result .
two years ago the republicans of the nation mustered over thirteen hundred thousand strong .
we did this under the single impulse of resistance to a common danger , with every external circumstance against us .
of strange , discordant , and even , hostile elements , we gathered from the four winds , and formed and fought the battle through , under the constant hot fire of a disciplined , proud , and pampered enemy .
did we brave all then , to falter now ?-- now -- when that same enemy is wavering , dissevered and belligerent?the result is not doubtful .
we shall not fail -- if we stand firm , we shall not fail .
wise councils may accelerate or mistakes delay it , but , sooner or later the victory is sure to come .

fellow - citizens of the senate and house of representatives : another year of health and of sufficiently abundant harvests has passed .
for these , and especially for the improved condition of our national affairs , our renewed and profoundest gratitude to god is due .
we remain in peace and friendship with foreign powers .
the efforts of disloyal citizens of the united states to involve us in foreign wars to aid an inexcusable insurrection have been unavailing .
her britannic majesty 's government , as was justly expected , have exercised their authority to prevent the departure of new hostile expeditions from british ports .
the emperor of france has by a like proceeding promptly vindicated the neutrality which he proclaimed at the beginning of the contest .
questions of great intricacy and importance have arisen out of the blockade and other belligerent operations between the government and several of the maritime powers , but they have been discussed and , as far as was possible , accommodated in a spirit of frankness , justice , and mutual good will .
it is especially gratifying that our prize courts , by the impartiality of their adjudications , have commanded the respect and confidence of maritime powers .
the supplemental treaty between the united states and great britain for the suppression of the african slave trade , made on the 17th day of february last , has been duly ratified and carried into execution .
it is believed that so far as american ports and american citizens are concerned that inhuman and odious traffic has been brought to an end .
i shall submit for the consideration of the senate a convention for the adjustment of possessory claims in washington territory arising out of the treaty of the 15th june , 1846 , between the united states and great britain , and which have been the source of some disquiet among the citizens of that now rapidly improving part of the country .
a novel and important question , involving the extent of the maritime jurisdiction of spain in the waters which surround the island of cuba , has been debated without reaching an agreement , and it is proposed in an amicable spirit to refer it to the arbitrament of a friendly power .
a convention for that purpose will be submitted to the senate .
i have thought it proper , subject to the approval of the senate , to concur with the interested commercial powers in an arrangement for the liquidation of the scheldt dues , upon the principles which have been heretofore adopted in regard to the imposts upon navigation in the waters of denmark .
the long - pending controversy between this government and that of chile touching the seizure at sitana , in peru , by chilean officers , of a large amount in treasure belonging to citizens of the united states has been brought to a close by the award of his majesty the king of the belgians , to whose arbitration the question was referred by the parties .
the subject was thoroughly and patiently examined by that justly respected magistrate , and although the sum awarded to the claimants may not have been as large as they expected there is no reason to distrust the wisdom of his majesty 's decision .
that decision was promptly complied with by chile when intelligence in regard to it reached that country .
the joint commission under the act of the last session for carrying into effect the convention with peru on the subject of claims has been organized at lima , and is engaged in the business intrusted to it .
difficulties concerning interoceanic transit through nicaragua are in course of amicable adjustment .
in conformity with principles set forth in my last annual message , i have received a representative from the united states of colombia , and have accredited a minister to that republic .
incidents occurring in the progress of our civil war have forced upon my attention the uncertain state of international questions touching the rights of foreigners in this country and of united states citizens abroad .
in regard to some governments these rights are at least partially , defined by treaties .
in no instance , however , is it expressly stipulated that in the event of civil war a foreigner residing in this country within the lines of the insurgents is to be exempted from the rule which classes him as a belligerent , in whose behalf the government or his country can not expect any privileges or immunities distinct from that character .
i regret to say , however , that such claims have been put forward , and in some instances in behalf of foreigners who have lived in the united states the greater part of their lives .
there is reason to believe that many persons born in foreign countries who have declared their intention to become citizens , or who have been fully naturalized , have evaded the military duty required of them by denying the fact and thereby throwing upon the government the burden of proof .
it has been found difficult or impracticable to obtain this proof , from the want of guides to the proper sources of information .
these might be supplied by requiring clerks of courts where declarations of intention may be made or naturalizations effected to send periodically lists of the names of the persons naturalized or declaring their intention to become citizens to the secretary of the interior , in whose department those names might be arranged and printed for general information .
there is also reason to believe that foreigners frequently become citizens of the united states for the sole purpose of evading duties imposed by the laws of their native countries , to which on becoming naturalized here they at once repair , and though never returning to the united states they still claim the interposition of this government as citizens .
many altercations and great prejudices have heretofore arisen out of this abuse .
it is therefore submitted to your serious consideration .
it might be advisable to fix a limit beyond which no citizen of the united states residing abroad may claim the interposition of his government .
the right of suffrage has often been assumed and exercised by aliens under pretenses of naturalization , which they have disavowed when drafted into the military service .
i submit the expediency of such an amendment of the law as will make the fact of voting an estoppel against any plea of exemption from military service or other civil obligation on the ground of alienage .
in common with other western powers , our relations with japan have been brought into serious jeopardy through the perverse opposition of the hereditary aristocracy of the empire to the enlightened and liberal policy of the tycoon , designed to bring the country into the society of nations .
it is hoped , although not with entire confidence , that these difficulties may be peacefully overcome .
i ask your attention to the claim of the minister residing there for the damages he sustained in the destruction by fire of the residence of the legation at yedo .
satisfactory arrangements have been made with the emperor of russia , which , it is believed , will result in effecting a continuous line of telegraph through that empire from our pacific coast .
i recommend to your favorable consideration the subject of an international telegraph across the atlantic ocean , and also of a telegraph between this capital and the national forts along the atlantic seaboard and the gulf of mexico .
such communications , established with any reasonable outlay , would be economical as well as effective aids to the diplomatic , military , and naval service .
the consular system of the united states , under the enactments of the last congress , begins to be self - sustaining , and there is reason to hope that it may become entirely so with the increase of trade which will ensue whenever peace is restored .
our ministers abroad have been faithful in defending american rights .
in protecting commercial interests our consuls have necessarily had to encounter increased labors and responsibilities growing out of the war .
these they have for the most part met and discharged with zeal and efficiency .
this acknowledgment justly includes those consuls who , residing in morocco , egypt , turkey , japan , china , and other oriental countries , are charged with complex functions and extraordinary powers .
the condition of the several organized territories is generally satisfactory , although indian disturbances in new mexico have not been entirely suppressed .
the mineral resources of colorado , nevada , idaho , new mexico , and arizona are proving far richer than has been heretofore understood .
i lay before you a communication on this subject from the governor of new mexico .
i again submit to your consideration the expediency of establishing a system for the encouragement of immigration .
although this source of national wealth and strength is again flowing with greater freedom than for several years before the insurrection occurred , there is still a great deficiency of laborers in every field of industry , especially in agriculture and in our mines , as well of iron and coal as of the precious metals .
while the demand for labor is much increased here , tens of thousands of persons , destitute of remunerative occupation , are thronging our foreign consulates and offering to emigrate to the united states if essential , but very cheap , assistance can be afforded them .
it is easy to see that under the sharp discipline of civil war the nation is beginning a new life .
this noble effort demands the aid and ought to receive the attention and support of the government .
injuries unforeseen by the government and unintended may in some cases have been inflicted on the subjects or citizens of foreign countries , both at sea and on land , by persons in the service of the united states .
as this government expects redress from other powers when similar injuries are inflicted by persons in their service upon citizens of the united states , we must be prepared to do justice to foreigners .
if the existing judicial tribunals are inadequate to this purpose , a special court may be authorized , with power to hear and decide such claims of the character referred to as may have arisen under treaties and the public law .
conventions for adjusting the claims by joint commission have been proposed to some governments , but no definitive answer to the proposition has yet been received from any .
in the course of the session i shall probably have occasion to request you to provide indemnification to claimants where decrees of restitution have been rendered and damages awarded by admiralty courts , and in other cases where this government may be acknowledged to be liable in principle and where the amount of that liability has been ascertained by an informal arbitration .
the proper officers of the treasury have deemed themselves required by the law of the united states upon the subject to demand a tax upon the incomes of foreign consuls in this country .
while such a demand may not in strictness be in derogation of public law , or perhaps of any existing treaty between the united states and a foreign country , the expediency of so far modifying the act as to exempt from tax the income of such consuls as are not citizens of the united states , derived from the emoluments of their office or from property not situated in the united states , is submitted to your serious consideration .
i make this suggestion upon the ground that a comity which ought to be reciprocated exempts our consuls in all other countries from taxation to the extent thus indicated .
the united states , i think , ought not to be exceptionally illiberal to international trade and commerce .
the operations of the treasury during the last year have been successfully conducted .
the enactment by congress of a national banking law has proved a valuable support of the public credit and the general legislation in relation to loans has fully answered the expectations of its favorers .
some amendments may be required to perfect existing laws , but no change in their principles or general scope is believed to be needed .
since these measures have been in operation all demands on the treasury , including the pay of the army and navy , have been promptly met and fully satisfied .
no considerable body of troops , it is believed , were ever more amply provided and more liberally and punctually paid , and it may be added that by no people were the burdens incident to a great war ever more cheerfully borne .
the receipts during the year from all sources , including loans and balance in the treasury at its commencement , were $ 901,125,674.86 , and the aggregate disbursements $ 895,796,630.65 , leaving a balance on the 1st of july , 1863 , of $ 5,329,044.21 .
of the receipts there were derived from customs $ 69,059,642.40 , from internal revenue $ 37,640,787.95 , from direct tax $ 1,485,103.61 , from lands $ 167,617.17 , from miscellaneous sources $ 3,046,615.35 , and from loans $ 776,682,361.57 , making the aggregate $ 901,125,674.86 .
of the disbursements there were for the civil service $ 23,253,922.08 , for pensions and indians $ 4,216,520.79 , for interest on public debt $ 24,729,846.51 , for the war department $ 599,298,600.83 , for the navy department $ 63,211,105.27 , for payment of funded and temporary debt $ 181,086,635.07 , making the aggregate $ 895,796,630.65 and leaving the balance of $ 5,329,044.21 .
but the payment of funded and temporary debt , having been made from moneys borrowed during the year , must be regarded as merely nominal payments and the moneys borrowed to make them as merely nominal receipts , and their amount , $ 181,086,635.07 , should therefore be deducted both from receipts and disbursements .
this being done there remains as actual receipts $ 720,039,039.79 and the actual disbursements $ 714,709,995.58 , leaving the balance as already stated .
the actual receipts and disbursements for the first quarter and the estimated receipts and disbursements for the remaining three quarters of the current fiscal year ( 1864 ) will be shown in detail by the report of the secretary of the treasury , to which i invite your attention .
it is sufficient to say here that it is not believed that actual results will exhibit a state of the finances less favorable to the country than the estimates of that officer heretofore submitted , while it is confidently expected that at the close of the year both disbursements and debt will be found very considerably less than has been anticipated .
the report of the secretary of war is a document of great interest .
it consists of--1 .
the military operations of the year , detailed in the report of the general in chief .
2 .
the organization of colored persons into the war service .
3 .
the exchange of prisoners , fully set forth in the letter of general hitchcock .
4 .
the operations under the act for enrolling and calling out the national forces , detailed in the report of the provost - marshal - general .
5 .
the organization of the invalid corps , and 6 .
the operation of the several departments of the quartermaster - general , commissary- general , paymaster - general , chief of engineers , chief of ordnance , and surgeon - general .
it has appeared impossible to make a valuable summary of this report , except such as would be too extended for this place , and hence i content myself by asking your careful attention to the report itself .
the duties devolving on the naval branch of the service during the year and throughout the whole of this unhappy contest have been discharged with fidelity and eminent success .
the extensive blockade has been constantly increasing in efficiency as the navy has expanded , yet on so long a line it has so far been impossible to entirely suppress illicit trade .
from returns received at the navy department it appears that more than 1,000 vessels have been captured since the blockade was instituted , and that the value of prizes already sent in for adjudication amounts to over $ 13,000,000.the naval force of the united states consists at this time of 588 vessels completed and in the course of completion , and of these 75 are ironclad or armored steamers .
the events of the war give an increased interest and importance to the navy which will probably extend beyond the war itself .
the armored vessels in our navy completed and in service , or which are under contract and approaching completion , are believed to exceed in number those of any other power ; but while these may be relied upon for harbor defense and coast service , others of greater strength and capacity will be necessary for cruising purposes and to maintain our rightful position on the ocean .
the change that has taken place in naval vessels and naval warfare since the introduction of steam as a motive power for ships of war demands either a corresponding change in some of our existing navy - yards or the establishment of new ones for the construction and necessary repair of modern naval vessels .
no inconsiderable embarrassment , delay , and public injury have been experienced from the want of such governmental establishments .
the necessity of such a navy - yard , so furnished , at some suitable place upon the atlantic seaboard has on repeated occasions been brought to the attention of congress by the navy department , and is again presented in the report of the secretary which accompanies this communication .
i think it my duty to invite your special attention to this subject , and also to that of establishing a yard and depot for naval purposes upon one of the western rivers .
a naval force has been created on those interior waters , and under many disadvantages , within little more than two years , exceeding in numbers the whole naval force of the country at the commencement of the present administration .
satisfactory and important as have been the performances of the heroic men of the navy at this interesting period , they are scarcely more wonderful than the success of our mechanics and artisans in the production of war vessels , which has created a new form of naval power .
our country has advantages superior to any other nation in our resources of iron and timber , with inexhaustible quantities of fuel in the immediate vicinity of both , and all available and in close proximity to navigable waters .
without the advantage of public works , the resources of the nation have been developed and its power displayed in the construction of a navy of such magnitude , which has at the very period of its creation rendered signal service to the union .
the increase of the number of seamen in the public service from 7,500 men in the spring of 1861 to about 34,000 at the present time has been accomplished without special legislation or extraordinary bounties to promote that increase .
it has been found , however , that the operation of the draft , with the high bounties paid for army recruits , is beginning to affect injuriously the naval service , and will , if not corrected , be likely to impair its efficiency by detaching seamen from their proper vocation and inducing them to enter the army .
i therefore respectfully suggest that congress might aid both the army and naval services by a definite provision on this subject which would at the same time be equitable to the communities more especially interested .
i commend to your consideration the suggestions of the secretary of the navy in regard to the policy of fostering and training seamen and also the education of officers and engineers for the naval service .
the naval academy is rendering signal service in preparing midshipmen for the highly responsible duties which in after life they will be required to perform .
in order that the country should not be deprived of the proper quota of educated officers , for which legal provision has been made at the naval school , the vacancies caused by the neglect or omission to make nominations from the states in insurrection have been filled by the secretary of the navy .
the school is now more full and complete than at any former period , and in every respect entitled to the favorable consideration of congress .
during the past fiscal year the financial condition of the post - office department has been one of increasing prosperity , and i am gratified in being able to state that the actual postal revenue has nearly equaled the entire expenditures , the latter amounting to $ 11,314,206.84 and the former to $ 11,163,789.59 , leaving a deficiency of but $ 150,417.25 .
in 1860 , the year immediately preceding the rebellion , the deficiency amounted to $ 5,656,705.49 , the postal receipts of that year being $ 2,645,722.19 less than those of 1863 .
the decrease since 1860 in the annual amount of transportation has been only about 25 per cent , but the annual expenditure on account of the same has been reduced 35 per cent .
it is manifest , therefore , that the post - office department may become self - sustaining in a few years , even with the restoration of the whole service .
the international conference of postal delegates from the principal countries of europe and america , which was called at the suggestion of the postmaster - general , met at paris on the 11th of may last and concluded its deliberations on the 8th of june .
the principles established by the conference as best adapted to facilitate postal intercourse between nations and as the basis of future postal conventions inaugurate a general system of uniform international charges at reduced rates of postage , and can not fail to produce beneficial results .
i refer you to the report of the secretary of the interior , which is herewith laid before you , for useful and varied information in relation to the public lands , indian affairs , patents , pensions , and other matters of public concern pertaining to his department .
the quantity of land disposed of during the last and the first quarter of the present fiscal years was 3,841,549 acres , of which 161,911 acres were sold for cash , 1,456,514 acres were taken up under the homestead law , and the residue disposed of under laws granting lands for military bounties , for railroad and other purposes .
it also appears that the sale of the public lands is largely on the increase .
it has long been a cherished opinion of some of our wisest statesmen that the people of the united states had a higher and more enduring interest in the early settlement and substantial cultivation of the public lands than in the amount of direct revenue to be derived from the sale of them .
this opinion has had a controlling influence in shaping legislation upon the subject of our national domain .
i may cite as evidence of this the liberal measures adopted in reference to actual settlers ; the grant to the states of the overflowed lands within their limits , in order to their being reclaimed and rendered fit for cultivation ; the grants to railway companies of alternate sections of land upon the contemplated issues of their roads , which when completed will so largely multiply the facilities for reaching our distant possessions .
this policy has received its most signal and beneficent illustration in the recent enactment granting homesteads to actual settlers .
since the 1st day of january last the before - mentioned quantity of 1,456,514 acres of land have been taken up under its provisions .
this fact and the amount of sales furnish gratifying evidence of increasing settlement upon the public lands , notwithstanding the great struggle in which the energies of the nation have been engaged , and which has required so large a withdrawal of our citizens from their accustomed pursuits .
i cordially concur in the recommendation of the secretary of the interior suggesting a modification of the act in favor of those engaged in the military and naval service of the united states .
i doubt not that congress will cheerfully adopt such measures as will , without essentially changing the general features of the system , secure to the greatest practicable extent its benefits to those who have left their homes in the defense of the country in this arduous crisis .
i invite your attention to the views of the secretary as to the propriety of raising by appropriate legislation a revenue from the mineral lands of the united states .
the measures provided at your last session for the removal of certain indian tribes have been carried into effect .
sundry treaties have been negotiated , which will in due time be submitted for the constitutional action of the senate .
they contain stipulations for extinguishing the possessory rights of the indians to large and valuable tracts of lands .
it is hoped that the effect of these treaties will result in the establishment of permanent friendly relations with such of these tribes as have been brought into frequent and bloody collision with our outlying settlements and emigrants .
sound policy and our imperative duty to these wards of the government demand our anxious and constant attention to their material well - being , to their progress in the arts of civilization , and , above all , to that moral training which under the blessing of divine providence will confer upon them the elevated and sanctifying influences , the hopes and consolations , of the christian faith .
i suggested in my last annual message the propriety of remodeling our indian system .
subsequent events have satisfied me of its necessity .
the details set forth in the report of the secretary evince the urgent need for immediate legislative action .
i commend the benevolent institutions established or patronized by the government in this district to your generous and fostering care .
the attention of congress during the last session was engaged to some extent with a proposition for enlarging the water communication between the mississippi river and the northeastern seaboard , which proposition , however , failed for the time .
since then , upon a call of the greatest respectability , a convention has been held at chicago upon the same subject , a summary of whose views is contained in a memorial addressed to the president and congress , and which i now have the honor to lay before you .
that this interest is one which ere long will force its own way i do not entertain a doubt , while it is submitted entirely to your wisdom as to what can be done now .
augmented interest is given to this subject by the actual commencement of work upon the pacific railroad , under auspices so favorable to rapid progress and completion .
the enlarged navigation becomes a palpable need to the great road .
i transmit the second annual report of the commissioner of the department of agriculture , asking your attention to the developments in that vital interest of the nation .
when congress assembled a year ago , the war had already lasted nearly twenty months , and there had been many conflicts on both land and sea , with varying results ; the rebellion had been pressed back into reduced limits ; yet the tone of public feeling and opinion , at home and abroad was not satisfactory .
with other signs , the popular elections then just past indicated uneasiness among ourselves , while , amid much that was cold and menacing , the kindest words coming from europe were uttered in accents of pity that we were too blind to surrender a hopeless cause .
our commerce was suffering greatly by a few armed vessels built upon and furnished from foreign shores , and we were threatened with such additions from the same quarter as would sweep our trade from the sea and raise our blockade .
we had failed to elicit from european governments anything hopeful upon this subject .
the preliminary emancipation proclamation , issued in september , was running its assigned period to the beginning of the new year .
a month later the final proclamation came , including the announcement that colored men of suitable condition would be received into the war service .
the policy of emancipation and of employing black soldiers gave to the future a new aspect , about which hope and fear and doubt contended in uncertain conflict .
according to our political system , as a matter of civil administration , the general government had no lawful power to effect emancipation in any state , and for a long time it had been hoped that the rebellion could be suppressed without resorting to it as a military measure .
it was all the while deemed possible that the necessity for it might come , and that if it should the crisis of the contest would then be presented .
it came , and , as was anticipated , it was followed by dark and doubtful days .
eleven months having now passed , we are permitted to take another review .
the rebel borders are pressed still farther back , and by the complete opening of the mississippi the country dominated by the rebellion is divided into distinct parts , with no practical communication between them .
tennessee and arkansas have been substantially cleared of insurgent control , and influential citizens in each , owners of slaves and advocates of slavery at the beginning of the rebellion , now declare openly for emancipation in their respective states .
of those states not included in the emancipation proclamation , maryland and missouri , neither of which three years ago would tolerate any restraint upon the extension of slavery into new territories , only dispute now as to the best mode of removing it within their own limits .
of those who were slaves at the beginning of the rebellion full 100,000 are now in the united states military service , about one - half of which number actually bear arms in the ranks , thus giving the double advantage of taking so much labor from the insurgent cause and supplying the places which otherwise must be filled with so many white men .
so far as tested , it is difficult to say they are not as good soldiers as any .
no servile insurrection or tendency to violence or cruelty has marked the measures of emancipation and arming the blacks .
these measures have been much discussed in foreign countries , and , contemporary with such discussion , the tone of public sentiment there is much improved .
at home the same measures have been fully discussed , supported , criticised , and denounced , and the annual elections following are highly encouraging to those whose official duty it is to bear the country through this great trial .
thus we have the new reckoning .
the crisis which threatened to divide the friends of the union is past .
looking now to the present and future , and with reference to a resumption of the national authority within the states wherein that authority has been suspended , i have thought fit to issue a proclamation , a copy of which is herewith transmitted . *
on examination of this proclamation it will appear , as is believed , that nothing will be attempted beyond what is amply justified by the constitution .
true , the form of an oath is given , but no man is coerced to take it .
the man is only promised a pardon in case he voluntarily takes the oath .
the constitution authorizes the executive to grant or withhold the pardon at his own absolute discretion , and this includes the power to grant on terms , as is fully established by judicial and other authorities .
it is also proffered that if in any of the states named a state government shall be in the mode prescribed set up , such government shall be recognized and guaranteed by the united states , and that under it the state shall , on the constitutional conditions , be protected against invasion and domestic violence .
the constitutional obligation of the united states to guarantee to every state in the union a republican form of government and to protect the state in the cases stated is explicit and full .
but why tender the benefits of this provision only to a state government set up in this particular way ?
this section of the constitution contemplates a case wherein the element within a state favorable to republican government in the union may be too feeble for an opposite and hostile element external to or even within the state , and such are precisely the cases with which we are now dealing .
an attempt to guarantee and protect a revived state government , constructed in whole or in preponderating part from the very element against whose hostility and violence it is to be protected , is simply absurd .
there must be a test by which to separate the opposing elements , so as to build only from the sound ; and that test is a sufficiently liberal one which accepts as sound whoever will make a sworn recantation of his former unsoundness .
but if it be proper to require as a test of admission to the political body an oath of allegiance to the constitution of the united states and to the union under it , why also to the laws and proclamations in regard to slavery ?
those laws and proclamations were enacted and put forth for the purpose of aiding in the suppression of the rebellion .
to give them their fullest effect there had to be a pledge for their maintenance .
in my judgment , they have aided and will further aid the cause for which they were intended .
to now abandon them would be not only to relinquish a lever of power , but would also be a cruel and an astounding breach of faith .
i may add at this point that while i remain in my present position i shall not attempt to retract or modify the emancipation proclamation , nor shall i return to slavery any person who is free by the terms of that proclamation or by any of the acts of congress .
for these and other reasons it is thought best that support of these measures shall be included in the oath , and it is believed the executive may lawfully claim it in return for pardon and restoration of forfeited rights , which he has clear constitutional power to withhold altogether or grant upon the terms which he shall deem wisest for the public interest .
it should be observed also that this part of the oath is subject to the modifying and abrogating power of legislation and supreme judicial decision .
the proposed acquiescence of the national executive in any reasonable temporary state arrangement for the freed people is made with the view of possibly modifying the confusion and destitution which must at best attend all classes by a total revolution of labor throughout whole states .
it is hoped that the already deeply afflicted people in those states may be somewhat more ready to give up the cause of their affliction if to this extent this vital matter be left to themselves , while no power of the national executive to prevent an abuse is abridged by the proposition .
the suggestion in the proclamation as to maintaining the political framework of the states on what is called reconstruction is made in the hope that it may do good without danger of harm .
it will save labor and avoid great confusion .
but why any proclamation now upon this subject ?
this question is beset with the conflicting views that the step might be delayed too long or be taken too soon .
in some states the elements for resumption seem ready for action .
but remain inactive apparently for want of a rallying point -- a plan of action , why shall a adopt the plan of b rather than b that of a ?
and if a and b should agree , how can they know but that the general government here will reject their plan ?
by the proclamation a plan is presented which may be accepted by them as a rallying point , and which they are assured in advance will not be rejected here .
this may bring them to act sooner than they otherwise would .
the objections to a premature presentation of a plan by the national executive consist in the danger of committals on points which could be more safely left to further developments .
care has been taken to so shape the document as to avoid embarrassments from this source .
saying that on certain terms certain classes will be pardoned with rights restored , it is not said that other classes or other terms will never be in included .
saying specified way , it is said that reconstruction will be accepted if presented in a not said it will never be accepted in any other way .
the movements by state action for emancipation in several of the states not included in the emancipation proclamation are matters of profound gratulation .
and while i do not repeat in detail what i have heretofore so earnestly urged upon this subject , my general views and feelings remain unchanged ; and i trust that congress will omit no fair opportunity of aiding these important steps to a great consummation .
in the midst of other cares , however important , we must not lose sight of the fact that the war power is still our main reliance .
to that power alone can we look yet for a time to give confidence to the people in the contested regions that the insurgent power will not again overrun them .
until that confidence shall be established little can be done anywhere for what is called reconstruction .
hence our chiefest care must still be directed to the army and navy , who have thus far borne their harder part so nobly and well ; and it may be esteemed fortunate that in giving the greatest efficiency to these indispensable arms we do also honorably recognize the gallant men , from commander to sentinel , who compose them , and to whom more than to others the world must stand indebted for the home of freedom disenthralled , regenerated , enlarged , and perpetuated .

my friends --- no one , not in my situation , can appreciate my feeling of sadness at this parting .
to this place , and the kindness of these people , i owe every thing .
here i have lived a quarter of a century , and have passed from a young to an old man .
here my children have been born , and one is buried .
i now leave , not knowing when , or whether ever , i may return , with a task before me greater than that which rested upon washington .
without the assistance of that divine being , who ever attended him , i can not succeed .
with that assistance i can not fail .
trusting in him , who can go with me , and remain with you and be every where for good , let us confidently hope that all will yet be well .
to his care commending you , as i hope in your prayers you will commend me , i bid you an affectionate farewell .

honors to henry clayon the fourth day of july , 1776 , the people of a few feeble and oppressed colonies of great britain , inhabiting a portion of the atlantic coast of north america , publicly declared their national independence , and made their appeal to the justice of their cause , and to the god of battles , for the maintainance of that declaration .
that people were few in numbers , and without resources , save only their own wise heads and stout hearts .
within the first year of that declared independence , and while its maintainance was yet problematical --- while the bloody struggle between those resolute rebels , and their haughty would - be - masters , was still waging , of undistinguished parents , and in an obscure district of one of those colonies , henry clay was born .
the infant nation , and the infant child began the race of life together .
for three quarters of a century they have travelled hand in hand .
they have been companions ever .
the nation has passed its perils , and is free , prosperous , and powerful .
the child has reached his manhood , his middle age , his old age , and is dead .
in all that has concerned the nation the man ever sympathised ; and now the nation mourns for the man .
the day after his death , one of the public journals , opposed to him politically , held the following pathetic and beautiful language , which i adopt , partly because such high and exclusive eulogy , originating with a political friend , might offend good taste , but chiefly , because i could not , in any language of my own , so well express my thoughts---"alas !
who can realize that henry clay is dead !
who can realize that never again that majestic form shall rise in the council - chambers of his country to beat back the storms of anarchy which may threaten , or pour the oil of peace upon the troubled billows as they rage and menace around ?
who can realize , that the workings of that mighty mind have ceased --- that the throbbings of that gallant heart are stilled --- that the mighty sweep of that graceful arm will be felt no more , and the magic of that eloquent tongue , which spake as spake no other tongue besides , hushed --- hushed forever !
who can realize that freedom 's champion --- the champion of a civilized world , and of all tongues and kindreds and people , has indeed fallen !
alas , in those dark hours , which , as they come in the history of all nations , must come in ours --- those hours of peril and dread which our land has experienced , and which she may be called to experience again --- to whom now may her people look up for that council [ counsel ] and advice , which only wisdom and experience and patriotism can give , and which only the undoubting confidence of a nation will receive ?
perchance , in the whole circle of the great and gifted of our land , there remains but one on whose shoulders the mighty mantle of the departed statesman may fall --- one , while we now write , is doubtless pouring his tears over the bier of his brother and his friend --- brother , friend ever , yet in political sentiment , as far apart as party could make them .
ah , it is at times like these , that the petty distinctions of mere party disappear .
we see only the great , the grand , the noble features of the departed statesman ; and we do not even beg permission to bow at his feet and mingle our tears with those who have ever been his political adherents --- we do [ not ? ]
beg this permission --- we claim it as a right , though we feel it as a privilege .
henry clay belonged to his country --- to the world , mere party can not claim men like him .
his career has been national --- his fame has filled the earth --- his memory will endure to ` the last syllable of recorded time.'"henry clay is dead!---he breathed his last on yesterday at twenty minutes after eleven , in his chamber at washington .
to those who followed his lead in public affairs , it more appropriately belongs to pronounce his eulogy , and pay specific honors to the memory of the illustrious dead --- but all americans may show the grief which his death inspires , for , his character and fame are national property .
as on a question of liberty , he knew no north , no south , no east , no west , but only the union , which held them all in its sacred circle , so now his countrymen will know no grief , that is not as wide - spread as the bounds of the confederacy .
the career of henry clay was a public career .
from his youth he has been devoted to the public service , at a period too , in the world 's history justly regarded as a remarkable era in human affairs .
he witnessed in the beginning the throes of the french revolution .
he saw the rise and fall of napoleon .
he was called upon to legislate for america , and direct her policy when all europe was the battle - field of contending dynasties , and when the struggle for supremacy imperilled the rights of all neutral nations .
his voice , spoke war and peace in the contest with great britain."when greece rose against the turks and struck for liberty , his name was mingled with the battle - cry of freedom .
when south america threw off the thraldom of spain , his speeches were read at the head of her armies by bolivar .
his name has been , and will continue to be , hallowed in two hemispheres , for it is---`one of the few the immortal namesthat were not born to die,'"to the ardent patriot and profound statesman , he added a quality possessed by few of the gifted on earth .
his eloquence has not been surpassed .
in the effective power to move the heart of man , clay was without an equal , and the heaven born endowment , in the spirit of its origin , has been most conspicuously exhibited against intestine feud .
on at least three important occasions , he has quelled our civil commotions , by a power and influence , which belonged to no other statesman of his age and times .
and in our last internal discord , when this union trembled to its center --- in old age , he left the shades of private life and gave the death blow to fraternal strife , with the vigor of his earlier years in a series of senatorial efforts , which in themselves would bring immortality , by challenging comparison with the efforts of any statesman in any age .
he exorcised the demon which possessed the body politic , and gave peace to a distracted land .
alas !
the achievement cost him his life !
he sank day by day to the tomb --- his pale , but noble brow , bound with a triple wreath , put there by a grateful country .
may his ashes rest in peace , while his spirit goes to take its station among the great and good men who preceded him!''while it is customary , and proper , upon occasions like the present , to give a brief sketch of the life of the deceased ; in the case of mr. clay , it is less necessary than most others ; for his biography has been written and re - written , and read , and re - read , for the last twenty - five years ; so that , with the exception of a few of the latest incidents of his life , all is as well known , as it can be .
the short sketch which i give is , therefore merely to maintain the connection of this discourse .
henry clay was born on the 12th of april 1777 , in hanover county , virginia .
of his father , who died in the fourth or fifth year of henry 's age , little seems to be known , except that he was a respectable man , and a preacher of the baptist persuasion .
mr. clay 's education , to the end of his life , was comparatively limited .
i say `` to the end of his life , '' because i have understood that , from time to time , he added something to his education during the greater part of his whole life .
mr. clay 's lack of a more perfect early education , however it may be regretted generally , teaches at least one profitable lesson ; it teaches that in this country , one can scarcely be so poor , but that , if he will , he can acquire sufficient education to get through the world respectably .
in his twenty - third year mr. clay was licenced to practice law , and emigrated to lexington , kentucky .
here he commenced and continued the practice till the year 1803 , when he was first elected to the kentucky legislature .
by successive elections he was continued in the legislature till the latter part of 1806 , when he was elected to fill a vacancy , of a single session , in the united states senate .
in 1807 he was again elected to the kentucky house of representatives , and by that body , chosen its speaker .
in 1808 he was re - elected to the same body .
in 1809 he was again chosen to fill a vacancy of two years in the united states senate .
in 1811 he was elected to the united states house of representatives , and on the first day of taking his seat in that body , he was chosen its speaker .
in 1813 he was again elected speaker .
early in 1814 , being the period of our last british war , mr. clay was sent as commissioner , with others , to negotiate a treaty of peace , which treaty was concluded in the latter part of the same year .
on his return from europe he was again elected to the lower branch of congress , and on taking his seat in december 1815 was called to his old post --- the speaker 's chair , a position in which he was retained , by successive elections , with one brief intermission , till the inauguration of john q. adams in march 1825 .
he was then appointed secretary of state , and occupied that important station till the inauguration of gen. jackson in march 1829 .
after this he returned to kentucky , resumed the practice of the law , and continued it till the autumn of 1831 , when he was by the legislature of kentucky , again placed in the united states senate .
by a re - election he was continued in the senate till he resigned his seat , and retired , in march 1842 .
in december 1849 he again took his seat in the senate , which he again resigned only a few months before his death .
by the foregoing it is perceived that the period from the beginning of mr. clay 's official life , in 1803 , to the end of it in 1852 , is but one year short of half a century ; and that the sum of all the intervals in it , will not amount to ten years .
but mere duration of time in office , constitutes the smallest part of mr. clay 's history .
throughout that long period , he has constantly been the most loved , and most implicitly followed by friends , and the most dreaded by opponents , of all living american politicians .
in all the great questions which have agitated the country , and particularly in those great and fearful crises , the missouri question --- the nullification question , and the late slavery question , as connected with the newly acquired territory , involving and endangering the stability of the union , his has been the leading and most conspicuous part .
in 1824 he was first a candidate for the presidency , and was defeated ; and , although he was successively defeated for the same office in 1832 , and in 1844 , there has never been a moment since 1824 till after 1848 when a very large portion of the american people did not cling to him with an enthusiastic hope and purpose of still elevating him to the presidency .
with other men , to be defeated , was to be forgotten ; but to him , defeat was but a trifling incident , neither changing him , or the world 's estimate of him .
even those of both political parties , who have been preferred to him for the highest office , have run far briefer courses than he , and left him , still shining , high in the heavens of the political world .
jackson , van buren , harrison , polk , and taylor , all rose after , and set long before him .
the spell --- the long enduring spell --- with which the souls of men were bound to him , is a miracle .
who can compass it ?
it is probably true he owed his pre - eminence to no one quality , but to a fortunate combination of several .
he was surpassingly eloquent ; but many eloquent men fail utterly ; and they are not , as a class , generally successful .
his judgment was excellent ; but many men of good judgment , live and die unnoticed .
his will was indomitable ; but this quality often secures to its owner nothing better than a character for useless obstinacy .
these then were mr. clay 's leading qualities .
no one of them is very uncommon ; but all taken together are rarely combined in a single individual ; and this is probably the reason why such men as henry clay are so rare in the world .
mr. clay 's eloquence did not consist , as many fine specimens of eloquence does [ do ] , of types and figures --- of antithesis , and elegant arrangement of words and sentences ; but rather of that deeply earnest and impassioned tone , and manner , which can proceed only from great sincerity and a thorough conviction , in the speaker of the justice and importance of his cause .
this it is , that truly touches the chords of human sympathy ; and those who heard mr. clay , never failed to be moved by it , or ever afterwards , forgot the impression .
all his efforts were made for practical effect .
he never spoke merely to be heard .
he never delivered a fourth of july oration , or an eulogy on an occasion like this .
as a politician or statesman , no one was so habitually careful to avoid all sectional ground .
whatever he did , he did for the whole country .
in the construction of his measures he ever carefully surveyed every part of the field , and duly weighed every conflicting interest .
feeling , as he did , and as the truth surely is , that the world 's best hope depended on the continued union of these states , he was ever jealous of , and watchful for , whatever might have the slightest tendency to separate them .
mr. clay 's predominant sentiment , from first to last , was a deep devotion to the cause of human liberty --- a strong sympathy with the oppressed every where , and an ardent wish for their elevation .
with him , this was a primary and all controlling passion .
subsidiary to this was the conduct of his whole life .
he loved his country partly because it was his own country , but mostly because it was a free country ; and he burned with a zeal for its advancement , prosperity and glory , because he saw in such , the advancement , prosperity and glory , of human liberty , human right and human nature .
he desired the prosperity of his countrymen partly because they were his countrymen , but chiefly to show to the world that freemen could be prosperous .
that his views and measures were always the wisest , needs not to be affirmed ; nor should it be , on this occasion , where so many , thinking differently , join in doing honor to his memory .
a free people , in times of peace and quiet --- when pressed by no common danger --- naturally divide into parties .
at such times , the man who is of neither party , is not --- cannot be , of any consequence .
mr. clay , therefore , was of a party .
taking a prominent part , as he did , in all the great political questions of his country for the last half century , the wisdom of his course on many , is doubted and denied by a large portion of his countrymen ; and of such it is not now proper to speak particularly .
but there are many others , about his course upon which , there is little or no disagreement amongst intelligent and patriotic americans .
of these last are the war of 1812 , the missouri question , nullification , and the now recent compromise measures .
in 1812 mr. clay , though not unknown , was still a young man .
whether we should go to war with great britain , being the question of the day , a minority opposed the declaration of war by congress , while the majority , though apparently inclining to war , had , for years , wavered , and hesitated to act decisively .
meanwhile british aggressions multiplied , and grew more daring and aggravated .
by mr. clay , more than any other man , the struggle was brought to a decision in congress .
the question , being now fully before congress , came up , in a variety of ways , in rapid succession , on most of which occasions mr. clay spoke .
adding to all the logic , of which the subject was susceptible , that noble inspiration , which came to him as it came to no other , he aroused , and nerved , and inspired his friends , and confounded and bore - down all opposition .
several of his speeches , on these occasions , were reported , and are still extant ; but the best of these all never was .
during its delivery the reporters forgot their vocations , dropped their pens , and sat enchanted from near the beginning to quite the close .
the speech now lives only in the memory of a few old men ; and the enthusiasm with which they cherish their recollection of it is absolutely astonishing .
the precise language of this speech we shall never know ; but we do know --- we can not help knowing , that , with deep pathos , it pleaded the cause of the injured sailor --- that it invoked the genius of the revolution --- that it apostrophised the names of otis , of henry and of washington --- that it appealed to the interest , the pride , the honor and the glory of the nation --- that it shamed and taunted the timidity of friends --- that it scorned , and scouted , and withered the temerity of domestic foes --- that it bearded and defied the british lion --- and rising , and swelling , and maddening in its course , it sounded the onset , till the charge , the shock , the steady struggle , and the glorious victory , all passed in vivid review before the entranced hearers .
important and exciting as was the war question , of 1812 , it never so alarmed the sagacious statesmen of the country for the safety of the republic , as afterwards did the missouri question .
this sprang from that unfortunate source of discord --- negro slavery .
when our federal constitution was adopted , we owned no territory beyond the limits or ownership of the states , except the territory north - west of the river ohio , and east of the mississippi .
what has since been formed into the states of maine , kentucky , and tennessee , was , i believe , within the limits of or owned by massachusetts , virginia , and north carolina .
as to the north western territory , provision had been made , even before the adoption of the constitution , that slavery should never go there .
on the admission of the states into the union carved from the territory we owned before the constitution , no question --- or at most , no considerable question --- arose about slavery --- those which were within the limits of or owned by the old states , following , respectively , the condition of the parent state , and those within the north west territory , following the previously made provision .
but in 1803 we purchased louisiana of the french ; and it included with much more , what has since been formed into the state of missouri .
with regard to it , nothing had been done to forestall the question of slavery .
when , therefore , in 1819 , missouri , having formed a state constitution , without excluding slavery , and with slavery already actually existing within its limits , knocked at the door of the union for admission , almost the entire representation of the non - slave - holding states , objected .
a fearful and angry struggle instantly followed .
this alarmed thinking men , more than any previous question , because , unlike all the former , it divided the country by geographical lines .
other questions had their opposing partizans in all localities of the country and in almost every family ; so that no division of the union could follow such , without a separation of friends , to quite as great an extent , as that of opponents .
not so with the missouri question .
on this a geographical line could be traced which , in the main , would separate opponents only .
this was the danger .
mr. jefferson , then in retirement wrote:``i had for a long time ceased to read newspapers , or to pay any attention to public affairs , confident they were in good hands , and content to be a passenger in our bark to the shore from which i am not distant .
but this momentous question , like a fire bell in the night , awakened , and filled me with terror .
i considered it at once as the knell of the union .
it is hushed , indeed , for the moment .
but this is a reprieve only , not a final sentence .
a geographical line , co - inciding with a marked principle , moral and political , once conceived , and held up to the angry passions of men , will never be obliterated ; and every irritation will mark it deeper and deeper .
i can say , with conscious truth , that there is not a man on earth who would sacrifice more than i would to relieve us from this heavy reproach , in any practicable way .
the cession of that kind of property , for so it is misnamed , is a bagatelle which would not cost me a second thought , if , in that way , a general emancipation , and expatriation could be effected ; and , gradually , and with due sacrifices i think it might be .
but as it is , we have the wolf by the ears and we can neither hold him , nor safely let him go .
justice is in one scale , and self - preservation in the other.''mr .
clay was in congress , and , perceiving the danger , at once engaged his whole energies to avert it .
it began , as i have said , in 1819 ; and it did not terminate till 1821 .
missouri would not yield the point ; and congress --- that is , a majority in congress --- by repeated votes , showed a determination to not admit the state unless it should yield .
after several failures , and great labor on the part of mr. clay to so present the question that a majority could consent to the admission , it was , by a vote , rejected , and as all seemed to think , finally .
a sullen gloom hung over the nation .
all felt that the rejection of missouri , was equivalent to a dissolution of the union : because those states which already had , what missouri was rejected for refusing to relinquish , would go with missouri .
all deprecated and deplored this , but none saw how to avert it .
for the judgment of members to be convinced of the necessity of yielding , was not the whole difficulty ; each had a constituency to meet , and to answer to .
mr. clay , though worn down , and exhausted , was appealed to by members , to renew his efforts at compromise .
he did so , and by some judicious modifications of his plan , coupled with laborious efforts with individual members , and his own over - mastering eloquence upon the floor , he finally secured the admission of the state .
brightly , and captivating as it had previously shown , it was now perceived that his great eloquence , was a mere embellishment , or , at most , but a helping hand to his inventive genius , and his devotion to his country in the day of her extreme peril .
after the settlement of the missouri question , although a portion of the american people have differed with mr. clay , and a majority even , appear generally to have been opposed to him on questions of ordinary administration , he seems constantly to have been regarded by all , as the man for a crisis .
accordingly , in the days of nullification , and more recently in the re - appearance of the slavery question , connected with our territory newly acquired of mexico , the task of devising a mode of adjustment , seems to have been cast upon mr. clay , by common consent --- and his performance of the task , in each case , was little else than a literal fulfilment of the public expectation .
mr. clay 's efforts in behalf of the south americans , and afterwards , in behalf of the greeks , in the times of their respective struggles for civil liberty are among the finest on record , upon the noblest of all themes ; and bear ample corroboration of what i have said was his ruling passion --- a love of liberty and right , unselfishly , and for their own sakes .
having been led to allude to domestic slavery so frequently already , i am unwilling to close without referring more particularly to mr. clay 's views and conduct in regard to it .
he ever was , on principle and in feeling , opposed to slavery .
the very earliest , and one of the latest public efforts of his life , separated by a period of more than fifty years , were both made in favor of gradual emancipation of the slaves in kentucky .
he did not perceive , that on a question of human right , the negroes were to be excepted from the human race .
and yet mr. clay was the owner of slaves .
cast into life where slavery was already widely spread and deeply seated , he did not perceive , as i think no wise man has perceived , how it could be at once eradicated , without producing a greater evil , even to the cause of human liberty itself .
his feeling and his judgment , therefore , ever led him to oppose both extremes of opinion on the subject .
those who would shiver into fragments the union of these states ; tear to tatters its now venerated constitution ; and even burn the last copy of the bible , rather than slavery should continue a single hour , together with all their more halting sympathisers , have received , and are receiving their just execration ; and the name , and opinions , and influence of mr. clay , are fully , and , as i trust , effectually and enduringly , arrayed against them .
but i would also , if i could , array his name , opinions , and influence against the opposite extreme --- against a few , but an increasing number of men , who , for the sake of perpetuating slavery , are beginning to assail and to ridicule the white - man 's charter of freedom --- the declaration that `` all men are created free and equal . ''
so far as i have learned , the first american , of any note , to do or attempt this , was the late john c. calhoun ; and if i mistake not , it soon after found its way into some of the messages of the governors of south carolina .
we , however , look for , and are not much shocked by , political eccentricities and heresies in south carolina .
but , only last year , i saw with astonishment , what purported to be a letter of a very distinguished and influential clergyman of virginia , copied , with apparent approbation , into a st. louis newspaper , containing the following , to me , very extraordinary language---"i am fully aware that there is a text in some bibles that is not in mine .
professional abolitionists have made more use of it , than of any passage in the bible .
it came , however , as i trace it , from saint voltaire , and was baptized by thomas jefferson , and since almost universally regarded as canonical authority `` all men are born free and equal.'"this is a genuine coin in the political currency of our generation .
i am sorry to say that i have never seen two men of whom it is true .
but i must admit i never saw the siamese twins , and therefore will not dogmatically say that no man ever saw a proof of this sage aphorism.''this sounds strangely in republican america .
the like was not heard in the fresher days of the republic .
let us contrast with it the language of that truly national man , whose life and death we now commemorate and lament .
i quote from a speech of mr. clay delivered before the american colonization society in 1827."we are reproached with doing mischief by the agitation of this question .
the society goes into no household to disturb its domestic tranquility ; it addresses itself to no slaves to weaken their obligations of obedience .
it seeks to affect no man 's property .
it neither has the power nor the will to affect the property of any one contrary to his consent .
the execution of its scheme would augment instead of diminishing the value of the property left behind .
the society , composed of free men , concerns itself only with the free .
collateral consequences we are not responsible for .
it is not this society which has produced the great moral revolution which the age exhibits .
what would they , who thus reproach us , have done ?
if they would repress all tendencies towards liberty , and ultimate emancipation , they must do more than put down the benevolent efforts of this society .
they must go back to the era of our liberty and independence , and muzzle the cannon which thunders its annual joyous return .
they must renew the slave trade with all its train of atrocities .
they must suppress the workings of british philanthropy , seeking to meliorate the condition of the unfortunate west indian slave .
they must arrest the career of south american deliverance from thraldom .
they must blow out the moral lights around us , and extinguish that greatest torch of all which america presents to a benighted world --- pointing the way to their rights , their liberties , and their happiness .
and when they have achieved all those purposes their work will be yet incomplete .
they must penetrate the human soul , and eradicate the light of reason , and the love of liberty .
then , and not till then , when universal darkness and despair prevail , can you perpetuate slavery , and repress all sympathy , and all humane , and benevolent efforts among free men , in behalf of the unhappy portion of our race doomed to bondage.''the american colonization society was organized in 1816 .
mr. clay , though not its projector , was one of its earliest members ; and he died , as for the many preceding years he had been , its president .
it was one of the most cherished objects of his direct care and consideration ; and the association of his name with it has probably been its very greatest collateral support .
he considered it no demerit in the society , that it tended to relieve slave - holders from the troublesome presence of the free negroes ; but this was far from being its whole merit in his estimation .
in the same speech from which i have quoted he says : `` there is a moral fitness in the idea of returning to africa her children , whose ancestors have been torn from her by the ruthless hand of fraud and violence .
transplanted in a foreign land , they will carry back to their native soil the rich fruits of religion , civilization , law and liberty .
may it not be one of the great designs of the ruler of the universe , ( whose ways are often inscrutable by short - sighted mortals , ) thus to transform an original crime , into a signal blessing to that most unfortunate portion of the globe ? ''
this suggestion of the possible ultimate redemption of the african race and african continent , was made twenty - five years ago .
every succeeding year has added strength to the hope of its realization .
may it indeed be realized !
pharaoh 's country was cursed with plagues , and his hosts were drowned in the red sea for striving to retain a captive people who had already served them more than four hundred years .
may like disasters never befall us !
if as the friends of colonization hope , the present and coming generations of our countrymen shall by any means , succeed in freeing our land from the dangerous presence of slavery ; and , at the same time , in restoring a captive people to their long - lost father - land , with bright prospects for the future ; and this too , so gradually , that neither races nor individuals shall have suffered by the change , it will indeed be a glorious consummation .
and if , to such a consummation , the efforts of mr. clay shall have contributed , it will be what he most ardently wished , and none of his labors will have been more valuable to his country and his kind .
but henry clay is dead .
his long and eventful life is closed .
our country is prosperous and powerful ; but could it have been quite all it has been , and is , and is to be , without henry clay ?
such a man the times have demanded , and such , in the providence of god was given us .
but he is gone .
let us strive to deserve , as far as mortals may , the continued care of divine providence , trusting that , in future national emergencies , he will not fail to provide us the instruments of safety and security .
honors to henry clayon the fourth day of july , 1776 , the people of a few feeble and oppressed colonies of great britain , inhabiting a portion of the atlantic coast of north america , publicly declared their national independence , and made their appeal to the justice of their cause , and to the god of battles , for the maintainance of that declaration .
that people were few in numbers , and without resources , save only their own wise heads and stout hearts .
within the first year of that declared independence , and while its maintainance was yet problematical -- while the bloody struggle between those resolute rebels , and their haughty would - be - masters , was still waging , of undistinguished parents , and in an obscure district of one of those colonies , henry clay was born .
the infant nation , and the infant child began the race of life together .
for three quarters of a century they have travelled hand in hand .
they have been companions ever .
the nation has passed its perils , and is free , prosperous , and powerful .
the child has reached his manhood , his middle age , his old age , and is dead .
in all that has concerned the nation the man ever sympathised ; and now the nation mourns for the man .
the day after his death , one of the public journals , opposed to him politically , held the following pathetic and beautiful language , which i adopt , partly because such high and exclusive eulogy , originating with a political friend , might offend good taste , but chiefly , because i could not , in any language of my own , so well express my thoughts -- " alas !
who can realize that henry clay is dead !
who can realize that never again that majestic form shall rise in the council - chambers of his country to beat back the storms of anarchy which may threaten , or pour the oil of peace upon the troubled billows as they rage and menace around ?
who can realize , that the workings of that mighty mind have ceased -- that the throbbings of that gallant heart are stilled -- that the mighty sweep of that graceful arm will be felt no more , and the magic of that eloquent tongue , which spake as spake no other tongue besides , hushed -- hushed forever !
who can realize that freedom 's champion -- the champion of a civilized world , and of all tongues and kindreds and people , has indeed fallen !
alas , in those dark hours , which , as they come in the history of all nations , must come in ours -- those hours of peril and dread which our land has experienced , and which she may be called to experience again -- to whom now may her people look up for that council and advice , which only wisdom and experience and patriotism can give , and which only the undoubting confidence of a nation will receive ?
perchance , in the whole circle of the great and gifted of our land , there remains but one on whose shoulders the mighty mantle of the departed statesman may fall -- one , while we now write , is doubtless pouring his tears over the bier of his brother and his friend -- brother , friend ever , yet in political sentiment , as far apart as party could make them .
ah , it is at times like these , that the petty distinctions of mere party disappear .
we see only the great , the grand , the noble features of the departed statesman ; and we do not even beg permission to bow at his feet and mingle our tears with those who have ever been his political adherents -- we do [ not ? ]
beg this permission -- we claim it as a right , though we feel it as a privilege .
henry clay belonged to his country -- to the world , mere party can not claim men like him .
his career has been national -- his fame has filled the earth -- his memory will endure to ` the last syllable of recorded time.'"henry clay is dead ! --
he breathed his last on yesterday at twenty minutes after eleven , in his chamber at washington .
to those who followed his lead in public affairs , it more appropriately belongs to pronounce his eulogy , and pay specific honors to the memory of the illustrious dead -- but all americans may show the grief which his death inspires , for , his character and fame are national property .
as on a question of liberty , he knew no north , no south , no east , no west , but only the union , which held them all in its sacred circle , so now his countrymen will know no grief , that is not as wide - spread as the bounds of the confederacy .
the career of henry clay was a public career .
from his youth he has been devoted to the public service , at a period too , in the world 's history justly regarded as a remarkable era in human affairs .
he witnessed in the beginning the throes of the french revolution .
he saw the rise and fall of napoleon .
he was called upon to legislate for america , and direct her policy when all europe was the battle - field of contending dynasties , and when the struggle for supremacy imperilled the rights of all neutral nations .
his voice , spoke war and peace in the contest with great britain."when greece rose against the turks and struck for liberty , his name was mingled with the battle - cry of freedom .
when south america threw off the thraldom of spain , his speeches were read at the head of her armies by bolivar .
his name has been , and will continue to be , hallowed in two hemispheres , for it is -- ` one of the few the immortal namesthat were not born to die,'"to the ardent patriot and profound statesman , he added a quality possessed by few of the gifted on earth .
his eloquence has not been surpassed .
in the effective power to move the heart of man , clay was without an equal , and the heaven born endowment , in the spirit of its origin , has been most conspicuously exhibited against intestine feud .
on at least three important occasions , he has quelled our civil commotions , by a power and influence , which belonged to no other statesman of his age and times .
and in our last internal discord , when this union trembled to its center -- in old age , he left the shades of private life and gave the death blow to fraternal strife , with the vigor of his earlier years in a series of senatorial efforts , which in themselves would bring immortality , by challenging comparison with the efforts of any statesman in any age .
he exorcised the demon which possessed the body politic , and gave peace to a distracted land .
alas !
the achievement cost him his life !
he sank day by day to the tomb -- his pale , but noble brow , bound with a triple wreath , put there by a grateful country .
may his ashes rest in peace , while his spirit goes to take its station among the great and good men who preceded him!"while it is customary , and proper , upon occasions like the present , to give a brief sketch of the life of the deceased ; in the case of mr. clay , it is less necessary than most others ; for his biography has been written and re - written , and read , and re - read , for the last twenty - five years ; so that , with the exception of a few of the latest incidents of his life , all is as well known , as it can be .
the short sketch which i give is , therefore merely to maintain the connection of this discourse .
henry clay was born on the 12th of april 1777 , in hanover county , virginia .
of his father , who died in the fourth or fifth year of henry 's age , little seems to be known , except that he was a respectable man , and a preacher of the baptist persuasion .
mr. clay 's education , to the end of his life , was comparatively limited .
i say " to the end of his life , " because i have understood that , from time to time , he added something to his education during the greater part of his whole life .
mr. clay 's lack of a more perfect early education , however it may be regretted generally , teaches at least one profitable lesson ; it teaches that in this country , one can scarcely be so poor , but that , if he will , he can acquire sufficient education to get through the world respectably .
in his twenty - third year mr. clay was licenced to practice law , and emigrated to lexington , kentucky .
here he commenced and continued the practice till the year 1803 , when he was first elected to the kentucky legislature .
by successive elections he was continued in the legislature till the latter part of 1806 , when he was elected to fill a vacancy , of a single session , in the united states senate .
in 1807 he was again elected to the kentucky house of representatives , and by that body , chosen its speaker .
in 1808 he was re - elected to the same body .
in 1809 he was again chosen to fill a vacancy of two years in the united states senate .
in 1811 he was elected to the united states house of representatives , and on the first day of taking his seat in that body , he was chosen its speaker .
in 1813 he was again elected speaker .
early in 1814 , being the period of our last british war , mr. clay was sent as commissioner , with others , to negotiate a treaty of peace , which treaty was concluded in the latter part of the same year .
on his return from europe he was again elected to the lower branch of congress , and on taking his seat in december 1815 was called to his old post --- the speaker 's chair , a position in which he was retained , by successive elections , with one brief intermission , till the inauguration of john q. adams in march 1825 .
he was then appointed secretary of state , and occupied that important station till the inauguration of gen. jackson in march 1829 .
after this he returned to kentucky , resumed the practice of the law , and continued it till the autumn of 1831 , when he was by the legislature of kentucky , again placed in the united states senate .
by a re - election he was continued in the senate till he resigned his seat , and retired , in march 1842 .
in december 1849 he again took his seat in the senate , which he again resigned only a few months before his death .
by the foregoing it is perceived that the period from the beginning of mr. clay 's official life , in 1803 , to the end of it in 1852 , is but one year short of half a century ; and that the sum of all the intervals in it , will not amount to ten years .
but mere duration of time in office , constitutes the smallest part of mr. clay 's history .
throughout that long period , he has constantly been the most loved , and most implicitly followed by friends , and the most dreaded by opponents , of all living american politicians .
in all the great questions which have agitated the country , and particularly in those great and fearful crises , the missouri question -- the nullification question , and the late slavery question , as connected with the newly acquired territory , involving and endangering the stability of the union , his has been the leading and most conspicuous part .
in 1824 he was first a candidate for the presidency , and was defeated ; and , although he was successively defeated for the same office in 1832 , and in 1844 , there has never been a moment since 1824 till after 1848 when a very large portion of the american people did not cling to him with an enthusiastic hope and purpose of still elevating him to the presidency .
with other men , to be defeated , was to be forgotten ; but to him , defeat was but a trifling incident , neither changing him , or the world 's estimate of him .
even those of both political parties , who have been preferred to him for the highest office , have run far briefer courses than he , and left him , still shining , high in the heavens of the political world .
jackson , van buren , harrison , polk , and taylor , all rose after , and set long before him .
the spell -- the long enduring spell -- with which the souls of men were bound to him , is a miracle .
who can compass it ?
it is probably true he owed his pre - eminence to no one quality , but to a fortunate combination of several .
he was surpassingly eloquent ; but many eloquent men fail utterly ; and they are not , as a class , generally successful .
his judgment was excellent ; but many men of good judgment , live and die unnoticed .
his will was indomitable ; but this quality often secures to its owner nothing better than a character for useless obstinacy .
these then were mr. clay 's leading qualities .
no one of them is very uncommon ; but all taken together are rarely combined in a single individual ; and this is probably the reason why such men as henry clay are so rare in the world .
mr. clay 's eloquence did not consist , as many fine specimens of eloquence does , of types and figures -- of antithesis , and elegant arrangement of words and sentences ; but rather of that deeply earnest and impassioned tone , and manner , which can proceed only from great sincerity and a thorough conviction , in the speaker of the justice and importance of his cause .
this it is , that truly touches the chords of human sympathy ; and those who heard mr. clay , never failed to be moved by it , or ever afterwards , forgot the impression .
all his efforts were made for practical effect .
he never spoke merely to be heard .
he never delivered a fourth of july oration , or an eulogy on an occasion like this .
as a politician or statesman , no one was so habitually careful to avoid all sectional ground .
whatever he did , he did for the whole country .
in the construction of his measures he ever carefully surveyed every part of the field , and duly weighed every conflicting interest .
feeling , as he did , and as the truth surely is , that the world 's best hope depended on the continued union of these states , he was ever jealous of , and watchful for , whatever might have the slightest tendency to separate them .
mr. clay 's predominant sentiment , from first to last , was a deep devotion to the cause of human liberty -- a strong sympathy with the oppressed every where , and an ardent wish for their elevation .
with him , this was a primary and all controlling passion .
subsidiary to this was the conduct of his whole life .
he loved his country partly because it was his own country , but mostly because it was a free country ; and he burned with a zeal for its advancement , prosperity and glory , because he saw in such , the advancement , prosperity and glory , of human liberty , human right and human nature .
he desired the prosperity of his countrymen partly because they were his countrymen , but chiefly to show to the world that freemen could be prosperous .
that his views and measures were always the wisest , needs not to be affirmed ; nor should it be , on this occasion , where so many , thinking differently , join in doing honor to his memory .
a free people , in times of peace and quiet --- when pressed by no common danger -- naturally divide into parties .
at such times , the man who is of neither party , is not -- can not be , of any consequence .
mr. clay , therefore , was of a party .
taking a prominent part , as he did , in all the great political questions of his country for the last half century , the wisdom of his course on many , is doubted and denied by a large portion of his countrymen ; and of such it is not now proper to speak particularly .
but there are many others , about his course upon which , there is little or no disagreement amongst intelligent and patriotic americans .
of these last are the war of 1812 , the missouri question , nullification , and the now recent compromise measures .
in 1812 mr. clay , though not unknown , was still a young man .
whether we should go to war with great britain , being the question of the day , a minority opposed the declaration of war by congress , while the majority , though apparently inclining to war , had , for years , wavered , and hesitated to act decisively .
meanwhile british aggressions multiplied , and grew more daring and aggravated .
by mr. clay , more than any other man , the struggle was brought to a decision in congress .
the question , being now fully before congress , came up , in a variety of ways , in rapid succession , on most of which occasions mr. clay spoke .
adding to all the logic , of which the subject was susceptible , that noble inspiration , which came to him as it came to no other , he aroused , and nerved , and inspired his friends , and confounded and bore - down all opposition .
several of his speeches , on these occasions , were reported , and are still extant ; but the best of these all never was .
during its delivery the reporters forgot their vocations , dropped their pens , and sat enchanted from near the beginning to quite the close .
the speech now lives only in the memory of a few old men ; and the enthusiasm with which they cherish their recollection of it is absolutely astonishing .
the precise language of this speech we shall never know ; but we do know -- we can not help knowing , that , with deep pathos , it pleaded the cause of the injured sailor -- that it invoked the genius of the revolution --- that it apostrophised the names of otis , of henry and of washington -- that it appealed to the interest , the pride , the honor and the glory of the nation -- that it shamed and taunted the timidity of friends -- that it scorned , and scouted , and withered the temerity of domestic foes -- that it bearded and defied the british lion -- and rising , and swelling , and maddening in its course , it sounded the onset , till the charge , the shock , the steady struggle , and the glorious victory , all passed in vivid review before the entranced hearers .
important and exciting as was the war question , of 1812 , it never so alarmed the sagacious statesmen of the country for the safety of the republic , as afterwards did the missouri question .
this sprang from that unfortunate source of discord -- negro slavery .
when our federal constitution was adopted , we owned no territory beyond the limits or ownership of the states , except the territory north - west of the river ohio , and east of the mississippi .
what has since been formed into the states of maine , kentucky , and tennessee , was , i believe , within the limits of or owned by massachusetts , virginia , and north carolina .
as to the north western territory , provision had been made , even before the adoption of the constitution , that slavery should never go there .
on the admission of the states into the union carved from the territory we owned before the constitution , no question -- or at most , no considerable question -- arose about slavery -- those which were within the limits of or owned by the old states , following , respectively , the condition of the parent state , and those within the north west territory , following the previously made provision .
but in 1803 we purchased louisiana of the french ; and it included with much more , what has since been formed into the state of missouri .
with regard to it , nothing had been done to forestall the question of slavery .
when , therefore , in 1819 , missouri , having formed a state constitution , without excluding slavery , and with slavery already actually existing within its limits , knocked at the door of the union for admission , almost the entire representation of the non - slave - holding states , objected .
a fearful and angry struggle instantly followed .
this alarmed thinking men , more than any previous question , because , unlike all the former , it divided the country by geographical lines .
other questions had their opposing partizans in all localities of the country and in almost every family ; so that no division of the union could follow such , without a separation of friends , to quite as great an extent , as that of opponents .
not so with the missouri question .
on this a geographical line could be traced which , in the main , would separate opponents only .
this was the danger .
mr. jefferson , then in retirement wrote:"i had for a long time ceased to read newspapers , or to pay any attention to public affairs , confident they were in good hands , and content to be a passenger in our bark to the shore from which i am not distant .
but this momentous question , like a fire bell in the night , awakened , and filled me with terror .
i considered it at once as the knell of the union .
it is hushed , indeed , for the moment .
but this is a reprieve only , not a final sentence .
a geographical line , co - inciding with a marked principle , moral and political , once conceived , and held up to the angry passions of men , will never be obliterated ; and every irritation will mark it deeper and deeper .
i can say , with conscious truth , that there is not a man on earth who would sacrifice more than i would to relieve us from this heavy reproach , in any practicable way .
the cession of that kind of property , for so it is misnamed , is a bagatelle which would not cost me a second thought , if , in that way , a general emancipation , and expatriation could be effected ; and , gradually , and with due sacrifices i think it might be .
but as it is , we have the wolf by the ears and we can neither hold him , nor safely let him go .
justice is in one scale , and self - preservation in the other."mr .
clay was in congress , and , perceiving the danger , at once engaged his whole energies to avert it .
it began , as i have said , in 1819 ; and it did not terminate till 1821 .
missouri would not yield the point ; and congress -- that is , a majority in congress -- by repeated votes , showed a determination to not admit the state unless it should yield .
after several failures , and great labor on the part of mr. clay to so present the question that a majority could consent to the admission , it was , by a vote , rejected , and as all seemed to think , finally .
a sullen gloom hung over the nation .
all felt that the rejection of missouri , was equivalent to a dissolution of the union : because those states which already had , what missouri was rejected for refusing to relinquish , would go with missouri .
all deprecated and deplored this , but none saw how to avert it .
for the judgment of members to be convinced of the necessity of yielding , was not the whole difficulty ; each had a constituency to meet , and to answer to .
mr. clay , though worn down , and exhausted , was appealed to by members , to renew his efforts at compromise .
he did so , and by some judicious modifications of his plan , coupled with laborious efforts with individual members , and his own over - mastering eloquence upon the floor , he finally secured the admission of the state .
brightly , and captivating as it had previously shown , it was now perceived that his great eloquence , was a mere embellishment , or , at most , but a helping hand to his inventive genius , and his devotion to his country in the day of her extreme peril .
after the settlement of the missouri question , although a portion of the american people have differed with mr. clay , and a majority even , appear generally to have been opposed to him on questions of ordinary administration , he seems constantly to have been regarded by all , as the man for a crisis .
accordingly , in the days of nullification , and more recently in the re - appearance of the slavery question , connected with our territory newly acquired of mexico , the task of devising a mode of adjustment , seems to have been cast upon mr. clay , by common consent -- and his performance of the task , in each case , was little else than a literal fulfilment of the public expectation .
mr. clay 's efforts in behalf of the south americans , and afterwards , in behalf of the greeks , in the times of their respective struggles for civil liberty are among the finest on record , upon the noblest of all themes ; and bear ample corroboration of what i have said was his ruling passion -- a love of liberty and right , unselfishly , and for their own sakes .
having been led to allude to domestic slavery so frequently already , i am unwilling to close without referring more particularly to mr. clay 's views and conduct in regard to it .
he ever was , on principle and in feeling , opposed to slavery .
the very earliest , and one of the latest public efforts of his life , separated by a period of more than fifty years , were both made in favor of gradual emancipation of the slaves in kentucky .
he did not perceive , that on a question of human right , the negroes were to be excepted from the human race .
and yet mr. clay was the owner of slaves .
cast into life where slavery was already widely spread and deeply seated , he did not perceive , as i think no wise man has perceived , how it could be at once eradicated , without producing a greater evil , even to the cause of human liberty itself .
his feeling and his judgment , therefore , ever led him to oppose both extremes of opinion on the subject .
those who would shiver into fragments the union of these states ; tear to tatters its now venerated constitution ; and even burn the last copy of the bible , rather than slavery should continue a single hour , together with all their more halting sympathisers , have received , and are receiving their just execration ; and the name , and opinions , and influence of mr. clay , are fully , and , as i trust , effectually and enduringly , arrayed against them .
but i would also , if i could , array his name , opinions , and influence against the opposite extreme -- against a few , but an increasing number of men , who , for the sake of perpetuating slavery , are beginning to assail and to ridicule the white - man 's charter of freedom -- the declaration that " all men are created free and equal . "
so far as i have learned , the first american , of any note , to do or attempt this , was the late john c. calhoun ; and if i mistake not , it soon after found its way into some of the messages of the governors of south carolina .
we , however , look for , and are not much shocked by , political eccentricities and heresies in south carolina .
but , only last year , i saw with astonishment , what purported to be a letter of a very distinguished and influential clergyman of virginia , copied , with apparent approbation , into a st. louis newspaper , containing the following , to me , very extraordinary language -- " i am fully aware that there is a text in some bibles that is not in mine .
professional abolitionists have made more use of it , than of any passage in the bible .
it came , however , as i trace it , from saint voltaire , and was baptized by thomas jefferson , and since almost universally regarded as canonical authority " all men are born free and equal.'"this is a genuine coin in the political currency of our generation .
i am sorry to say that i have never seen two men of whom it is true .
but i must admit i never saw the siamese twins , and therefore will not dogmatically say that no man ever saw a proof of this sage aphorism."this sounds strangely in republican america .
the like was not heard in the fresher days of the republic .
let us contrast with it the language of that truly national man , whose life and death we now commemorate and lament .
i quote from a speech of mr. clay delivered before the american colonization society in 1827."we are reproached with doing mischief by the agitation of this question .
the society goes into no household to disturb its domestic tranquility ; it addresses itself to no slaves to weaken their obligations of obedience .
it seeks to affect no man 's property .
it neither has the power nor the will to affect the property of any one contrary to his consent .
the execution of its scheme would augment instead of diminishing the value of the property left behind .
the society , composed of free men , concerns itself only with the free .
collateral consequences we are not responsible for .
it is not this society which has produced the great moral revolution which the age exhibits .
what would they , who thus reproach us , have done ?
if they would repress all tendencies towards liberty , and ultimate emancipation , they must do more than put down the benevolent efforts of this society .
they must go back to the era of our liberty and independence , and muzzle the cannon which thunders its annual joyous return .
they must renew the slave trade with all its train of atrocities .
they must suppress the workings of british philanthropy , seeking to meliorate the condition of the unfortunate west indian slave .
they must arrest the career of south american deliverance from thraldom .
they must blow out the moral lights around us , and extinguish that greatest torch of all which america presents to a benighted world -- pointing the way to their rights , their liberties , and their happiness .
and when they have achieved all those purposes their work will be yet incomplete .
they must penetrate the human soul , and eradicate the light of reason , and the love of liberty .
then , and not till then , when universal darkness and despair prevail , can you perpetuate slavery , and repress all sympathy , and all humane , and benevolent efforts among free men , in behalf of the unhappy portion of our race doomed to bondage."the american colonization society was organized in 1816 .
mr. clay , though not its projector , was one of its earliest members ; and he died , as for the many preceding years he had been , its president .
it was one of the most cherished objects of his direct care and consideration ; and the association of his name with it has probably been its very greatest collateral support .
he considered it no demerit in the society , that it tended to relieve slave - holders from the troublesome presence of the free negroes ; but this was far from being its whole merit in his estimation .
in the same speech from which i have quoted he says : " there is a moral fitness in the idea of returning to africa her children , whose ancestors have been torn from her by the ruthless hand of fraud and violence .
transplanted in a foreign land , they will carry back to their native soil the rich fruits of religion , civilization , law and liberty .
may it not be one of the great designs of the ruler of the universe , ( whose ways are often inscrutable by short - sighted mortals , ) thus to transform an original crime , into a signal blessing to that most unfortunate portion of the globe ? "
this suggestion of the possible ultimate redemption of the african race and african continent , was made twenty - five years ago .
every succeeding year has added strength to the hope of its realization .
may it indeed be realized !
pharaoh 's country was cursed with plagues , and his hosts were drowned in the red sea for striving to retain a captive people who had already served them more than four hundred years .
may like disasters never befall us !
if as the friends of colonization hope , the present and coming generations of our countrymen shall by any means , succeed in freeing our land from the dangerous presence of slavery ; and , at the same time , in restoring a captive people to their long - lost father - land , with bright prospects for the future ; and this too , so gradually , that neither races nor individuals shall have suffered by the change , it will indeed be a glorious consummation .
and if , to such a consummation , the efforts of mr. clay shall have contributed , it will be what he most ardently wished , and none of his labors will have been more valuable to his country and his kind .
but henry clay is dead .
his long and eventful life is closed .
our country is prosperous and powerful ; but could it have been quite all it has been , and is , and is to be , without henry clay ?
such a man the times have demanded , and such , in the providence of god was given us .
but he is gone .
let us strive to deserve , as far as mortals may , the continued care of divine providence , trusting that , in future national emergencies , he will not fail to provide us the instruments of safety and security .
>
fellow - citizens of the senate and house of representatives : 
 again the blessings of health and abundant harvests claim our profoundest gratitude to almighty god .
the condition of our foreign affairs is reasonably satisfactory .
mexico continues to be a theater of civil war .
while our political relations with that country have undergone no change , we have at the same time strictly maintained neutrality between the belligerents .
at the request of the states of costa rica and nicaragua , a competent engineer has been authorized to make a survey of the river san juan and the port of san juan .
it is a source of much satisfaction that the difficulties which for a moment excited some political apprehensions and caused a closing of the interoceanic transit route have been amicably adjusted , and that there is a good prospect that the route will soon be reopened with an increase of capacity and adaptation .
we could not exaggerate either the commercial or the political importance of that great improvement .
it would be doing injustice to an important south american state not to acknowledge the directness , frankness , and cordiality with which the united states of colombia have entered into intimate relations with this government .
a claims convention has been constituted to complete the unfinished work of the one which closed its session in 1861 .
the new liberal constitution of venezuela having gone into effect with the universal acquiescence of the people , the government under it has been recognized and diplomatic intercourse with it has opened in a cordial and friendly spirit .
the long - deferred aves island claim has been satisfactorily paid and discharged .
mutual payments have been made of the claims awarded by the late joint commission for the settlement of claims between the united states and peru .
an earnest and cordial friendship continues to exist between the two countries , and such efforts as were in my power have been used to remove misunderstanding and avert a threatened war between peru and spain .
our relations are of the most friendly nature with chile , the argentine republic , bolivia , costa rica , paraguay , san salvador , and hayti .
during the past year no differences of any kind have arisen with any of those republics , and , on the other hand , their sympathies with the united states are constantly expressed with cordiality and earnestness .
the claim arising from the seizure of the cargo of the brig macedonian in 1821 has been paid in full by the government of chile .
civil war continues in the spanish part of san domingo , apparently without prospect of an early close .
official correspondence has been freely opened with liberia , and it gives us a pleasing view of social and political progress in that republic .
it may be expected to derive new vigor from american influence , improved by the rapid disappearance of slavery in the united states .
i solicit your authority to furnish to the republic a gunboat at moderate cost , to be reimbursed to the united states by installments .
such a vessel is needed for the safety of that state against the native african races , and in liberian hands it would be more effective in arresting the african slave trade than a squadron in our own hands .
the possession of the least organized naval force would stimulate a generous ambition in the republic , and the confidence which we should manifest by furnishing it would win forbearance and favor toward the colony from all civilized nations .
the proposed overland telegraph between america and europe , by the way of behrings straits and asiatic russia , which was sanctioned by congress at the last session , has been undertaken , under very favorable circumstances , by an association of american citizens , with the cordial good will and support as well of this government as of those of great britain and russia .
assurances have been received from most of the south american states of their high appreciation of the enterprise and their readiness to cooperate in constructing lines tributary to that world - encircling communication .
i learn with much satisfaction that the noble design of a telegraphic communication between the eastern coast of america and great britain has been renewed , with full expectation of its early accomplishment .
thus it is hoped that with the return of domestic peace the country will be able to resume with energy and advantage its former high career of commerce and civilization .
our very popular and estimable representative in egypt died in april last .
an unpleasant altercation which arose between the temporary incumbent of the office and the government of the pasha resulted in a suspension of intercourse .
the evil was promptly corrected on the arrival of the successor in the consulate , and our relations with egypt , as well as our relations with the barbary powers , are entirely satisfactory .
the rebellion which has so long been flagrant in china has at last been suppressed , with the cooperating good offices of this government and of the other western commercial states .
the judicial consular establishment there has become very difficult and onerous , and it will need legislative revision to adapt it to the extension of our commerce and to the more intimate intercourse which has been instituted with the government and people of that vast empire .
china seems to be accepting with hearty good will the conventional laws which regulate commercial and social intercourse among the western nations .
owing to the peculiar situation of japan and the anomalous form of its government , the action of that empire in performing treaty stipulations is inconstant and capricious .
nevertheless , good progress has been effected by the western powers , moving with enlightened concert .
our own pecuniary claims have been allowed or put in course of settlement , and the inland sea has been reopened to commerce .
there is reason also to believe that these proceedings have increased rather than diminished the friendship of japan toward the united states .
the ports of norfolk , fernandina , and pensacola have been opened by proclamation .
it is hoped that foreign merchants will now consider whether it is not safer and more profitable to themselves , as well as just to the united states , to resort to these and other open ports than it is to pursue , through many hazards and at vast cost , a contraband trade with other ports which are closed , if not by actual military occupation , at least by a lawful and effective blockade .
for myself , i have no doubt of the power and duty of the executive , under the law of nations , to exclude enemies of the human race from an asylum in the united states .
if congress should think that proceedings in such cases lack the authority of law , or ought to be further regulated by it , i recommend that provision be made for effectually preventing foreign slave traders from acquiring domicile and facilities for their criminal occupation in our country .
it is possible that if it were new and open question the maritime powers , with the lights they now enjoy , would not concede the privileges of a naval belligerent to the insurgents of the united states , destitute , as they are , and always have been , equally of ships of war and of ports and harbors .
disloyal emissaries have been neither less assiduous nor more successful during the last year than they were before that time in their efforts under favor of that privilege , to embroil our country in foreign wars .
the desire and determination of the governments of the maritime states to defeat that design are believed to be as sincere as and can not be more earnest than our own .
nevertheless , unforeseen political difficulties have arisen , especially in brazilian and british ports and on the northern boundary of the united states , which have required , and are likely to continue to require , the practice of constant vigilance and a just and conciliatory spirit on the part of the united states , as well as of the nations concerned and their governments .
commissioners have been appointed under the treaty with great britain on the adjustment of the claims of the hudsons bay and pugets sound agricultural companies , in oregon , and are now proceeding to the execution of the trust assigned to them .
in view of the insecurity of life and property in the region adjacent to the canadian border , by reason of recent assaults and depredations committed by inimical and desperate persons who are harbored there , it has been thought proper to give notice that after the expiration of six months , the period conditionally stipulated in the existing arrangement with great britain , the united states must hold themselves at liberty to increase their naval armament upon the lakes if they shall find that proceeding necessary .
the condition of the border will necessarily come into consideration in connection with the question of continuing or modifying the rights of transit from canada through the united states , as well as the regulation of imposts , which were temporarily established by the reciprocity treaty of the 5th june , 1854 .
i desire , however , to be understood while making this statement that the colonial authorities of canada are not deemed to be intentionally unjust or unfriendly toward the united states , but , on the contrary , there is every reason to expect that , with the approval of the imperial government , they will take the necessary measures to prevent new incursions across the border .
the act passed at the last session for the encouragement of immigration has so far as was possible been put into operation .
it seems to need amendment which will enable the officers of the government to prevent the practice of frauds against the immigrants while on their way and on their arrival in the ports , so as to secure them here a free choice of avocations and places of settlement .
a liberal disposition toward this great national policy is manifested by most of the european states , and ought to be reciprocated on our part by giving the immigrants effective national protection .
i regard our immigrants as one of the principal replenishing streams which are appointed by providence to repair the ravages of internal war and its wastes of national strength and health .
all that is necessary is to secure the flow of that stream in its present fullness , and to that end the government must in every way make it manifest that it neither needs nor designs to impose involuntary military service upon those who come from other lands to cast their lot in our country .
the financial affairs of the government have been successfully administered during the last year .
the legislation of the last session of congress has beneficially affected the revenues , although sufficient time has not yet elapsed to experience the full effect of several of the provisions of the acts of congress imposing increased taxation .
the receipts during the year from all sources , upon the basis of warrants signed by the secretary of the treasury , including loans and the balance in the treasury on the 1st day of july , 1863 , were $ 1,394,796,007.62 , and the aggregate disbursements , upon the same basis , were $ 1,298,056,101.89 , leaving a balance in the treasury , as shown by warrants , of $ 96,739,905.73 .
deduct from these amounts the amount of the principal of the public debt redeemed and the amount of issues in substitution therefor , and the actual cash operations of the treasury were : receipts , $ 884,076,646.57 ; disbursements , $ 865,234,087.86 ; which leaves a cash balance in the treasury of $ 18,842,558.71 .
of the receipts there were derived from customs $ 102,316,152.99 , from lands $ 588,333.29 .
from direct taxes $ 475,648.96 , from internal revenue $ 109,741,134.10 , from miscellaneous sources $ 47,511,448.10 , and from loans applied to actual expenditures , including former balance , $ 623,443,929.13 .
there were disbursed for the civil service $ 27,505,599.46 , for pensions and indians $ 7,517,930.97 , for the war department $ 690,791,842.97 , for the navy department $ 85,733,292.77 , for interest on the public debt $ 53,685,421.69 , making an aggregate of $ 865,234,087.86 and leaving a balance in the treasury of $ 18,842,558.71 , as before stated .
for the actual receipts and disbursements for the first quarter and the estimated receipts and disbursements for the three remaining quarters of the current fiscal year , and the general operations of the treasury in detail , i refer you to the report of the secretary of the treasury .
i concur with him in the opinion that the proportion of moneys required to meet the expenses consequent upon the war derived from taxation should be still further increased ; and i earnestly invite your attention to this subject , to the end that there may be such additional legislation as shall be required to meet the just expectations of the secretary .
the public debt on the 1st day of july last , as appears by the books of the treasury , amounted to $ 1,740,690,489.49 .
probably , should the war continue for another year , that amount may be increased by not far from five hundred millions .
held , as it is , for the most part by our own people , it has become a substantial branch of national , though private , property .
for obvious reasons the more nearly this property can be distributed among all the people the better .
to favor such general distribution , greater inducements to become owners might , perhaps , with good effect and without injury be presented to persons of limited means .
with this view i suggest whether it might not be both competent and expedient for congress to provide that a limited amount of some future issue of public securities might be held by any bona fide purchaser exempt from taxation and from seizure for debt , under such restrictions and limitations as might be necessary to guard against abuse of so important a privilege .
this would enable every prudent person to set aside a small annuity against a possible day of want .
privileges like these would render the possession of such securities to the amount limited most desirable to every person of small means who might be able to save enough for the purpose .
the great advantage of citizens being creditors as well as debtors with relation to the public debt is obvious .
men readily perceive that they can not be much oppressed by a debt which they owe to themselves .
the public debt on the 1st day of july last , although somewhat exceeding the estimate of the secretary of the treasury made to congress at the commencement of the last session , falls short of the estimate of that officer made in the preceding december as to its probable amount at the beginning of this year by the sum of $ 3,995,097.31 .
this fact exhibits a satisfactory condition and conduct of the operations of the treasury .
the national banking system is proving to be acceptable to capitalists and to the people .
on the 25th day of november 584 national banks had been organized , a considerable number of which were conversions from state banks .
changes from state systems to the national system are rapidly taking place , and it is hoped that very soon there will be in the united states no banks of issue not authorized by congress and no bank - note circulation not secured by the government .
that the government and the people will derive great benefit from this change in the banking systems of the country can hardly be questioned .
the national system will create a reliable and permanent influence in support of the national credit and protect the people against losses in the use of paper money .
whether or not any further legislation is advisable for the suppression of state - bank issues it will be for congress to determine .
it seems quite clear that the treasury can not be satisfactorily conducted unless the government can exercise a restraining power over the bank - note circulation of the country .
the report of the secretary of war and the accompanying documents will detail the campaigns of the armies in the field since the date of the last annual message , and also the operations of the several administrative bureaus of the war department during the last year .
it will also specify the measures deemed essential for the national defense and to keep up and supply the requisite military force .
the report of the secretary of the navy presents a comprehensive and satisfactory exhibit of the affairs of that department and of the naval service .
it is a subject of congratulation and laudable pride to our countrymen that a navy of such vast proportions has been organized in so brief a period and conducted with so much efficiency and success .
the general exhibit of the navy , including vessels under construction on the 1st of december , 1864 , shows a total of 671 vessels , carrying 4,610 guns , and of 510,396 tons , being an actual increase during the year , over and above all losses by shipwreck or in battle , of 83 vessels , 167 guns , and 42,427 tons .
the total number of men at this time in the naval service , including officers , is about 51,000 .
there have been captured by the navy during the year 324 vessels , and the whole number of naval captures since hostilities commenced is 1,379 , of which 267 are steamers .
the gross proceeds arising from the sale of condemned prize property thus far reported amount to $ 14,396,250.51 .
a large amount of such proceeds is still under adjudication and yet to be reported .
the total expenditure of the navy department of every description , including the cost of the immense squadrons that have been called into existence from the 4th of march , 1861 , to the 1st of november , 1864 , is $ 238,647,262.35 .
your favorable consideration is invited to the various recommendations of the secretary of the navy , especially in regard to a navy - yard and suitable establishment for the construction and repair of iron vessels and the machinery and armature for our ships , to which reference was made in my last annual message .
your attention is also invited to the views expressed in the report in relation to the legislation of congress at its last session in respect to prize on our inland waters .
i cordially concur in the recommendation of the secretary as to the propriety of creating the new rank of vice - admiral in our naval service .
your attention is invited to the report of the postmaster - general for a detailed account of the operations and financial condition of the post - office department .
the postal revenues for the year ending june 30 , 1864 , amounted to $ 12,438,253.78 and the expenditures to $ 12,644,786.20 , the excess of expenditures over receipts being $ 206,652.42 .
the views presented by the postmaster - general on the subject of special grants by the government in aid of the establishment of new lines of ocean mail steamships and the policy he recommends for the development of increased commercial intercourse with adjacent and neighboring countries should receive the careful consideration of congress .
it is of noteworthy interest that the steady expansion of population , improvement , and governmental institutions over the new and unoccupied portions of our country have scarcely been checked , much less impeded or destroyed , by our great civil war , which at first glance would seem to have absorbed almost the entire energies of the nation .
the organization and admission of the state of nevada has been completed in conformity with law , and thus our excellent system is firmly established in the mountains , which once seemed a barren and uninhabitable waste between the atlantic states and those which have grown up on the coast of the pacific ocean .
the territories of the union are generally in a condition of prosperity and rapid growth .
idaho and montana , by reason of their great distance and the interruption of communication with them by indian hostilities , have been only partially organized ; but it is understood that these difficulties are about to disappear , which will permit their governments , like those of the others , to go into speedy and full operation .
as intimately connected with and promotive of this material growth of the nation , i ask the attention of congress to the valuable information and important recommendations relating to the public lands , indian affairs , the pacific railroad , and mineral discoveries contained in the report of the secretary of the interior which is herewith transmitted , and which report also embraces the subjects of patents , pensions , and other topics of public interest pertaining to his department .
the quantity of public land disposed of during the five quarters ending on the 30th of september last was 4,221,342 acres , of which 1,538,614 acres were entered under the homestead law .
the remainder was located with military land warrants , agricultural scrip certified to states for railroads , and sold for cash .
the cash received from sales and location fees was $ 1,019,446 .
the income from sales during the fiscal year ending june 30 , 1864 , was $ 678,007.21 , against $ 136,077.95 received during the preceding year .
the aggregate number of acres surveyed during the year has been equal to the quantity disposed of , and there is open to settlement about 133,000,000 acres of surveyed land .
the great enterprise of connecting the atlantic with the pacific states by railways and telegraph lines has been entered upon with a vigor that gives assurance of success , notwithstanding the embarrassments arising from the prevailing high prices of materials and labor .
the route of the main line of the road has been definitely located for 100 miles westward from the initial point at omaha city , nebr. , and a preliminary location of the pacific railroad of california has been made from sacramento eastward to the great bend of the truckee river in nevada .
numerous discoveries of gold , silver , and cinnabar mines have been added to the many heretofore known , and the country occupied by the sierra nevada and rocky mountains and the subordinate ranges now teems with enterprising labor , which is richly remunerative .
it is believed that the product of the mines of precious metals in that region has during the year reached , if not exceeded , one hundred millions in value .
it was recommended in my last annual message that our indian system be remodeled .
congress at its last session , acting upon the recommendation , did provide for reorganizing the system in california , and it is believed that under the present organization the management of the indians there will be attended with reasonable success .
much yet remains to be done to provide for the proper government of the indians in other parts of the country , to render it secure for the advancing set - tier , and to provide for the welfare of the indian .
the secretary reiterates his recommendations , and to them the attention of congress is invited .
the liberal provisions made by congress for paying pensions to invalid soldiers and sailors of the republic and to the widows , orphans , and dependent mothers of those who have fallen in battle or died of disease contracted or of wounds received in the service of their country have been diligently administered .
there have been added to the pension rolls during the year ending the 30th day of june last the names of 16,770 invalid soldiers and of 271 disabled seamen , making the present number of army invalid pensioners 22,767 and of navy invalid pensioners 712 .
of widows , orphans , and mothers 22,198 have been placed on the army pension rolls and 248 on the navy rolls .
the present number of army pensioners of this class is 25,433 and of navy pensioners 793 .
at the beginning of the year the number of revolutionary pensioners was 1,430 .
only 12 of them were soldiers , of whom 7 have since died .
the remainder are those who under the law receive pensions because of relationship to revolutionary soldiers .
during the year ending the 30th of june , 1864 , $ 4,504,616.92 have been paid to pensioners of all classes .
i cheerfully commend to your continued patronage the benevolent institutions of the district of columbia which have hitherto been established or fostered by congress , and respectfully refer for information concerning them and in relation to the washington aqueduct , the capitol , and other matters of local interest to the report of the secretary .
the agricultural department , under the supervision of its present energetic and faithful head , is rapidly commending itself to the great and vital interest it was created to advance it is peculiarly the people 's department , in which they feel more directly concerned than in any other .
i commend it to the continued attention and fostering care of congress .
the war continues .
since the last annual message all the important lines and positions then occupied by our forces have been maintained and our arms have steadily advanced , thus liberating the regions left in rear , so that missouri , kentucky , tennessee , and parts of other states have again produced reasonably fair crops .
the most remarkable feature in the military operations of the year is general sherman 's attempted march of 300 miles directly through the insurgent region .
it tends to show a great increase of our relative strength that our general in chief should feel able to confront and hold in check every active force of the enemy , and yet to detach a well - appointed large army to move on such an expedition .
the result not yet being known , conjecture in regard to it is not here indulged .
important movements have also occurred during the year to the effect of molding society for durability in the union .
although short of complete success , it is much in the fight direction that 12,000 citizens in each of the states of arkansas and louisiana have organized loyal state governments , with free constitutions , and are earnestly struggling to maintain and administer them .
the movements in the same direction , more extensive though less definite , in missouri , kentucky , and tennessee should not be overlooked .
but maryland presents the example of complete success .
maryland is secure to liberty and union for all the future .
the genius of rebellion will no more claim maryland .
like another foul spirit being driven out , it may seek to tear her , but it will woo her no - more .
at the last session of congress a proposed amendment of the constitution abolishing slavery throughout the united states passed the senate , but failed for lack of the requisite two - thirds vote in the house of representatives .
although the present is the same congress and nearly the same members , and without questioning the wisdom or patriotism of those who stood in opposition , i venture to recommend the reconsideration and passage of the measure at the present session .
of course the abstract question is not changed ; but in intervening election shows almost certainly that the next congress will pass the measure if this does not .
hence there is only a question of time as to when the proposed amendment will go to the states for their action .
and as it is to so go at all events , may we not agree that the sooner the better ?
it is not claimed that the election has imposed a duty on members to change their views or their votes any further than , as an additional element to be considered , their judgment may be affected by it .
it is the voice of the people now for the first time heard upon the question .
in a great national crisis like ours unanimity of action among those seeking a common end is very desirable -- almost indispensable .
and yet no approach to such unanimity is attainable unless some deference shall be paid to the will of the majority simply because it is the will of the majority .
in this case the common end is the maintenance of the union , and among the means to secure that end such will , through the election , is most dearly declared in favor of such constitutional amendment .
the most reliable indication of public purpose in this country is derived through our popular elections .
judging by the recent canvass and its result , the purpose of the people within the loyal states to maintain the integrity of the union was never more firm nor more nearly unanimous than now .
the extraordinary calmness and good order with which the millions of voters met and mingled at the polls give strong assurance of this .
not only all those who supported the union ticket , so called , but a great majority of the opposing party also may be fairly claimed to entertain and to be actuated by the same purpose .
it is an unanswerable argument to this effect that no candidate for any officce whatever , high or low , has ventured to seek votes on the avowal that he was for giving up the union .
there have been much impugning of motives and much heated controversy as to the proper means and best mode of advancing the union cause , but on the distinct issue of union or no union the politicians have shown their instinctive knowledge that there is no diversity among the people .
in affording the people the fair opportunity of showing one to another and to the world this firmess and unanimity of purpose , the election has been of vast value to the national cause .
the election has exhibited another tact not less valuable to be known -- the fact that we do not approach exhaustion in the most important branch of national resources , that of living men .
while it is melancholy to reflect that the war has filled so many graves and carried mourning to so many hearts , it is some relief to know that , compared with the surviving , the fallen have been so few .
while corps and divisions and brigades and regiments have formed and fought and dwindled and gone out of existence , a great majority of the men who composed them are still living .
the same is true of the naval service .
the election returns prove this .
so many voters could not else be found .
the states regularly holding elections , both now and four years ago , to wit , california , connecticut , delaware , illinois , indiana , iowa , kentucky , maine , maryland , massachusetts , michigan , minnesota , missouri , new hampshire , new jersey , new york , ohio , oregon , pennsylvania , rhode island , vermont , west virginia , and wisconsin , east 3,982,011 votes now , against 3,870,222 cast then , showing an aggregate now of 3,982,011 .
to this is to be added 33,762 cast now in the new states of kansas and nevada , which states did not vote in 1860 , thus swelling the aggregate to 4,015,773 and the net increase during the three years and a half of war to 145,551 .
a table is appended showing particulars .
to this again should be added the number of all soldiers in the field from massachusetts , rhode island , new jersey , delaware , indiana , illinois , and california , who by the laws of those states could not vote away from their homes , and which number can not be less than 90,000 .
nor yet is this all .
the number in organized territories is triple now what it was four years ago , while thousands , white and black , join us as the national arms press back the insurgent lines .
so much is shown , affirmatively and negatively , by the election .
it is not material to inquire how the increase has been produced or to show that it would have been greater but for the war , which is probably true .
the important fact remains demonstrated that we have more men now than we had when the war began ; that we are not exhausted nor in process of exhaustion ; that we are gaining strength and may if need be maintain the contest indefinitely .
this as to men .
material resources are now more complete and abundant than ever .
the national resources , then , are unexhausted , and , as we believe , inexhaustible .
the public purpose to reestablish and maintain the national authority is unchanged , and , as we believe , unchangeable .
the manner of continuing the effort remains to choose .
on careful consideration of all the evidence accessible it seems to me that no attempt at negotiation with the insurgent leader could result in any good .
he would accept nothing short of severance of the union , precisely what we will not and can not give .
his declarations to this effect are explicit and oft repeated .
he does not attempt to deceive us .
he affords us no excuse to deceive ourselves .
he can not voluntarily reaccept the union ; we can not voluntarily yield it .
between him and us the issue is distinct , simple , and inflexible .
it is an issue which can only be tried by war and decided by victory .
if we yield , we are beaten ; if the southern people fail him , he is beaten .
either way it would be the victory and defeat following war .
what is true , however , of him who heads the insurgent cause is not necessarily true of those who follow .
although he can not reaccept the union , they can .
some of them , we know , already desire peace and reunion .
the number of such may increase .
they can at any moment have peace simply by laying down their arms and submitting to the national authority under the constitution .
alter so much the government could not , if it would , maintain war against them .
the loyal people would not sustain or allow it .
if questions should remain , we would adjust them by the peaceful means of legislation , conference , courts , and votes , operating only in constitutional and lawful channels .
some certain , and other possible , questions are and would be beyond the executive power to adjust ; as , for instance , the admission of members into congress and whatever might require the appropriation of money .
the executive power itself would be greatly diminished by the cessation of actual war .
pardons and remissions of forfeitures , however , would still be within executive control .
in what spirit and temper this control would be exercised can be fairly judged of by the past .
a year ago general pardon and amnesty , upon specified terms , were offered to all except certain designated classes , and it was at the same time made known that the excepted classes were still within contemplation of special clemency .
during the year many availed themselves of the general provision , and many more would , only that the signs of bad faith in some led to such precautionary measures as rendered the practical process less easy and certain .
during the same time also special pardons have been granted to individuals of the excepted classes , and no voluntary application has been denied .
thus practically the door has been for a full year open to all except such as were not in condition to make free choice ; that is , such as were in custody or under constraint .
it is still so open to all .
but the time may come , probably will come , when public duty shall demand that it be closed and that in lieu more rigorous measures than heretofore shall be adopted .
in presenting the abandonment of armed resistance to the national authority on the part of the insurgents as the only indispensable condition to ending the war on the part of the government , i retract nothing heretofore said as to slavery .
i repeat the declaration made a year a ago , that " while i remain in my present position i shall not attempt to retract or modify the emancipation proclamation , nor shall i return to slavery any person who is free by the terms of that proclamation or by any of the acts of congress . "
if the people should , by whatever mode or means , make it an executive duty to reenslave such persons , another , and not i , must be their instrument to perform it .
in stating a single condition of peace i mean simply to say that the war will cease on the part of the government whenever it shall have ceased on the part of those who began it .

