mr. speaker , mr. vice president , members of congress , distinguished guests , and fellow americans : 
 tonight i want to begin by congratulating the men and women of the 112th congress , as well as your new speaker , john boehner .
and as we mark this occasion , we 're also mindful of the empty chair in this chamber , and we pray for the health of our colleague -- and our friend - -- gabby giffords .
it 's no secret that those of us here tonight have had our differences over the last two years .
the debates have been contentious ; we have fought fiercely for our beliefs .
and that 's a good thing .
that 's what a robust democracy demands .
that 's what helps set us apart as a nation .
but there 's a reason the tragedy in tucson gave us pause .
amid all the noise and passion and rancor of our public debate , tucson reminded us that no matter who we are or where we come from , each of us is a part of something greater - -- something more consequential than party or political preference .
we are part of the american family .
we believe that in a country where every race and faith and point of view can be found , we are still bound together as one people ; that we share common hopes and a common creed ; that the dreams of a little girl in tucson are not so different than those of our own children , and that they all deserve the chance to be fulfilled .
that , too , is what sets us apart as a nation .
now , by itself , this simple recognition wo n't usher in a new era of cooperation .
what comes of this moment is up to us .
what comes of this moment will be determined not by whether we can sit together tonight , but whether we can work together tomorrow .
i believe we can .
and i believe we must .
that 's what the people who sent us here expect of us .
with their votes , they 've determined that governing will now be a shared responsibility between parties .
new laws will only pass with support from democrats and republicans .
we will move forward together , or not at all - -- for the challenges we face are bigger than party , and bigger than politics .
at stake right now is not who wins the next election - -- after all , we just had an election .
at stake is whether new jobs and industries take root in this country , or somewhere else .
it 's whether the hard work and industry of our people is rewarded .
it 's whether we sustain the leadership that has made america not just a place on a map , but the light to the world .
we are poised for progress .
two years after the worst recession most of us have ever known , the stock market has come roaring back .
corporate profits are up .
the economy is growing again .
but we have never measured progress by these yardsticks alone .
we measure progress by the success of our people .
by the jobs they can find and the quality of life those jobs offer .
by the prospects of a small business owner who dreams of turning a good idea into a thriving enterprise .
by the opportunities for a better life that we pass on to our children .
that 's the project the american people want us to work on .
together .
we did that in december .
thanks to the tax cuts we passed , americans ' paychecks are a little bigger today .
every business can write off the full cost of new investments that they make this year .
and these steps , taken by democrats and republicans , will grow the economy and add to the more than one million private sector jobs created last year .
but we have to do more .
these steps we 've taken over the last two years may have broken the back of this recession , but to win the future , we 'll need to take on challenges that have been decades in the making .
many people watching tonight can probably remember a time when finding a good job meant showing up at a nearby factory or a business downtown .
you did n't always need a degree , and your competition was pretty much limited to your neighbors .
if you worked hard , chances are you 'd have a job for life , with a decent paycheck and good benefits and the occasional promotion .
maybe you 'd even have the pride of seeing your kids work at the same company .
that world has changed .
and for many , the change has been painful .
i 've seen it in the shuttered windows of once booming factories , and the vacant storefronts on once busy main streets .
i 've heard it in the frustrations of americans who 've seen their paychecks dwindle or their jobs disappear - -- proud men and women who feel like the rules have been changed in the middle of the game .
they 're right .
the rules have changed .
in a single generation , revolutions in technology have transformed the way we live , work and do business .
steel mills that once needed 1,000 workers can now do the same work with 100 .
today , just about any company can set up shop , hire workers , and sell their products wherever there 's an internet connection .
meanwhile , nations like china and india realized that with some changes of their own , they could compete in this new world .
and so they started educating their children earlier and longer , with greater emphasis on math and science .
they 're investing in research and new technologies .
just recently , china became the home to the world 's largest private solar research facility , and the world 's fastest computer .
so , yes , the world has changed .
the competition for jobs is real .
but this should n't discourage us .
it should challenge us .
remember - -- for all the hits we 've taken these last few years , for all the naysayers predicting our decline , america still has the largest , most prosperous economy in the world .
no workers -- no workers are more productive than ours .
no country has more successful companies , or grants more patents to inventors and entrepreneurs .
we 're the home to the world 's best colleges and universities , where more students come to study than any place on earth .
what 's more , we are the first nation to be founded for the sake of an idea - -- the idea that each of us deserves the chance to shape our own destiny .
that 's why centuries of pioneers and immigrants have risked everything to come here .
it 's why our students do n't just memorize equations , but answer questions like " what do you think of that idea ?
what would you change about the world ?
what do you want to be when you grow up ? "
the future is ours to win .
but to get there , we ca n't just stand still .
as robert kennedy told us , " the future is not a gift .
it is an achievement . "
sustaining the american dream has never been about standing pat .
it has required each generation to sacrifice , and struggle , and meet the demands of a new age .
and now it 's our turn .
we know what it takes to compete for the jobs and industries of our time .
we need to out - innovate , out - educate , and out - build the rest of the world .
we have to make america the best place on earth to do business .
we need to take responsibility for our deficit and reform our government .
that 's how our people will prosper .
that 's how we 'll win the future .
and tonight , i 'd like to talk about how we get there .
the first step in winning the future is encouraging american innovation .
none of us can predict with certainty what the next big industry will be or where the new jobs will come from .
thirty years ago , we could n't know that something called the internet would lead to an economic revolution .
what we can do -- what america does better than anyone else -- is spark the creativity and imagination of our people .
we 're the nation that put cars in driveways and computers in offices ; the nation of edison and the wright brothers ; of google and facebook .
in america , innovation does n't just change our lives .
it is how we make our living .
our free enterprise system is what drives innovation .
but because it 's not always profitable for companies to invest in basic research , throughout our history , our government has provided cutting - edge scientists and inventors with the support that they need .
that 's what planted the seeds for the internet .
that 's what helped make possible things like computer chips and gps .
just think of all the good jobs -- from manufacturing to retail -- that have come from these breakthroughs .
half a century ago , when the soviets beat us into space with the launch of a satellite called sputnik , we had no idea how we would beat them to the moon .
the science was n't even there yet .
nasa did n't exist .
but after investing in better research and education , we did n't just surpass the soviets ; we unleashed a wave of innovation that created new industries and millions of new jobs .
this is our generation 's sputnik moment .
two years ago , i said that we needed to reach a level of research and development we have n't seen since the height of the space race .
and in a few weeks , i will be sending a budget to congress that helps us meet that goal .
we 'll invest in biomedical research , information technology , and especially clean energy technology - --   -- an investment that will strengthen our security , protect our planet , and create countless new jobs for our people .
already , we 're seeing the promise of renewable energy .
robert and gary allen are brothers who run a small michigan roofing company .
after september 11th , they volunteered their best roofers to help repair the pentagon .
but half of their factory went unused , and the recession hit them hard .
today , with the help of a government loan , that empty space is being used to manufacture solar shingles that are being sold all across the country .
in robert 's words , " we reinvented ourselves . "
that 's what americans have done for over 200 years : reinvented ourselves .
and to spur on more success stories like the allen brothers , we 've begun to reinvent our energy policy .
we 're not just handing out money .
we 're issuing a challenge .
we 're telling america 's scientists and engineers that if they assemble teams of the best minds in their fields , and focus on the hardest problems in clean energy , we 'll fund the apollo projects of our time .
at the california institute of technology , they 're developing a way to turn sunlight and water into fuel for our cars .
at oak ridge national laboratory , they 're using supercomputers to get a lot more power out of our nuclear facilities .
with more research and incentives , we can break our dependence on oil with biofuels , and become the first country to have a million electric vehicles on the road by 2015 .
we need to get behind this innovation .
and to help pay for it , i 'm asking congress to eliminate the billions in taxpayer dollars we currently give to oil companies .
i do n't know if -- i do n't know if you 've noticed , but they 're doing just fine on their own .
so instead of subsidizing yesterday 's energy , let 's invest in tomorrow 's .
now , clean energy breakthroughs will only translate into clean energy jobs if businesses know there will be a market for what they 're selling .
so tonight , i challenge you to join me in setting a new goal : by 2035 , 80 percent of america 's electricity will come from clean energy sources .
some folks want wind and solar .
others want nuclear , clean coal and natural gas .
to meet this goal , we will need them all -- and i urge democrats and republicans to work together to make it happen .
maintaining our leadership in research and technology is crucial to america 's success .
but if we want to win the future - -- if we want innovation to produce jobs in america and not overseas - -- then we also have to win the race to educate our kids .
think about it .
over the next 10 years , nearly half of all new jobs will require education that goes beyond a high school education .
and yet , as many as a quarter of our students are n't even finishing high school .
the quality of our math and science education lags behind many other nations .
america has fallen to ninth in the proportion of young people with a college degree .
and so the question is whether all of us -- - as citizens , and as parents -- - are willing to do what 's necessary to give every child a chance to succeed .
that responsibility begins not in our classrooms , but in our homes and communities .
it 's family that first instills the love of learning in a child .
only parents can make sure the tv is turned off and homework gets done .
we need to teach our kids that it 's not just the winner of the super bowl who deserves to be celebrated , but the winner of the science fair .
we need to teach them that success is not a function of fame or pr , but of hard work and discipline .
our schools share this responsibility .
when a child walks into a classroom , it should be a place of high expectations and high performance .
but too many schools do n't meet this test .
that 's why instead of just pouring money into a system that 's not working , we launched a competition called race to the top .
to all 50 states , we said , " if you show us the most innovative plans to improve teacher quality and student achievement , we 'll show you the money . "
race to the top is the most meaningful reform of our public schools in a generation .
for less than 1 percent of what we spend on education each year , it has led over 40 states to raise their standards for teaching and learning .
and these standards were developed , by the way , not by washington , but by republican and democratic governors throughout the country .
and race to the top should be the approach we follow this year as we replace no child left behind with a law that 's more flexible and focused on what 's best for our kids .
you see , we know what 's possible from our children when reform is n't just a top - down mandate , but the work of local teachers and principals , school boards and communities .
take a school like bruce randolph in denver .
three years ago , it was rated one of the worst schools in colorado -- located on turf between two rival gangs .
but last may , 97 percent of the seniors received their diploma .
most will be the first in their families to go to college .
and after the first year of the school 's transformation , the principal who made it possible wiped away tears when a student said , " thank you , ms. waters , for showing that we are smart and we can make it . "
that 's what good schools can do , and we want good schools all across the country .
let 's also remember that after parents , the biggest impact on a child 's success comes from the man or woman at the front of the classroom .
in south korea , teachers are known as " nation builders . "
here in america , it 's time we treated the people who educate our children with the same level of respect .
we want to reward good teachers and stop making excuses for bad ones .
and over the next 10 years , with so many baby boomers retiring from our classrooms , we want to prepare 100,000 new teachers in the fields of science and technology and engineering and math .
in fact , to every young person listening tonight who 's contemplating their career choice : if you want to make a difference in the life of our nation ; if you want to make a difference in the life of a child -- become a teacher .
your country needs you .
of course , the education race does n't end with a high school diploma .
to compete , higher education must be within the reach of every american .
that 's why we 've ended the unwarranted taxpayer subsidies that went to banks , and used the savings to make college affordable for millions of students .
and this year , i ask congress to go further , and make permanent our tuition tax credit -- - worth $ 10,000 for four years of college .
it 's the right thing to do .
because people need to be able to train for new jobs and careers in today 's fast - changing economy , we 're also revitalizing america 's community colleges .
last month , i saw the promise of these schools at forsyth tech in north carolina .
many of the students there used to work in the surrounding factories that have since left town .
one mother of two , a woman named kathy proctor , had worked in the furniture industry since she was 18 years old .
and she told me she 's earning her degree in biotechnology now , at 55 years old , not just because the furniture jobs are gone , but because she wants to inspire her children to pursue their dreams , too .
as kathy said , " i hope it tells them to never give up . "
if we take these steps - -- if we raise expectations for every child , and give them the best possible chance at an education , from the day they are born until the last job they take -- - we will reach the goal that i set two years ago : by the end of the decade , america will once again have the highest proportion of college graduates in the world .
one last point about education .
today , there are hundreds of thousands of students excelling in our schools who are not american citizens .
some are the children of undocumented workers , who had nothing to do with the actions of their parents .
they grew up as americans and pledge allegiance to our flag , and yet they live every day with the threat of deportation .
others come here from abroad to study in our colleges and universities .
but as soon as they obtain advanced degrees , we send them back home to compete against us .
it makes no sense .
now , i strongly believe that we should take on , once and for all , the issue of illegal immigration .
and i am prepared to work with republicans and democrats to protect our borders , enforce our laws and address the millions of undocumented workers who are now living in the shadows .
i know that debate will be difficult .
i know it will take time .
but tonight , let 's agree to make that effort .
and let 's stop expelling talented , responsible young people who could be staffing our research labs or starting a new business , who could be further enriching this nation .
the third step in winning the future is rebuilding america .
to attract new businesses to our shores , we need the fastest , most reliable ways to move people , goods , and information -- from high - speed rail to high - speed internet .
our infrastructure used to be the best , but our lead has slipped .
south korean homes now have greater internet access than we do .
countries in europe and russia invest more in their roads and railways than we do .
china is building faster trains and newer airports .
meanwhile , when our own engineers graded our nation 's infrastructure , they gave us a " d. " 
 we have to do better .
america is the nation that built the transcontinental railroad , brought electricity to rural communities , constructed the interstate highway system .
the jobs created by these projects did n't just come from laying down track or pavement .
they came from businesses that opened near a town 's new train station or the new off - ramp .
so over the last two years , we 've begun rebuilding for the 21st century , a project that has meant thousands of good jobs for the hard - hit construction industry .
and tonight , i 'm proposing that we redouble those efforts .
we 'll put more americans to work repairing crumbling roads and bridges .
we 'll make sure this is fully paid for , attract private investment , and pick projects based   what 's best for the economy , not politicians .
within 25 years , our goal is to give 80 percent of americans access to high - speed rail .
this could allow you to go places in half the time it takes to travel by car .
for some trips , it will be faster than flying -- - without the pat - down .
as we speak , routes in california and the midwest are already underway .
within the next five years , we 'll make it possible for businesses to deploy the next generation of high - speed wireless coverage to 98 percent of all americans .
this is n't just about --   -- this is n't about faster internet or fewer dropped calls .
it 's about connecting every part of america to the digital age .
it 's about a rural community in iowa or alabama where farmers and small business owners will be able to sell their products all over the world .
it 's about a firefighter who can download the design of a burning building onto a handheld device ; a student who can take classes with a digital textbook ; or a patient who can have face - to - face video chats with her doctor .
all these investments - -- in innovation , education , and infrastructure -- - will make america a better place to do business and create jobs .
but to help our companies compete , we also have to knock down barriers that stand in the way of their success .
for example , over the years , a parade of lobbyists has rigged the tax code to benefit particular companies and industries .
those with accountants or lawyers to work the system can end up paying no taxes at all .
but all the rest are hit with one of the highest corporate tax rates in the world .
it makes no sense , and it has to change .
so tonight , i 'm asking democrats and republicans to simplify the system .
get rid of the loopholes .
level the playing field .
and use the savings to lower the corporate tax rate for the first time in 25 years -- - without adding to our deficit .
it can be done .
to help businesses sell more products abroad , we set a goal of doubling our exports by 2014 - -- because the more we export , the more jobs we create here at home .
already , our exports are up .
recently , we signed agreements with india and china that will support more than 250,000 jobs here in the united states .
and last month , we finalized a trade agreement with south korea that will support at least 70,000 american jobs .
this agreement has unprecedented support from business and labor , democrats and republicans -- and i ask this congress to pass it as soon as possible .
now , before i took office , i made it clear that we would enforce our trade agreements , and that i would only sign deals that keep faith with american workers and promote american jobs .
that 's what we did with korea , and that 's what i intend to do as we pursue agreements with panama and colombia and continue our asia pacific and global trade talks .
to reduce barriers to growth and investment , i 've ordered a review of government regulations .
when we find rules that put an unnecessary burden on businesses , we will fix them .
but i will not hesitate to create or enforce common - sense safeguards to protect the american people .
that 's what we 've done in this country for more than a century .
it 's why our food is safe to eat , our water is safe to drink , and our air is safe to breathe .
it 's why we have speed limits and child labor laws .
it 's why last year , we put in place consumer protections against hidden fees and penalties by credit card companies and new rules to prevent another financial crisis .
and it 's why we passed reform that finally prevents the health insurance industry from exploiting patients .
now , i have heard rumors that a few of you still have concerns about our new health care law .
so let me be the first to say that anything can be improved .
if you have ideas about how to improve this law by making care better or more affordable , i am eager to work with you .
we can start right now by correcting a flaw in the legislation that has placed an unnecessary bookkeeping burden on small businesses .
what i 'm not willing to do -- what i 'm not willing to do is go back to the days when insurance companies could deny someone coverage because of a preexisting condition .
i 'm not willing to tell james howard , a brain cancer patient from texas , that his treatment might not be covered .
i 'm not willing to tell jim houser , a small business man from oregon , that he has to go back to paying $ 5,000 more to cover his employees .
as we speak , this law is making prescription drugs cheaper for seniors and giving uninsured students a chance to stay on their patients ' -- parents ' coverage .
so i say to this chamber tonight , instead of re - fighting the battles of the last two years , let 's fix what needs fixing and let 's move forward .
now , the final critical step in winning the future is to make sure we are n't buried under a mountain of debt .
we are living with a legacy of deficit spending that began almost a decade ago .
and in the wake of the financial crisis , some of that was necessary to keep credit flowing , save jobs , and put money in people 's pockets .
but now that the worst of the recession is over , we have to confront the fact that our government spends more than it takes in .
that is not sustainable .
every day , families sacrifice to live within their means .
they deserve a government that does the same .
so tonight , i am proposing that starting this year , we freeze annual domestic spending for the next five years .
now , this would reduce the deficit by more than $ 400 billion over the next decade , and will bring discretionary spending to the lowest share of our economy since dwight eisenhower was president .
this freeze will require painful cuts .
already , we 've frozen the salaries of hardworking federal employees for the next two years .
i 've proposed cuts to things i care deeply about , like community action programs .
the secretary of defense has also agreed to cut tens of billions of dollars in spending that he and his generals believe our military can do without .
i recognize that some in this chamber have already proposed deeper cuts , and i 'm willing to eliminate whatever we can honestly afford to do without .
but let 's make sure that we 're not doing it on the backs of our most vulnerable citizens .
and let 's make sure that what we 're cutting is really excess weight .
cutting the deficit by gutting our investments in innovation and education is like lightening an overloaded airplane by removing its engine .
it may make you feel like you 're flying high at first , but it wo n't take long before you feel the impact .
now , most of the cuts and savings i 've proposed only address annual domestic spending , which represents a little more than 12 percent of our budget .
to make further progress , we have to stop pretending that cutting this kind of spending alone will be enough .
it wo n't .
the bipartisan fiscal commission i created last year made this crystal clear .
i do n't agree with all their proposals , but they made important progress .
and their conclusion is that the only way to tackle our deficit is to cut excessive spending wherever we find it -- - in domestic spending , defense spending , health care spending , and spending through tax breaks and loopholes .
this means further reducing health care costs , including programs like medicare and medicaid , which are the single biggest contributor to our long - term deficit .
the health insurance law we passed last year will slow these rising costs , which is part of the reason that nonpartisan economists have said that repealing the health care law would add a quarter of a trillion dollars to our deficit .
still , i 'm willing to look at other ideas to bring down costs , including one that republicans suggested last year -- medical malpractice reform to rein in frivolous lawsuits .
to put us on solid ground , we should also find a bipartisan solution to strengthen social security for future generations .
we must do it without putting at risk current retirees , the most vulnerable , or people with disabilities ; without slashing benefits for future generations ; and without subjecting americans ' guaranteed retirement income to the whims of the stock market .
and if we truly care about our deficit , we simply ca n't afford a permanent extension of the tax cuts for the wealthiest 2 percent of americans .
before we take money away from our schools or scholarships away from our students , we should ask millionaires to give up their tax break .
it 's not a matter of punishing their success .
it 's about promoting america 's success .
in fact , the best thing we could do on taxes for all americans is to simplify the individual tax code .
this will be a tough job , but members of both parties have expressed an interest in doing this , and i am prepared to join them .
so now is the time to act .
now is the time for both sides and both houses of congress -- - democrats and republicans - -- to forge a principled compromise that gets the job done .
if we make the hard choices now to rein in our deficits , we can make the investments we need to win the future .
let me take this one step further .
we should n't just give our people a government that 's more affordable .
we should give them a government that 's more competent and more efficient .
we ca n't win the future with a government of the past .
we live and do business in the information age , but the last major reorganization of the government happened in the age of black - and - white tv .
there are 12 different agencies that deal with exports .
there are at least five different agencies that deal with housing policy .
then there 's my favorite example : the interior department is in charge of salmon while they 're in fresh water , but the commerce department handles them when they 're in saltwater .
i hear it gets even more complicated once they 're smoked .
now , we 've made great strides over the last two years in using technology and getting rid of waste .
veterans can now download their electronic medical records with a click of the mouse .
we 're selling acres of federal office space that has n't been used in years , and we 'll cut through red tape to get rid of more .
but we need to think bigger .
in the coming months , my administration will develop a proposal to merge , consolidate , and reorganize the federal government in a way that best serves the goal of a more competitive america .
i will submit that proposal to congress for a vote -- - and we will push to get it passed .
in the coming year , we 'll also work to rebuild people 's faith in the institution of government .
because you deserve to know exactly how and where your tax dollars are being spent , you 'll be able to go to a website and get that information for the very first time in history .
because you deserve to know when your elected officials are meeting with lobbyists , i ask congress to do what the white house has already done -- put that information online .
and because the american people deserve to know that special interests are n't larding up legislation with pet projects , both parties in congress should know this : if a bill comes to my desk with earmarks inside , i will veto it .
i will veto it .
the 21st century government that 's open and competent .
a government that lives within its means .
an economy that 's driven by new skills and new ideas .
our success in this new and changing world will require reform , responsibility , and innovation .
it will also require us to approach that world with a new level of engagement in our foreign affairs .
just as jobs and businesses can now race across borders , so can new threats and new challenges .
no single wall separates east and west .
no one rival superpower is aligned against us .
and so we must defeat determined enemies , wherever they are , and build coalitions that cut across lines of region and race and religion .
and america 's moral example must always shine for all who yearn for freedom and justice and dignity .
and because we 've begun this work , tonight we can say that american leadership has been renewed and america 's standing has been restored .
look to iraq , where nearly 100,000 of our brave men and women have left with their heads held high .
american combat patrols have ended , violence is down , and a new government has been formed .
this year , our civilians will forge a lasting partnership with the iraqi people , while we finish the job of bringing our troops out of iraq .
america 's commitment has been kept .
the iraq war is coming to an end .
of course , as we speak , al qaeda and their affiliates continue to plan attacks against us .
thanks to our intelligence and law enforcement professionals , we 're disrupting plots and securing our cities and skies .
and as extremists try to inspire acts of violence within our borders , we are responding with the strength of our communities , with respect for the rule of law , and with the conviction that american muslims are a part of our american family .
we 've also taken the fight to al qaeda and their allies abroad .
in afghanistan , our troops have taken taliban strongholds and trained afghan security forces .
our purpose is clear : by preventing the taliban from reestablishing a stranglehold over the afghan people , we will deny al qaeda the safe haven that served as a launching pad for 9/11 .
thanks to our heroic troops and civilians , fewer afghans are under the control of the insurgency .
there will be tough fighting ahead , and the afghan government will need to deliver better governance .
but we are strengthening the capacity of the afghan people and building an enduring partnership with them .
this year , we will work with nearly 50 countries to begin a transition to an afghan lead .
and this july , we will begin to bring our troops home .
in pakistan , al qaeda 's leadership is under more pressure than at any point since 2001 .
their leaders and operatives are being removed from the battlefield .
their safe havens are shrinking .
and we 've sent a message from the afghan border to the arabian peninsula to all parts of the globe : we will not relent , we will not waver , and we will defeat you .
american leadership can also be seen in the effort to secure the worst weapons of war .
because republicans and democrats approved the new start treaty , far fewer nuclear weapons and launchers will be deployed .
because we rallied the world , nuclear materials are being locked down on every continent so they never fall into the hands of terrorists .
because of a diplomatic effort to insist that iran meet its obligations , the iranian government now faces tougher sanctions , tighter sanctions than ever before .
and on the korean peninsula , we stand with our ally south korea , and insist that north korea keeps its commitment to abandon nuclear weapons .
this is just a part of how we 're shaping a world that favors peace and prosperity .
with our european allies , we revitalized nato and increased our cooperation on everything from counterterrorism to missile defense .
we 've reset our relationship with russia , strengthened asian alliances , built new partnerships with nations like india .
this march , i will travel to brazil , chile , and el salvador to forge new alliances across the americas .
around the globe , we 're standing with those who take responsibility - -- helping farmers grow more food , supporting doctors who care for the sick , and combating the corruption that can rot a society and rob people of opportunity .
recent events have shown us that what sets us apart must not just be our power - -- it must also be the purpose behind it .
in south sudan - -- with our assistance - -- the people were finally able to vote for independence after years of war .
thousands lined up before dawn .
people danced in the streets .
one man who lost four of his brothers at war summed up the scene around him : " this was a battlefield for most of my life , " he said . "
now we want to be free . "
and we saw that same desire to be free in tunisia , where the will of the people proved more powerful than the writ of a dictator .
and tonight , let us be clear : the united states of america stands with the people of tunisia , and supports the democratic aspirations of all people .
we must never forget that the things we 've struggled for , and fought for , live in the hearts of people everywhere .
and we must always remember that the americans who have borne the greatest burden in this struggle are the men and women who serve our country .
tonight , let us speak with one voice in reaffirming that our nation is united in support of our troops and their families .
let us serve them as well as they 've served us -- by giving them the equipment they need , by providing them with the care and benefits that they have earned , and by enlisting our veterans in the great task of building our own nation .
our troops come from every corner of this country - -- they 're black , white , latino , asian , native american .
they are christian and hindu , jewish and muslim .
and , yes , we know that some of them are gay .
starting this year , no american will be forbidden from serving the country they love because of who they love .
and with that change , i call on all our college campuses to open their doors to our military recruiters and rotc .
it is time to leave behind the divisive battles of the past .
it is time to move forward as one nation .
we should have no illusions about the work ahead of us .
reforming our schools , changing the way we use energy , reducing our deficit -- - none of this will be easy .
all of it will take time .
and it will be harder because we will argue about everything .
the costs .
the details .
the letter of every law .
of course , some countries do n't have this problem .
if the central government wants a railroad , they build a railroad , no matter how many homes get bulldozed .
if they do n't want a bad story in the newspaper , it does n't get written .
and yet , as contentious and frustrating and messy as our democracy can sometimes be , i know there is n't a person here who would trade places with any other nation on earth .
we may have differences in policy , but we all believe in the rights enshrined in our constitution .
we may have different opinions , but we believe in the same promise that says this is a place where you can make it if you try .
we may have different backgrounds , but we believe in the same dream that says this is a country where anything is possible .
no matter who you are .
no matter where you come from .
that dream is why i can stand here before you tonight .
that dream is why a working - class kid from scranton can sit behind me .
that dream is why someone who began by sweeping the floors of his father 's cincinnati bar can preside as speaker of the house in the greatest nation on earth .
that dream - -- that american dream - -- is what drove the allen brothers to reinvent their roofing company for a new era .
it 's what drove those students at forsyth tech to learn a new skill and work towards the future .
and that dream is the story of a small business owner named brandon fisher .
brandon started a company in berlin , pennsylvania , that specializes in a new kind of drilling technology .
and one day last summer , he saw the news that halfway across the world , 33 men were trapped in a chilean mine , and no one knew how to save them .
but brandon thought his company could help .
and so he designed a rescue that would come to be known as plan b. his employees worked around the clock to manufacture the necessary drilling equipment .
and brandon left for chile .
along with others , he began drilling a 2,000-foot hole into the ground , working three- or four - hour -- three or four days at a time without any sleep .
thirty - seven days later , plan b succeeded , and the miners were rescued .
but because he did n't want all of the attention , brandon was n't there when the miners emerged .
he 'd already gone back home , back to work on his next project .
and later , one of his employees said of the rescue , " we proved that center rock is a little company , but we do big things . "
we do big things .
from the earliest days of our founding , america has been the story of ordinary people who dare to dream .
that 's how we win the future .
we 're a nation that says , " i might not have a lot of money , but i have this great idea for a new company . " "
i might not come from a family of college graduates , but i will be the first to get my degree . " "
i might not know those people in trouble , but i think i can help them , and i need to try . " "
i 'm not sure how we 'll reach that better place beyond the horizon , but i know we 'll get there .
i know we will . "
we do big things .
the idea of america endures .
our destiny remains our choice .
and tonight , more than two centuries later , it 's because of our people that our future is hopeful , our journey goes forward , and the state of our union is strong .
thank you .
god bless you , and may god bless the united states of america .

if there is anyone out there who still doubts that america is a place where all things are possible ; who still wonders if the dream of our founders is alive in our time ; who still questions the power of our democracy , tonight is your answer .
it 's the answer told by lines that stretched around schools and churches in numbers this nation has never seen ; by people who waited three hours and four hours , many for the very first time in their lives , because they believed that this time must be different ; that their voice could be that difference .
it 's the answer spoken by young and old , rich and poor , democrat and republican , black , white , latino , asian , native american , gay , straight , disabled and not disabled -- americans who sent a message to the world that we have never been a collection of red states and blue states : we are , and always will be , the united states of america .
it 's the answer that led those who have been told for so long by so many to be cynical , and fearful , and doubtful of what we can achieve to put their hands on the arc of history and bend it once more toward the hope of a better day .
it 's been a long time coming , but tonight , because of what we did on this day , in this election , at this defining moment , change has come to america .
i just received a very gracious call from senator mccain .
he fought long and hard in this campaign , and he 's fought even longer and harder for the country he loves .
he has endured sacrifices for america that most of us can not begin to imagine , and we are better off for the service rendered by this brave and selfless leader .
i congratulate him and governor palin for all they have achieved , and i look forward to working with them to renew this nation 's promise in the months ahead .
i want to thank my partner in this journey , a man who campaigned from his heart and spoke for the men and women he grew up with on the streets of scranton and rode with on that train home to delaware , the vice president - elect of the united states , joe biden .
i would not be standing here tonight without the unyielding support of my best friend for the last sixteen years , the rock of our family and the love of my life , our nation 's next first lady , michelle obama .
sasha and malia , i love you both so much , and you have earned the new puppy that 's coming with us to the white house .
and while she 's no longer with us , i know my grandmother is watching , along with the family that made me who i am .
i miss them tonight , and know that my debt to them is beyond measure .
to my campaign manager david plouffe , my chief strategist david axelrod , and the best campaign team ever assembled in the history of politics -- you made this happen , and i am forever grateful for what you 've sacrificed to get it done .
but above all , i will never forget who this victory truly belongs to -- it belongs to you .
i was never the likeliest candidate for this office .
we did n't start with much money or many endorsements .
our campaign was not hatched in the halls of washington -- it began in the backyards of des moines and the living rooms of concord and the front porches of charleston .
it was built by working men and women who dug into what little savings they had to give five dollars and ten dollars and twenty dollars to this cause .
it grew strength from the young people who rejected the myth of their generation 's apathy ; who left their homes and their families for jobs that offered little pay and less sleep ; from the not - so - young people who braved the bitter cold and scorching heat to knock on the doors of perfect strangers ; from the millions of americans who volunteered , and organized , and proved that more than two centuries later , a government of the people , by the people and for the people has not perished from this earth .
this is your victory .
i know you did n't do this just to win an election and i know you did n't do it for me .
you did it because you understand the enormity of the task that lies ahead .
for even as we celebrate tonight , we know the challenges that tomorrow will bring are the greatest of our lifetime -- two wars , a planet in peril , the worst financial crisis in a century .
even as we stand here tonight , we know there are brave americans waking up in the deserts of iraq and the mountains of afghanistan to risk their lives for us .
there are mothers and fathers who will lie awake after their children fall asleep and wonder how they 'll make the mortgage , or pay their doctor 's bills , or save enough for college .
there is new energy to harness and new jobs to be created ; new schools to build and threats to meet and alliances to repair .
the road ahead will be long .
our climb will be steep .
we may not get there in one year or even one term , but america -- i have never been more hopeful than i am tonight that we will get there .
i promise you -- we as a people will get there .
there will be setbacks and false starts .
there are many who wo n't agree with every decision or policy i make as president , and we know that government ca n't solve every problem .
but i will always be honest with you about the challenges we face .
i will listen to you , especially when we disagree .
and above all , i will ask you join in the work of remaking this nation the only way it 's been done in america for two - hundred and twenty - one years -- block by block , brick by brick , calloused hand by calloused hand .
what began twenty - one months ago in the depths of winter must not end on this autumn night .
this victory alone is not the change we seek -- it is only the chance for us to make that change .
and that can not happen if we go back to the way things were .
it can not happen without you .
so let us summon a new spirit of patriotism ; of service and responsibility where each of us resolves to pitch in and work harder and look after not only ourselves , but each other .
let us remember that if this financial crisis taught us anything , it 's that we can not have a thriving wall street while main street suffers -- in this country , we rise or fall as one nation ; as one people .
let us resist the temptation to fall back on the same partisanship and pettiness and immaturity that has poisoned our politics for so long .
let us remember that it was a man from this state who first carried the banner of the republican party to the white house -- a party founded on the values of self - reliance , individual liberty , and national unity .
those are values we all share , and while the democratic party has won a great victory tonight , we do so with a measure of humility and determination to heal the divides that have held back our progress .
as lincoln said to a nation far more divided than ours , " we are not enemies , but friends ... though passion may have strained it must not break our bonds of affection . "
and to those americans whose support i have yet to earn -- i may not have won your vote , but i hear your voices , i need your help , and i will be your president too .
and to all those watching tonight from beyond our shores , from parliaments and palaces to those who are huddled around radios in the forgotten corners of our world -- our stories are singular , but our destiny is shared , and a new dawn of american leadership is at hand .
to those who would tear this world down -- we will defeat you .
to those who seek peace and security -- we support you .
and to all those who have wondered if america 's beacon still burns as bright -- tonight we proved once more that the true strength of our nation comes not from our the might of our arms or the scale of our wealth , but from the enduring power of our ideals : democracy , liberty , opportunity , and unyielding hope .
for that is the true genius of america -- that america can change .
our union can be perfected .
and what we have already achieved gives us hope for what we can and must achieve tomorrow .
this election had many firsts and many stories that will be told for generations .
but one that 's on my mind tonight is about a woman who cast her ballot in atlanta .
she 's a lot like the millions of others who stood in line to make their voice heard in this election except for one thing -- ann nixon cooper is 106 years old .
she was born just a generation past slavery ; a time when there were no cars on the road or planes in the sky ; when someone like her could n't vote for two reasons -- because she was a woman and because of the color of her skin .
and tonight , i think about all that she 's seen throughout her century in america -- the heartache and the hope ; the struggle and the progress ; the times we were told that we ca n't , and the people who pressed on with that american creed : yes we can .
at a time when women 's voices were silenced and their hopes dismissed , she lived to see them stand up and speak out and reach for the ballot .
yes we can .
when there was despair in the dust bowl and depression across the land , she saw a nation conquer fear itself with a new deal , new jobs and a new sense of common purpose .
yes we can .
when the bombs fell on our harbor and tyranny threatened the world , she was there to witness a generation rise to greatness and a democracy was saved .
yes we can .
she was there for the buses in montgomery , the hoses in birmingham , a bridge in selma , and a preacher from atlanta who told a people that " we shall overcome . "
yes we can .
a man touched down on the moon , a wall came down in berlin , a world was connected by our own science and imagination .
and this year , in this election , she touched her finger to a screen , and cast her vote , because after 106 years in america , through the best of times and the darkest of hours , she knows how america can change .
yes we can .
america , we have come so far .
we have seen so much .
but there is so much more to do .
so tonight , let us ask ourselves -- if our children should live to see the next century ; if my daughters should be so lucky to live as long as ann nixon cooper , what change will they see ?
what progress will we have made ?
this is our chance to answer that call .
this is our moment .
this is our time -- to put our people back to work and open doors of opportunity for our kids ; to restore prosperity and promote the cause of peace ; to reclaim the american dream and reaffirm that fundamental truth -- that out of many , we are one ; that while we breathe , we hope , and where we are met with cynicism , and doubt , and those who tell us that we ca n't , we will respond with that timeless creed that sums up the spirit of a people : 
 yes we can .
thank you , god bless you , and may god bless the united states of america .

thank you very much .
thank you .
my lord chancellor , mr. speaker , mr. prime minister , my lords , and members of the house of commons : 
 i have known few greater honors than the opportunity to address the mother of parliaments at westminster hall .
i am told that the last three speakers here have been the pope , her majesty the queen , and nelson mandela -- which is either a very high bar or the beginning of a very funny joke .
i come here today to reaffirm one of the oldest , one of the strongest alliances the world has ever known .
it 's long been said that the united states and the united kingdom share a special relationship .
and since we also share an especially active press corps , that relationship is often analyzed and overanalyzed for the slightest hint of stress or strain .
of course , all relationships have their ups and downs .
admittedly , ours got off on the wrong foot with a small scrape about tea and taxes .
there may also have been some hurt feelings when the white house was set on fire during the war of 1812 .
but fortunately , it 's been smooth sailing ever since .
the reason for this close friendship does n't just have to do with our shared history , our shared heritage ; our ties of language and culture ; or even the strong partnership between our governments .
our relationship is special because of the values and beliefs that have united our people through the ages .
centuries ago , when kings , emperors , and warlords reigned over much of the world , it was the english who first spelled out the rights and liberties of man in the magna carta .
it was here , in this very hall , where the rule of law first developed , courts were established , disputes were settled , and citizens came to petition their leaders .
over time , the people of this nation waged a long and sometimes bloody struggle to expand and secure their freedom from the crown .
propelled by the ideals of the enlightenment , they would ultimately forge an english bill of rights , and invest the power to govern in an elected parliament that 's gathered here today .
what began on this island would inspire millions throughout the continent of europe and across the world .
but perhaps no one drew greater inspiration from these notions of freedom than your rabble - rousing colonists on the other side of the atlantic .
as winston churchill said , the " & hellip;magna carta , the bill of rights , habeas corpus , trial by jury , and english common law find their most famous expression in the american declaration of independence . "
for both of our nations , living up to the ideals enshrined in these founding documents has sometimes been difficult , has always been a work in progress .
the path has never been perfect .
but through the struggles of slaves and immigrants , women and ethnic minorities , former colonies and persecuted religions , we have learned better than most that the longing for freedom and human dignity is not english or american or western -- - it is universal , and it beats in every heart .
perhaps that 's why there are few nations that stand firmer , speak louder , and fight harder to defend democratic values around the world than the united states and the united kingdom .
we are the allies who landed at omaha and gold , who sacrificed side by side to free a continent from the march of tyranny , and help prosperity flourish from the ruins of war .
and with the founding of nato -- - a british idea -- - we joined a transatlantic alliance that has ensured our security for over half a century .
together with our allies , we forged a lasting peace from a cold war .
when the iron curtain lifted , we expanded our alliance to include the nations of central and eastern europe , and built new bridges to russia and the former states of the soviet union .
and when there was strife in the balkans , we worked together to keep the peace .
today , after a difficult decade that began with war and ended in recession , our nations have arrived at a pivotal moment once more .
a global economy that once stood on the brink of depression is now stable and recovering .
after years of conflict , the united states has removed 100,000 troops from iraq , the united kingdom has removed its forces , and our combat mission there has ended .
in afghanistan , we 've broken the taliban 's momentum and will soon begin a transition to afghan lead .
and nearly 10 years after 9/11 , we have disrupted terrorist networks and dealt al qaeda a huge blow by killing its leader -- - osama bin laden .
together , we have met great challenges .
but as we enter this new chapter in our shared history , profound challenges stretch before us .
in a world where the prosperity of all nations is now inextricably linked , a new era of cooperation is required to ensure the growth and stability of the global economy .
as new threats spread across borders and oceans , we must dismantle terrorist networks and stop the spread of nuclear weapons , confront climate change and combat famine and disease .
and as a revolution races through the streets of the middle east and north africa , the entire world has a stake in the aspirations of a generation that longs to determine its own destiny .
these challenges come at a time when the international order has already been reshaped for a new century .
countries like china , india , and brazil are growing by leaps and bounds .
we should welcome this development , for it has lifted hundreds of millions from poverty around the globe , and created new markets and opportunities for our own nations .
and yet , as this rapid change has taken place , it 's become fashionable in some quarters to question whether the rise of these nations will accompany the decline of american and european influence around the world .
perhaps , the argument goes , these nations represent the future , and the time for our leadership has passed .
that argument is wrong .
the time for our leadership is now .
it was the united states and the united kingdom and our democratic allies that shaped a world in which new nations could emerge and individuals could thrive .
and even as more nations take on the responsibilities of global leadership , our alliance will remain indispensable to the goal of a century that is more peaceful , more prosperous and more just .
at a time when threats and challenges require nations to work in concert with one another , we remain the greatest catalysts for global action .
in an era defined by the rapid flow of commerce and information , it is our free market tradition , our openness , fortified by our commitment to basic security for our citizens , that offers the best chance of prosperity that is both strong and shared .
as millions are still denied their basic human rights because of who they are , or what they believe , or the kind of government that they live under , we are the nations most willing to stand up for the values of tolerance and self - determination that lead to peace and dignity .
now , this does n't mean we can afford to stand still .
the nature of our leadership will need to change with the times .
as i said the first time i came to london as president , for the g20 summit , the days are gone when roosevelt and churchill could sit in a room and solve the world 's problems over a glass of brandy - -- although i 'm sure that prime minister cameron would agree that some days we could both use a stiff drink .
in this century , our joint leadership will require building new partnerships , adapting to new circumstances , and remaking ourselves to meet the demands of a new era .
that begins with our economic leadership .
adam smith 's central insight remains true today : there is no greater generator of wealth and innovation than a system of free enterprise that unleashes the full potential of individual men and women .
that 's what led to the industrial revolution that began in the factories of manchester .
that is what led to the dawn of the information age that arose from the office parks of silicon valley .
that 's why countries like china , india and brazil are growing so rapidly -- because in fits and starts , they are moving toward market - based principles that the united states and the united kingdom have always embraced .
in other words , we live in a global economy that is largely of our own making .
and today , the competition for the best jobs and industries favors countries that are free - thinking and forward - looking ; countries with the most creative and innovative and entrepreneurial citizens .
that gives nations like the united states and the united kingdom an inherent advantage .
for from newton and darwin to edison and einstein , from alan turing to steve jobs , we have led the world in our commitment to science and cutting - edge research , the discovery of new medicines and technologies .
we educate our citizens and train our workers in the best colleges and universities on earth .
but to maintain this advantage in a world that 's more competitive than ever , we will have to redouble our investments in science and engineering , and renew our national commitments to educating our workforces .
we 've also been reminded in the last few years that markets can sometimes fail .
in the last century , both our nations put in place regulatory frameworks to deal with such market failures -- safeguards to protect the banking system after the great depression , for example ; regulations that were established to prevent the pollution of our air and water during the 1970s .
but in today 's economy , such threats of market failure can no longer be contained within the borders of any one country .
market failures can go global , and go viral , and demand international responses .
a financial crisis that began on wall street infected nearly every continent , which is why we must keep working through forums like the g20 to put in place global rules of the road to prevent future excesses and abuse .
no country can hide from the dangers of carbon pollution , which is why we must build on what was achieved at copenhagen and cancun to leave our children a planet that is safer and cleaner .
moreover , even when the free market works as it should , both our countries recognize that no matter how responsibly we live in our lives , hard times or bad luck , a crippling illness or a layoff may strike any one of us .
and so part of our common tradition has expressed itself in a conviction that every citizen deserves a basic measure of security - -- health care if you get sick , unemployment insurance if you lose your job , a dignified retirement after a lifetime of hard work .
that commitment to our citizens has also been the reason for our leadership in the world .
and now , having come through a terrible recession , our challenge is to meet these obligations while ensuring that we 're not consuming -- and hence consumed with -- a level of debt that could sap the strength and vitality of our economies .
and that will require difficult choices and it will require different paths for both of our countries .
but we have faced such challenges before , and have always been able to balance the need for fiscal responsibility with the responsibilities we have to one another .
and i believe we can do this again .
as we do , the successes and failures of our own past can serve as an example for emerging economies - -- that it 's possible to grow without polluting ; that lasting prosperity comes not from what a nation consumes , but from what it produces , and from the investments it makes in its people and its infrastructure .
and just as we must lead on behalf of the prosperity of our citizens , so we must safeguard their security .
our two nations know what it is to confront evil in the world .
hitler 's armies would not have stopped their killing had we not fought them on the beaches and on the landing grounds , in the fields and on the streets .
we must never forget that there was nothing inevitable about our victory in that terrible war .
it was won through the courage and character of our people .
precisely because we are willing to bear its burden , we know well the cost of war .
and that is why we built an alliance that was strong enough to defend this continent while deterring our enemies .
at its core , nato is rooted in the simple concept of article five : that no nato nation will have to fend on its own ; that allies will stand by one another , always .
and for six decades , nato has been the most successful alliance in human history .
today , we confront a different enemy .
terrorists have taken the lives of our citizens in new york and in london .
and while al qaeda seeks a religious war with the west , we must remember that they have killed thousands of muslims - -- men , women and children - -- around the globe .
our nations are not and will never be at war with islam .
our fight is focused on defeating al qaeda and its extremist allies .
in that effort , we will not relent , as osama bin laden and his followers have learned .
and as we fight an enemy that respects no law of war , we will continue to hold ourselves to a higher standard - -- by living up to the values , the rule of law and due process that we so ardently defend .
for almost a decade , afghanistan has been a central front of these efforts .
throughout those years , you , the british people , have been a stalwart ally , along with so many others who fight by our side .
together , let us pay tribute to all of our men and women who have served and sacrificed over the last several years - -- for they are part of an unbroken line of heroes who have borne the heaviest burden for the freedoms that we enjoy .
because of them , we have broken the taliban 's momentum .
because of them , we have built the capacity of afghan security forces .
and because of them , we are now preparing to turn a corner in afghanistan by transitioning to afghan lead .
and during this transition , we will pursue a lasting peace with those who break free of al qaeda and respect the afghan constitution and lay down arms .
and we will ensure that afghanistan is never a safe haven for terror , but is instead a country that is strong , sovereign , and able to stand on its own two feet .
indeed , our efforts in this young century have led us to a new concept for nato that will give us the capabilities needed to meet new threats -- threats like terrorism and piracy , cyber attacks and ballistic missiles .
but a revitalized nato will continue to hew to that original vision of its founders , allowing us to rally collective action for the defense of our people , while building upon the broader belief of roosevelt and churchill that all nations have both rights and responsibilities , and all nations share a common interest in an international architecture that maintains the peace .
we also share a common interest in stopping the spread of nuclear weapons .
across the globe , nations are locking down nuclear materials so they never fall into the wrong hands -- because of our leadership .
from north korea to iran , we 've sent a message that those who flaunt their obligations will face consequences - -- which is why america and the european union just recently strengthened our sanctions on iran , in large part because of the leadership of the united kingdom and the united states .
and while we hold others to account , we will meet our own obligations under the non - proliferation treaty , and strive for a world without nuclear weapons .
we share a common interest in resolving conflicts that prolong human suffering and threaten to tear whole regions asunder .
in sudan , after years of war and thousands of deaths , we call on both north and south to pull back from the brink of violence and choose the path of peace .
and in the middle east , we stand united in our support for a secure israel and a sovereign palestine .
and we share a common interest in development that advances dignity and security .
to succeed , we must cast aside the impulse to look at impoverished parts of the globe as a place for charity .
instead , we should empower the same forces that have allowed our own people to thrive : we should help the hungry to feed themselves , the doctors who care for the sick .
we should support countries that confront corruption , and allow their people to innovate .
and we should advance the truth that nations prosper when they allow women and girls to reach their full potential .
we do these things because we believe not simply in the rights of nations ; we believe in the rights of citizens .
that is the beacon that guided us through our fight against fascism and our twilight struggle against communism .
and today , that idea is being put to the test in the middle east and north africa .
in country after country , people are mobilizing to free themselves from the grip of an iron fist .
and while these movements for change are just six months old , we have seen them play out before - -- from eastern europe to the americas , from south africa to southeast asia .
history tells us that democracy is not easy .
it will be years before these revolutions reach their conclusion , and there will be difficult days along the way .
power rarely gives up without a fight - -- particularly in places where there are divisions of tribe and divisions of sect .
we also know that populism can take dangerous turns - -- from the extremism of those who would use democracy to deny minority rights , to the nationalism that left so many scars on this continent in the 20th century .
but make no mistake : what we saw , what we are seeing in tehran , in tunis , in tahrir square , is a longing for the same freedoms that we take for granted here at home .
it was a rejection of the notion that people in certain parts of the world do n't want to be free , or need to have democracy imposed upon them .
it was a rebuke to the worldview of al qaeda , which smothers the rights of individuals , and would thereby subject them to perpetual poverty and violence .
let there be no doubt : the united states and united kingdom stand squarely on the side of those who long to be free .
and now , we must show that we will back up those words with deeds .
that means investing in the future of those nations that transition to democracy , starting with tunisia and egypt - -- by deepening ties of trade and commerce ; by helping them demonstrate that freedom brings prosperity .
and that means standing up for universal rights - -- by sanctioning those who pursue repression , strengthening civil society , supporting the rights of minorities .
we do this knowing that the west must overcome suspicion and mistrust among many in the middle east and north africa - -- a mistrust that is rooted in a difficult past .
for years , we 've faced charges of hypocrisy from those who do not enjoy the freedoms that they hear us espouse .
and so to them , we must squarely acknowledge that , yes , we have enduring interests in the region - -- to fight terror , sometimes with partners who may not be perfect ; to protect against disruptions of the world 's energy supply .
but we must also insist that we reject as false the choice between our interests and our ideals ; between stability and democracy .
for our idealism is rooted in the realities of history - -- that repression offers only the false promise of stability , that societies are more successful when their citizens are free , and that democracies are the closest allies we have .
it is that truth that guides our action in libya .
it would have been easy at the outset of the crackdown in libya to say that none of this was our business - -- that a nation 's sovereignty is more important than the slaughter of civilians within its borders .
that argument carries weight with some .
but we are different .
we embrace a broader responsibility .
and while we can not stop every injustice , there are circumstances that cut through our caution - -- when a leader is threatening to massacre his people , and the international community is calling for action .
that 's why we stopped a massacre in libya .
and we will not relent until the people of libya are protected and the shadow of tyranny is lifted .
we will proceed with humility , and the knowledge that we can not dictate every outcome abroad .
ultimately , freedom must be won by the people themselves , not imposed from without .
but we can and must stand with those who so struggle .
because we have always believed that the future of our children and grandchildren will be better if other people 's children and grandchildren are more prosperous and more free - -- from the beaches of normandy to the balkans to benghazi .
that is our interests and our ideals .
and if we fail to meet that responsibility , who would take our place , and what kind of world would we pass on ?
our action - -- our leadership - -- is essential to the cause of human dignity .
and so we must act - -- and lead - -- with confidence in our ideals , and an abiding faith in the character of our people , who sent us all here today .
for there is one final quality that i believe makes the united states and the united kingdom indispensable to this moment in history .
and that is how we define ourselves as nations .
unlike most countries in the world , we do not define citizenship based on race or ethnicity .
being american or british is not about belonging to a certain group ; it 's about believing in a certain set of ideals -- the rights of individuals , the rule of law .
that is why we hold incredible diversity within our borders .
that 's why there are people around the world right now who believe that if they come to america , if they come to new york , if they come to london , if they work hard , they can pledge allegiance to our flag and call themselves americans ; if they come to england , they can make a new life for themselves and can sing god save the queen just like any other citizen .
yes , our diversity can lead to tension .
and throughout our history there have been heated debates about immigration and assimilation in both of our countries .
but even as these debates can be difficult , we fundamentally recognize that our patchwork heritage is an enormous strength -- that in a world which will only grow smaller and more interconnected , the example of our two nations says it is possible for people to be united by their ideals , instead of divided by their differences ; that it 's possible for hearts to change and old hatreds to pass ; that it 's possible for the sons and daughters of former colonies to sit here as members of this great parliament , and for the grandson of a kenyan who served as a cook in the british army to stand before you as president of the united states .
that is what defines us .
that is why the young men and women in the streets of damascus and cairo still reach for the rights our citizens enjoy , even if they sometimes differ with our policies .
as two of the most powerful nations in the history of the world , we must always remember that the true source of our influence has n't just been the size of our economies , or the reach of our militaries , or the land that we 've claimed .
it has been the values that we must never waver in defending around the world -- the idea that all beings are endowed by our creator with certain rights that can not be denied .
that is what forged our bond in the fire of war -- a bond made manifest by the friendship between two of our greatest leaders .
churchill and roosevelt had their differences .
they were keen observers of each other 's blind spots and shortcomings , if not always their own , and they were hard - headed about their ability to remake the world .
but what joined the fates of these two men at that particular moment in history was not simply a shared interest in victory on the battlefield .
it was a shared belief in the ultimate triumph of human freedom and human dignity - -- a conviction that we have a say in how this story ends .
this conviction lives on in their people today .
the challenges we face are great .
the work before us is hard .
but we have come through a difficult decade , and whenever the tests and trials ahead may seem too big or too many , let us turn to their example , and the words that churchill spoke on the day that europe was freed : 
 " in the long years to come , not only will the people of this island but&hellip;the world , wherever the bird of freedom chirps in   human heart , look back to what we 've done , and they will say ' do not despair , do not yield&hellip;march straightforward ' . "
with courage and purpose , with humility and with hope , with faith in the promise of tomorrow , let us march straightforward together , enduring allies in the cause of a world that is more peaceful , more prosperous , and more just .
thank you very much .

i wanted to come out here , first of all , to tell you that jay is prepared for all your questions and is very much looking forward to the session .
the second thing is i want to let you know that over the next couple of weeks , there 's going to obviously be a whole range of issues -- immigration , economics , et cetera -- we 'll try to arrange a fuller press conference to address your questions .
the reason i actually wanted to come out today is not to take questions , but to speak to an issue that obviously has gotten a lot of attention over the course of the last week -- the issue of the trayvon martin ruling .
i gave a preliminary statement right after the ruling on sunday .
but watching the debate over the course of the last week , i thought it might be useful for me to expand on my thoughts a little bit .
first of all , i want to make sure that , once again , i send my thoughts and prayers , as well as michelle 's , to the family of trayvon martin , and to remark on the incredible grace and dignity with which they 've dealt with the entire situation .
i can only imagine what they 're going through , and it 's remarkable how they 've handled it .
the second thing i want to say is to reiterate what i said on sunday , which is there 's going to be a lot of arguments about the legal issues in the case -- i 'll let all the legal analysts and talking heads address those issues .
the judge conducted the trial in a professional manner .
the prosecution and the defense made their arguments .
the juries were properly instructed that in a case such as this reasonable doubt was relevant , and they rendered a verdict .
and once the jury has spoken , that 's how our system works .
but i did want to just talk a little bit about context and how people have responded to it and how people are feeling .
you know , when trayvon martin was first shot i said that this could have been my son .
another way of saying that is trayvon martin could have been me 35 years ago .
and when you think about why , in the african american community at least , there 's a lot of pain around what happened here , i think it 's important to recognize that the african american community is looking at this issue through a set of experiences and a history that does n't go away .
there are very few african american men in this country who have n't had the experience of being followed when they were shopping in a department store .
that includes me .
there are very few african american men who have n't had the experience of walking across the street and hearing the locks click on the doors of cars .
that happens to me -- at least before i was a senator .
there are very few african americans who have n't had the experience of getting on an elevator and a woman clutching her purse nervously and holding her breath until she had a chance to get off .
that happens often .
and i do n't want to exaggerate this , but those sets of experiences inform how the african american community interprets what happened one night in florida .
and it 's inescapable for people to bring those experiences to bear .
the african american community is also knowledgeable that there is a history of racial disparities in the application of our criminal laws -- everything from the death penalty to enforcement of our drug laws .
and that ends up having an impact in terms of how people interpret the case .
now , this is n't to say that the african american community is na&iuml;ve about the fact that african american young men are disproportionately involved in the criminal justice system ; that they 're disproportionately both victims and perpetrators of violence .
it 's not to make excuses for that fact -- although black folks do interpret the reasons for that in a historical context .
they understand that some of the violence that takes place in poor black neighborhoods around the country is born out of a very violent past in this country , and that the poverty and dysfunction that we see in those communities can be traced to a very difficult history .
and so the fact that sometimes that 's unacknowledged adds to the frustration .
and the fact that a lot of african american boys are painted with a broad brush and the excuse is given , well , there are these statistics out there that show that african american boys are more violent -- using that as an excuse to then see sons treated differently causes pain .
i think the african american community is also not na&iuml;ve in understanding that , statistically , somebody like trayvon martin was statistically more likely to be shot by a peer than he was by somebody else .
so folks understand the challenges that exist for african american boys .
but they get frustrated , i think , if they feel that there 's no context for it and that context is being denied .
and that all contributes i think to a sense that if a white male teen was involved in the same kind of scenario , that , from top to bottom , both the outcome and the aftermath might have been different .
now , the question for me at least , and i think for a lot of folks , is where do we take this ?
how do we learn some lessons from this and move in a positive direction ?
i think it 's understandable that there have been demonstrations and vigils and protests , and some of that stuff is just going to have to work its way through , as long as it remains nonviolent .
if i see any violence , then i will remind folks that that dishonors what happened to trayvon martin and his family .
but beyond protests or vigils , the question is , are there some concrete things that we might be able to do .
i know that eric holder is reviewing what happened down there , but i think it 's important for people to have some clear expectations here .
traditionally , these are issues of state and local government , the criminal code .
and law enforcement is traditionally done at the state and local levels , not at the federal levels .
that does n't mean , though , that as a nation we ca n't do some things that i think would be productive .
so let me just give a couple of specifics that i 'm still bouncing around with my staff , so we 're not rolling out some five - point plan , but some areas where i think all of us could potentially focus .
number one , precisely because law enforcement is often determined at the state and local level , i think it would be productive for the justice department , governors , mayors to work with law enforcement about training at the state and local levels in order to reduce the kind of mistrust in the system that sometimes currently exists .
when i was in illinois , i passed racial profiling legislation , and it actually did just two simple things .
one , it collected data on traffic stops and the race of the person who was stopped .
but the other thing was it resourced us training police departments across the state on how to think about potential racial bias and ways to further professionalize what they were doing .
and initially , the police departments across the state were resistant , but actually they came to recognize that if it was done in a fair , straightforward way that it would allow them to do their jobs better and communities would have more confidence in them and , in turn , be more helpful in applying the law .
and obviously , law enforcement has got a very tough job .
so that 's one area where i think there are a lot of resources and best practices that could be brought to bear if state and local governments are receptive .
and i think a lot of them would be .
and let 's figure out are there ways for us to push out that kind of training .
along the same lines , i think it would be useful for us to examine some state and local laws to see if it -- if they are designed in such a way that they may encourage the kinds of altercations and confrontations and tragedies that we saw in the florida case , rather than diffuse potential altercations .
i know that there 's been commentary about the fact that the " stand your ground " laws in florida were not used as a defense in the case .
on the other hand , if we 're sending a message as a society in our communities that someone who is armed potentially has the right to use those firearms even if there 's a way for them to exit from a situation , is that really going to be contributing to the kind of peace and security and order that we 'd like to see ?
and for those who resist that idea that we should think about something like these " stand your ground " laws , i 'd just ask people to consider , if trayvon martin was of age and armed , could he have stood his ground on that sidewalk ?
and do we actually think that he would have been justified in shooting mr. zimmerman who had followed him in a car because he felt threatened ?
and if the answer to that question is at least ambiguous , then it seems to me that we might want to examine those kinds of laws .
number three -- and this is a long - term project -- we need to spend some time in thinking about how do we bolster and reinforce our african american boys .
and this is something that michelle and i talk a lot about .
there are a lot of kids out there who need help who are getting a lot of negative reinforcement .
and is there more that we can do to give them the sense that their country cares about them and values them and is willing to invest in them ?
i 'm not na&iuml;ve about the prospects of some grand , new federal program .
i 'm not sure that that 's what we 're talking about here .
but i do recognize that as president , i 've got some convening power , and there are a lot of good programs that are being done across the country on this front .
and for us to be able to gather together business leaders and local elected officials and clergy and celebrities and athletes , and figure out how are we doing a better job helping young african american men feel that they 're a full part of this society and that they 've got pathways and avenues to succeed -- i think that would be a pretty good outcome from what was obviously a tragic situation .
and we 're going to spend some time working on that and thinking about that .
and then , finally , i think it 's going to be important for all of us to do some soul - searching .
there has been talk about should we convene a conversation on race .
i have n't seen that be particularly productive when politicians try to organize conversations .
they end up being stilted and politicized , and folks are locked into the positions they already have .
on the other hand , in families and churches and workplaces , there 's the possibility that people are a little bit more honest , and at least you ask yourself your own questions about , am i wringing as much bias out of myself as i can ?
am i judging people as much as i can , based on not the color of their skin , but the content of their character ?
that would , i think , be an appropriate exercise in the wake of this tragedy .
and let me just leave you with a final thought that , as difficult and challenging as this whole episode has been for a lot of people , i do n't want us to lose sight that things are getting better .
each successive generation seems to be making progress in changing attitudes when it comes to race .
it does n't mean we 're in a post - racial society .
it does n't mean that racism is eliminated .
but when i talk to malia and sasha , and i listen to their friends and i seem them interact , they 're better than we are -- they 're better than we were -- on these issues .
and that 's true in every community that i 've visited all across the country .
and so we have to be vigilant and we have to work on these issues .
and those of us in authority should be doing everything we can to encourage the better angels of our nature , as opposed to using these episodes to heighten divisions .
but we should also have confidence that kids these days , i think , have more sense than we did back then , and certainly more than our parents did or our grandparents did ; and that along this long , difficult journey , we 're becoming a more perfect union -- not a perfect union , but a more perfect union .
thank you , guys .

hello , everybody .
i am glad to see that all of you braved the weather to be here .
a little while ago i had a meeting with the democratic and republican congressional leaders , and it went very well .
in fact , i understand that mcconnell and reid are out doing snow angels on the south lawn together .
can you picture that , chuck ?
not really ?
the meeting did go well , and i appreciate them making the trek .
we had a good and frank conversation and it 's one that i hope we can continue on a more regular basis .
we all understand that there are legitimate and genuine differences between the parties , but despite the political posturing that often paralyzes this town , there are many issues upon which we can and should agree .
that 's what the american people are demanding of us .
i think they 're tired of every day being election day in washington .
and at this critical time in our country , the people sent us here expect a seriousness of purpose that transcends petty politics .
that 's why i 'm going to continue to seek the best ideas from either party as we work to tackle the pressing challenges ahead .
i am confident , for example , that when one in 10 of our fellow citizens ca n't work , we should be able to come together and help business create more jobs .
we ought to be able to agree on providing small businesses with additional tax credits and much needed lines of credit .
we ought to agree on investments in crumbling roads and bridges , and we should agree on tax breaks for making homes more energy - efficient -- all of which will put more americans to work .
many of the job proposals that i 've laid out have passed the house and are soon going to be debated in the senate .
we spent a lot of time in this meeting discussing a jobs package and how we could move forward on that .
and if there are additional ideas , i will consider them as well .
what i wo n't consider is doing nothing in the face of a lot of hardship across the country .
we also talked about restoring fiscal responsibility .
there are few matters on which there is as much vigorous bipartisan agreement , at least in public , but unfortunately there 's also a lot of partisan wrangling behind closed doors .
this is what we know for sure : for us to solve this extraordinary problem that is so many years in the making , it 's going to take the cooperation of both parties .
it 's not going to happen in any other way .
i 'm pleased that congress supported my request to restore the pay - as - you - go rule , which was instrumental in turning deficits into surpluses during the 1990s .
i 've also called for a bipartisan fiscal commission .
unfortunately this measure , which originally had received the support of a bipartisan majority of the senate and was cosponsored by senators conrad and gregg , democrats and republicans , was blocked there .
so i 'm going to be creating this commission by executive order .
and during our meeting i asked the leadership of both parties to join in this serious effort to address our long - term deficits , because when the politics is put aside , the reality of our fiscal challenge is not subject to interpretation .
math is not partisan .
there ought to be a debate about how to close our deficits .
what we ca n't accept is business as usual , and we ca n't afford grandstanding at the expense of actually getting something done .
during our meeting we also touched briefly on how we can move forward on health reform .
i 've already announced that in two weeks i 'll be holding a meeting with people from both parties , and as i told the congressional leadership , i 'm looking forward to a constructive debate with plans that need to be measured against this test .
does it bring down costs for all americans as well as for the federal government , which spends a huge amount on health care ?
does it provide adequate protection against abuses by the insurance industry ?
does it make coverage affordable and available to the tens of millions of working americans who do n't have it right now ?
and does it help us get on a path of fiscal sustainability ?
we also talked about why this is so urgent .
just this week , there was a report that anthem blue cross , which is the largest insurer in the largest state , california , is planning on raising premiums for many individual policyholders by as much as 39 percent .
if we do n't act , this is just a preview of coming attractions .
premiums will continue to rise for folks with insurance ; millions more will lose their coverage altogether ; our deficits will continue to grow larger .
and we have an obligation -- both parties -- to tackle this issue in a serious way .
now , bipartisanship depends on a willingness among both democrats and republicans to put aside matters of party for the good of the country .
i wo n't hesitate to embrace a good idea from my friends in the minority party , but i also wo n't hesitate to condemn what i consider to be obstinacy that 's rooted not in substantive disagreements but in political expedience .
we talked about this as well , particularly when it comes to the confirmation process .
i respect the senate 's role to advise and consent , but for months , qualified , non- controversial nominees for critical positions in government , often positions related to our national security , have been held up despite having overwhelming support .
my nominee for one important job , the head of general services administration , which helps run the government , was denied a vote for nine months .
when she finally got a vote on her nomination , she was confirmed 96 to nothing .
that 's not advise and consent ; that 's delay and obstruct .
one senator , as you all are aware , had put a hold on every single nominee that we had put forward due to a dispute over a couple of earmarks in his state .
in our meeting , i asked the congressional leadership to put a stop to these holds in which nominees for critical jobs are denied a vote for months .
surely we can set aside partisanship and do what 's traditionally been done to confirm these nominations .
if the senate does not act -- and i made this very clear -- if the senate does not act to confirm these nominees , i will consider making several recess appointments during the upcoming recess , because we ca n't afford to allow politics to stand in the way of a well - functioning government .
my hope is that this will be the first of a series of meetings that i have with leadership of both parties in congress .
we 've got to get past the tired debates that have plagued our politics and left behind nothing but soaring debt and mounting challenges , greater hardships among the american people , and extraordinary frustrations among the american people .
those frustrations are what led me to run for president , and as long as i 'm here in washington , i intend to try to make this government work on their behalf .
so , you know , i 'm going to take a couple of questions , guys .
major .
well , here 's how i responded to john in the meeting , and i 've said this publicly before .
there are some core goals that have to be met .
we 've got to control costs , both for families and businesses , but also for our government .
everybody out there who talks about deficits has to acknowledge that the single biggest driver of our deficits is health care spending .
we can not deal with our deficits and debt long term unless we get a handle on that .
so that has to be part of a package .
number two , we 've got to deal with insurance abuses that affect millions of americans who 've got health insurance .
and number three , we 've got to make health insurance more available to folks in the individual market , as i just mentioned , in california , who are suddenly seeing their premiums go up 39 percent .
that applies to the majority of small businesses , as well as sole proprietors .
they are struggling .
so i 've got these goals .
now , we have a package , as we work through the differences between the house and the senate , and we 'll put it up on a web site for all to see over a long period of time , that meets those criteria , meets those goals .
but when i was in baltimore talking to the house republicans , they indicated , we can accomplish some of these goals at no cost .
and i said , great , let me see it .
and i have no interest in doing something that 's more expensive and harder to accomplish if somebody else has an easier way to do it .
so i 'm going to be starting from scratch in the sense that i will be open to any ideas that help promote these goals .
what i will not do , what i do n't think makes sense and i do n't think the american people want to see , would be another year of partisan wrangling around these issues ; another six months or eight months or nine months worth of hearings in every single committee in the house and the senate in which there 's a lot of posturing .
let 's get the relevant parties together ; let 's put the best ideas on the table .
my hope is that we can find enough overlap that we can say this is the right way to move forward , even if i do n't get every single thing that i want .
but here 's the point that i made to john boehner and mitch mcconnell : bipartisanship ca n't be that i agree to all the things that they believe in or want , and they agree to none of the things i believe in and want , and that 's the price of bipartisanship , right ?
but that 's sometimes the way it gets presented .
mitch mcconnell said something very nice in the meeting about how he supports our goals on nuclear energy and clean coal technology and more drilling to increase oil production .
well , of course he likes that ; that 's part of the republican agenda for energy , which i accept .
and i 'm willing to move off some of the preferences of my party in order to meet them halfway .
but there 's got to be some give from their side as well .
that 's true on health care ; that 's true on energy ; that 's true on financial reform .
that 's what i 'm hoping gets accomplished at the summit .
what i agree with is that the public has soured on the process that they saw over the last year .
i think that actually contaminates how they view the substance of the bills .
i think it is important for all of these issues to be aired so that people have confidence if we 're moving forward on such a significant part of the economy as health care , that there is complete transparency and all of these issues have been adequately vetted and adequately debated .
and this gives an opportunity not just for democrats to say here 's what we think we should do , but it also gives republicans a showcase before the entire country to say here 's our plan ; here 's why we think this will work .
and one of the things that john boehner and mitch mcconnell both said is they did n't think that the status quo was acceptable , and that 's , right there , promising .
that indicates that if all sides agree that we ca n't just continue with business as usual then maybe we can actually get something done .
well , i think that the biggest uncertainty has been we just went through the worst recession since the great depression and people were n't sure whether the financial system was going to melt down and whether we were going to tip into a endless recession .
so let 's be clear about the sources of uncertainty in terms of business investment over the last several years : a huge contraction , trillions of dollars of losses in people 's 401s ; people have a lot of debt coming out of the previous decade that they still have n't worked out ; the housing market losing a whole bunch of value .
so the good news is that where we were contracting by 6 percent the economy is now growing by 6 percent .
the ceos i talked to are saying they are now making investments , and i anticipate that they 're going to start hiring at a more rapid clip .
what i 've also heard is them saying that we would like to feel like washington is working and able to get some things done .
there are two ways of interpreting the issue of uncertainty .
one way would be to say , well , you know what , we 'll just go back to what we were doing before on , let 's say , the financial markets .
we wo n't have the regulations that we need ; we wo n't make any changes in terms of " too big to fail . "
that will provide certainty -- until the next financial crisis .
that 's not the kind of certainty i think that the financial markets need .
the kind of certainty they need is for us to go ahead and agree on a bipartisan effort to put some rules of the road in place so that consumers are protected in the financial markets ; so that we do n't have banks that are too big to fail ; that we have ways of winding them down and protecting the overall system without taxpayer bailouts .
that requires legislation .
the sooner we can get that done , the better .
the same would be true when it comes to health care .
a lot of ceos i hear from will say , boy , we 'd like you to get health care settled one way or another , but they will acknowledge that when they open up their latest invoice for their premiums and they find out that those premiums have gone up 20 percent or 25 percent , that 's the kind of uncertainty that also tamps down business investment .
so i guess my answer would be this : the sooner the business community has a sense that we 've got our act together here in washington and can move forward on big , serious issues in a substantive way without a lot of posturing and partisan wrangling , i think the better off the entire country is going to be .
i absolutely agree on that .
what i think is important is not to buy into this notion that is perpetrated by some of the business interests that got a stake in this who are fighting financial reform , for example , to say , boy , we 'd be doing fine if we just did n't try to regulate the banks .
that i think would be a mistake .
the small businesses i talk to --- and i 've been talking to a lot of them as i 've been traveling around the country over the last several months -- their biggest problem is right now they ca n't get credit out of their banks so they 're uncertain about that .
and they 're still uncertain about orders -- do they just have enough customers to justify them doing more .
it 's looking better at this point .
but that 's not the rationale for people saying , i 'm not hiring .
let me put it this way .
most small businesses right now , if they 've got enough customers to make a profit and they can get the bank loans required to boost their payroll , boost their inventory , and sell to those customers , they will do so .
okay ?
let 's see , let 's get a print guy here .
david .
you know , i think that on energy there should be a bipartisan agreement that we have to take a both / and approach rather than an either / or approach .
what do i mean by that ?
i am very firm in my conviction that the country that leads the way in clean energy -- solar , wind , biodiesel , geothermal -- that country is going to win the race in the 21st century global economy .
so we have to move in that direction .
what is also true is that given our energy needs in order to continue economic growth , produce jobs , make sure our businesses are competitive around the world , that we 're going to need some of the old , traditional energy sources as we 're developing these new ones and ramping them up .
so we ca n't overnight convert to an all - solar or an all - wind economy .
that just ca n't happen .
we 're going to have needs in these traditional sources .
and so the question then is , are we going to be able to put together a package that includes safe , secure nuclear power ; that includes new technologies so that we can use coal -- which we have in abundance and is very cheap , but often is adding to our greenhouse gases -- can we find sequestration technologies that clean that up ; can we identify opportunities to increase our oil and natural gas production in a way that is environmentally sustainable ?
and that should be part of a package with our development of clean energy .
and my hope is that my republican friends , but also democrats , say to themselves , let 's be practical and let 's do both .
let 's not just do one or the other ; let 's do both .
over time i think the transition is going to be more and more clean energy and over time fossil fuels become less prominent in our overall energy mix .
but we 've got to do both .
i am just a eternal optimist --   -- and so -- it 's the right thing to do .
and all i can do is just to keep on making the argument about what 's right for the country and assume that over time people , regardless of party , regardless of their particular political positions , are going to gravitate towards the truth .
okay ?
i 'm going to take two more .
let 's see -- 
 > 
  well , i just want to make sure that i was getting a balance here , so -- go ahead , chuck .
why is everybody moaning about todd ?
> 

  well , it 's moving along fairly quickly .
i think that we have bent over backwards to say to the islamic republic of iran that we are willing to have a constructive conversation about how they can align themselves with international norms and rules and reenter as full members of the international community .
the most obvious attempt was when we gave them an offer that said we are going to provide the conversion of some of the low - enriched uranium that they already have into the isotopes that they need for their medical research and for hospitals that would serve up to a million iranian citizens .
they rejected it -- although one of the difficulties in dealing with iran over the last several months is it 's not always clear who 's speaking on behalf of the government , and we get a lot of different , mixed signals .
but what 's clear is , is that they have not said yes to an agreement that russia , china , germany , france , great britain and the united states all said was a good deal , and that the director of the iaea said was the right thing to do and that iran should accept .
that indicates to us that , despite their posturing that their nuclear power is only for civilian use , that they in fact continue to pursue a course that would lead to weaponization .
and that is not acceptable to the international community , not just to the united states .
so what we 've said from the start was we 're moving on dual tracks .
if you want to accept the kinds of agreements with the international community that lead you down a path of being a member of good standing , then we welcome you .
if not -- 

  well , i 'm getting to that .
and if not , then the next step is sanctions .
they have made their choice so far , although the door is still open .
and what we are going to be working on over the next several weeks is developing a significant regime of sanctions that will indicate to them how isolated they are from the international community as a whole .
well , meaning that there 's going to be a -- 

  we are going to be looking at a variety of ways in which countries indicate to iran that their approach is unacceptable .
and the u. n. will be one aspect of that broader effort .
well , the -- we are confident right now that the international community is unified around iran 's misbehavior in this area .
how china operates at the security council as we pursue sanctions is something that we 're going to have to see .
one thing i 'm pleased about is to see how forward - leaning the russians have been on this issue .
i think they clearly have seen that iran has n't been serious about solving what is a solvable dispute between iran and the international community .
all right ?
i 'm going to make this the last question .
and i 'll take somebody from the back -- yes .
yes .
on health care , the republicans are asking whether the february 25th session will include economists and public interest groups and people supporting your side , or will it just be the members of congress ?
and on anthem blue cross , do you have the authority to go in and tell a private company they ca n't charge that -- how will you stop them ?
> 
  well , i do n't have the authority as i understand it -- i ca n't simply issue an executive order lowering everybody 's rates .
if i could i would have done that already and saved myself a lot of grief on capitol hill .
that 's why reform is so important .
that 's why the status quo is unacceptable .
but there is no shortcut in dealing with this issue .
i know the american people get frustrated in debating something like health care because you get a whole bunch of different claims being made by different groups and different interests .
it is a big , complicated , tough issue .
but what is also true is that without some action on the part of congress , it is very unlikely that we see any improvement over the current trajectory .
and the current trajectory is premiums keep on going up 10 , 15 , 20 , 30 percent .
the current trajectory is more and more people are losing health care .
i do n't know if people noted , because during the health care debate everybody was saying the president is trying to take over -- a government takeover of health care .
i do n't know if anybody noticed that for the first time this year you saw more people getting health care from government than you did from the private sector -- not because of anything we did , but because more and more people are losing their health care from their employers .
it 's becoming unaffordable .
that 's what we 're trying to prevent .
we want people to be able to get health care from their employers .
but we also understand that you 've got to fix the system so that people are able to get it at affordable rates and small businesses can afford to give their employees insurance at an affordable rate .
and that 's not happening right now .
to your question about the 25th , my hope is that this does n't end up being political theater , as i think some of you have phrased it .
i want a substantive discussion .
we have n't refined exactly how the agenda is going to go that day .
we want to talk with both the democratic and republican leaders to find out what they think would be most useful .
i do want to make sure that there 's some people like the congressional budget office , for example , that are considered non - partisan , who can answer questions .
in this whole health care debate i 'm reminded of the story that was told about senator moynihan , who was i guess in an argument with one of his colleagues , and his colleague was losing the argument so he got a little flustered and said to senator moynihan , " well , i 'm entitled to my own opinion . "
and senator moynihan said , " well , you 're entitled to your own opinion , but you 're not entitled to your own facts . "
i think that 's the key to a successful dialogue on the 25th or on health care .
let 's establish some common facts .
let 's establish what the issues are , what the problems are , and let 's test out in front of the american people what ideas work and what ideas do n't .
and if we can establish that factual accuracy about how different approaches would work , then i think we can make some progress .
and it may be that some of the facts that come up are ones that make my party a little bit uncomfortable .
so if it 's established that by working seriously on medical malpractice and tort reform that we can reduce some of those costs , i 've said from the beginning of this debate i 'd be willing to work on that .
on the other hand , if i 'm told that that is only a fraction of the problem and that is not the biggest driver of health care costs , then i 'm also going to insist , okay , let 's look at that as one aspect of it , but what else are we willing to do ?
and this is where it gets back to the point i was making earlier .
bipartisanship can not mean simply that democrats give up everything that they believe in , find the handful of things that republicans have been advocating for and we do those things , and then we have bipartisanship .
that 's not how it works in any other realm of life .
that 's certainly not how it works in my marriage with michelle , although i usually do give in most of the time .
but the -- there 's got to be some give and take , and that 's what i 'm hoping can be accomplished .
and i 'm confident that 's what the american people are looking for .
so , all right ?
okay , since there was n't a jobs question -- 

  i 'll make this the last one , jobs question .
well , my understanding is -- first of all , the house has moved forward a jobs package that has some good elements in it .
my understanding is , is that there is bipartisan talks taking place as we speak on the senate side about some elements of a package .
i think there are some things that a lot of people agree on .
just to give you an example , the idea of eliminating capital gains for small businesses -- something we can all agree on .
i talked about it at the state of the union address .
my hope would be that we would all agree on a mechanism to get community banks who are lending to small businesses more capital , because that is something that i keep on hearing is one of the biggest problems that small businesses have out there .
so i think that it 's realistic for us to get a package moving quickly that may not include all the things i think need to be done , and it may be that that first package builds some trust and confidence that democrats and republicans on capitol hill can work together and then we move on to the next aspect of the package and so forth .
it may take a series of incremental steps , but the one thing i 'm absolutely clear about is , is that we 've got an economy that 's growing right now , a huge boost in productivity -- that 's the good news .
the bad news is , is that companies still have n't taken that final step in actually putting people on their payroll full - time .
we 're seeing an increase in temporary workers , but they have n't yet taken on that full - time worker .
and so providing some additional impetus to them , right as the economy is moving in a positive direction , i think can end up yielding some good results .
all right ?
thank you , guys .
that was pretty good , thanks .

thank you .
thank you , governor .
to all the families , first responders , to the community of newtown , clergy , guests -- scripture tells us : " & hellip;do not lose heart .
though outwardly we are wasting away&hellip;inwardly we are being renewed day by day .
for our light and momentary troubles are achieving for us an eternal glory that far outweighs them all .
so we fix our eyes not on what is seen , but on what is unseen , since what is seen is temporary , but what is unseen is eternal .
for we know that if the earthly tent we live in is destroyed , we have a building from god , an eternal house in heaven , not built by human hands . "
we gather here in memory of twenty beautiful children and six remarkable adults .
they lost their lives in a school that could have been any school ; in a quiet town full of good and decent people that could be any town in america .
here in newtown , i come to offer the love and prayers of a nation .
i am very mindful that mere words can not match the depths of your sorrow , nor can they heal your wounded hearts .
i can only hope it helps for you to know that you 're not alone in your grief ; that our world too has been torn apart ; that all across this land of ours , we have wept with you , we 've pulled our children tight .
and you must know that whatever measure of comfort we can provide , we will provide ; whatever portion of sadness that we can share with you to ease this heavy load , we will gladly bear it .
newtown -- you are not alone .
as these difficult days have unfolded , you 've also inspired us with stories of strength and resolve and sacrifice .
we know that when danger arrived in the halls of sandy hook elementary , the school 's staff did not flinch , they did not hesitate .
dawn hochsprung and mary sherlach , vicki soto , lauren rousseau , rachel davino and anne marie murphy -- they responded as we all hope we might respond in such terrifying circumstances -- with courage and with love , giving their lives to protect the children in their care .
we know that there were other teachers who barricaded themselves inside classrooms , and kept steady through it all , and reassured their students by saying " wait for the good guys , they 're coming " ; " show me your smile . "
and we know that good guys came .
the first responders who raced to the scene , helping to guide those in harm 's way to safety , and comfort those in need , holding at bay their own shock and trauma because they had a job to do , and others needed them more .
and then there were the scenes of the schoolchildren , helping one another , holding each other , dutifully following instructions in the way that young children sometimes do ; one child even trying to encourage a grown - up by saying , " i know karate .
so it 's okay .
i 'll lead the way out . "
as a community , you 've inspired us , newtown .
in the face of indescribable violence , in the face of unconscionable evil , you 've looked out for each other , and you 've cared for one another , and you 've loved one another .
this is how newtown will be remembered .
and with time , and god 's grace , that love will see you through .
but we , as a nation , we are left with some hard questions .
someone once described the joy and anxiety of parenthood as the equivalent of having your heart outside of your body all the time , walking around .
with their very first cry , this most precious , vital part of ourselves -- our child -- is suddenly exposed to the world , to possible mishap or malice .
and every parent knows there is nothing we will not do to shield our children from harm .
and yet , we also know that with that child 's very first step , and each step after that , they are separating from us ; that we wo n't -- that we ca n't always be there for them .
they 'll suffer sickness and setbacks and broken hearts and disappointments .
and we learn that our most important job is to give them what they need to become self - reliant and capable and resilient , ready to face the world without fear .
and we know we ca n't do this by ourselves .
it comes as a shock at a certain point where you realize , no matter how much you love these kids , you ca n't do it by yourself .
that this job of keeping our children safe , and teaching them well , is something we can only do together , with the help of friends and neighbors , the help of a community , and the help of a nation .
and in that way , we come to realize that we bear a responsibility for every child because we 're counting on everybody else to help look after ours ; that we 're all parents ; that they 're all our children .
this is our first task -- caring for our children .
it 's our first job .
if we do n't get that right , we do n't get anything right .
that 's how , as a society , we will be judged .
and by that measure , can we truly say , as a nation , that we are meeting our obligations ?
can we honestly say that we 're doing enough to keep our children -- all of them -- safe from harm ?
can we claim , as a nation , that we 're all together there , letting them know that they are loved , and teaching them to love in return ?
can we say that we 're truly doing enough to give all the children of this country the chance they deserve to live out their lives in happiness and with purpose ?
i 've been reflecting on this the last few days , and if we 're honest with ourselves , the answer is no .
we 're not doing enough .
and we will have to change .
since i 've been president , this is the fourth time we have come together to comfort a grieving community torn apart by a mass shooting .
the fourth time we 've hugged survivors .
the fourth time we 've consoled the families of victims .
and in between , there have been an endless series of deadly shootings across the country , almost daily reports of victims , many of them children , in small towns and big cities all across america -- victims whose -- much of the time , their only fault was being in the wrong place at the wrong time .
we ca n't tolerate this anymore .
these tragedies must end .
and to end them , we must change .
we will be told that the causes of such violence are complex , and that is true .
no single law -- no set of laws can eliminate evil from the world , or prevent every senseless act of violence in our society .
but that ca n't be an excuse for inaction .
surely , we can do better than this .
if there is even one step we can take to save another child , or another parent , or another town , from the grief that has visited tucson , and aurora , and oak creek , and newtown , and communities from columbine to blacksburg before that -- then surely we have an obligation to try .
in the coming weeks , i will use whatever power this office holds to engage my fellow citizens -- from law enforcement to mental health professionals to parents and educators -- in an effort aimed at preventing more tragedies like this .
because what choice do we have ?
we ca n't accept events like this as routine .
are we really prepared to say that we 're powerless in the face of such carnage , that the politics are too hard ?
are we prepared to say that such violence visited on our children year after year after year is somehow the price of our freedom ?
all the world 's religions -- so many of them represented here today -- start with a simple question : why are we here ?
what gives our life meaning ?
what gives our acts purpose ?
we know our time on this earth is fleeting .
we know that we will each have our share of pleasure and pain ; that even after we chase after some earthly goal , whether it 's wealth or power or fame , or just simple comfort , we will , in some fashion , fall short of what we had hoped .
we know that no matter how good our intentions , we will all stumble sometimes , in some way .
we will make mistakes , we will experience hardships .
and even when we 're trying to do the right thing , we know that much of our time will be spent groping through the darkness , so often unable to discern god 's heavenly plans .
there 's only one thing we can be sure of , and that is the love that we have -- for our children , for our families , for each other .
the warmth of a small child 's embrace -- that is true .
the memories we have of them , the joy that they bring , the wonder we see through their eyes , that fierce and boundless love we feel for them , a love that takes us out of ourselves , and binds us to something larger -- we know that 's what matters .
we know we 're always doing right when we 're taking care of them , when we 're teaching them well , when we 're showing acts of kindness .
we do n't go wrong when we do that .
that 's what we can be sure of .
and that 's what you , the people of newtown , have reminded us .
that 's how you 've inspired us .
you remind us what matters .
and that 's what should drive us forward in everything we do , for as long as god sees fit to keep us on this earth .
" let the little children come to me , " jesus said , " and do not hinder them -- for to such belongs the kingdom of heaven . "
charlotte .
daniel .
olivia .
josephine .
ana .
dylan .
madeleine .
catherine .
chase .
jesse .
james .
grace .
emilie .
jack .
noah .
caroline .
jessica .
benjamin .
avielle .
allison .
god has called them all home .
for those of us who remain , let us find the strength to carry on , and make our country worthy of their memory .
may god bless and keep those we 've lost in his heavenly place .
may he grace those we still have with his holy comfort .
and may he bless and watch over this community , and the united states of america .

thank you very much .
everybody , please have a seat .
thank you very much .
well , thank you .
it is good to be back .
it is good to be back in new york , it is good to be back in the great hall at cooper union .
we 've got some special guests here that i want to acknowledge .
congresswoman carolyn maloney is here in the house .
governor david paterson is here .
attorney general andrew cuomo .
state comptroller thomas dinapoli is here .
the mayor of new york city , michael bloomberg .
dr. george campbell , jr. , president of cooper union .
and all the citywide elected officials who are here .
thank you very much for your attendance .
it is wonderful to be back in cooper union , where generations of leaders and citizens have come to defend their ideas and contest their differences .
it 's also good to be back in lower manhattan , a few blocks from wall street .
it really is good to be back , because wall street is the heart of our nation 's financial sector .
now , since i last spoke here two years ago , our country has been through a terrible trial .
more than 8 million people have lost their jobs .
countless small businesses have had to shut their doors .
trillions of dollars in savings have been lost -- forcing seniors to put off retirement , young people to postpone college , entrepreneurs to give up on the dream of starting a company .
and as a nation we were forced to take unprecedented steps to rescue the financial system and the broader economy .
and as a result of the decisions we made -- some of which , let 's face it , were very unpopular -- we are seeing hopeful signs .
a little more than one year ago we were losing an average of 750,000 jobs each month .
today , america is adding jobs again .
one year ago the economy was shrinking rapidly .
today the economy is growing .
in fact , we 've seen the fastest turnaround in growth in nearly three decades .
but you 're here and i 'm here because we 've got more work to do .
until this progress is felt not just on wall street but on main street we can not be satisfied .
until the millions of our neighbors who are looking for work can find a job , and wages are growing at a meaningful pace , we may be able to claim a technical recovery -- but we will not have truly recovered .
and even as we seek to revive this economy , it 's also incumbent on us to rebuild it stronger than before .
we do n't want an economy that has the same weaknesses that led to this crisis .
and that means addressing some of the underlying problems that led to this turmoil and devastation in the first place .
now , one of the most significant contributors to this recession was a financial crisis as dire as any we 've known in generations -- at least since the ' 30s .
and that crisis was born of a failure of responsibility -- from wall street all the way to washington -- that brought down many of the world 's largest financial firms and nearly dragged our economy into a second great depression .
it was that failure of responsibility that i spoke about when i came to new york more than two years ago -- before the worst of the crisis had unfolded .
it was back in 2007 .
and i take no satisfaction in noting that my comments then have largely been borne out by the events that followed .
but i repeat what i said then because it is essential that we learn the lessons from this crisis so we do n't doom ourselves to repeat it .
and make no mistake , that is exactly what will happen if we allow this moment to pass -- and that 's an outcome that is unacceptable to me and it 's unacceptable to you , the american people .
as i said on this stage two years ago , i believe in the power of the free market .
i believe in a strong financial sector that helps people to raise capital and get loans and invest their savings .
that 's part of what has made america what it is .
but a free market was never meant to be a free license to take whatever you can get , however you can get it .
that 's what happened too often in the years leading up to this crisis .
some -- and let me be clear , not all -- but some on wall street forgot that behind every dollar traded or leveraged there 's family looking to buy a house , or pay for an education , open a business , save for retirement .
what happens on wall street has real consequences across the country , across our economy .
i 've spoken before about the need to build a new foundation for economic growth in the 21st century .
and given the importance of the financial sector , wall street reform is an absolutely essential part of that foundation .
without it , our house will continue to sit on shifting sands , and our families , businesses , and the global economy will be vulnerable to future crises .
that 's why i feel so strongly that we need to enact a set of updated , commonsense rules to ensure accountability on wall street and to protect consumers in our financial system .
now , here 's the good news : a comprehensive plan to achieve these reforms has already passed the house of representatives .
a senate version is currently being debated , drawing on ideas from democrats and republicans .
both bills represent significant improvement on the flawed rules that we have in place today , despite the furious effort of industry lobbyists to shape this legislation to their special interests .
and for those of you in the financial sector i 'm sure that some of these lobbyists work for you and they 're doing what they are being paid to do .
but i 'm here today specifically -- when i speak to the titans of industry here -- because i want to urge you to join us , instead of fighting us in this effort .
i 'm here because i believe that these reforms are , in the end , not only in the best interest of our country , but in the best interest of the financial sector .
and i 'm here to explain what reform will look like , and why it matters .
now , first , the bill being considered in the senate would create what we did not have before , and that is a way to protect the financial system and the broader economy and american taxpayers in the event that a large financial firm begins to fail .
if there 's a lehmans or an aig , how can we respond in a way that does n't force taxpayers to pick up the tab or , alternatively , could bring down the whole system .
in an ordinary local bank when it approaches insolvency , we 've got a process , an orderly process through the fdic , that ensures that depositors are protected , maintains confidence in the banking system , and it works .
customers and taxpayers are protected and owners and management lose their equity .
but we do n't have that kind of process designed to contain the failure of a lehman brothers or any of the largest and most interconnected financial firms in our country .
that 's why , when this crisis began , crucial decisions about what would happen to some of the world 's biggest companies -- companies employing tens of thousands of people and holding hundreds of billions of dollars in assets -- had to take place in hurried discussions in the middle of the night .
and that 's why , to save the entire economy from an even worse catastrophe , we had to deploy taxpayer dollars .
now , much of that money has now been paid back and my administration has proposed a fee to be paid by large financial firms to recover all the money , every dime , because the american people should never have been put in that position in the first place .
but this is why we need a system to shut these firms down with the least amount of collateral damage to innocent people and innocent businesses .
and from the start , i 've insisted that the financial industry , not taxpayers , shoulder the costs in the event that a large financial company should falter .
the goal is to make certain that taxpayers are never again on the hook because a firm is deemed " too big to fail . "
now , there 's a legitimate debate taking place about how best to ensure taxpayers are held harmless in this process .
and that 's a legitimate debate , and i encourage that debate .
but what 's not legitimate is to suggest that somehow the legislation being proposed is going to encourage future taxpayer bailouts , as some have claimed .
that makes for a good sound bite , but it 's not factually accurate .
it is not true .
in fact , the system as it stands -- the system as it stands is what led to a series of massive , costly taxpayer bailouts .
and it 's only with reform that we can avoid a similar outcome in the future .
in other words , a vote for reform is a vote to put a stop to taxpayer - funded bailouts .
that 's the truth .
end of story .
and nobody should be fooled in this debate .
by the way , these changes have the added benefit of creating incentives within the industry to ensure that no one company can ever threaten to bring down the whole economy .
to that end , the bill would also enact what 's known as the volcker rule -- and there 's a tall guy sitting in the front row here , paul volcker --   -- who we named it after .
and it does something very simple : it places some limits on the size of banks and the kinds of risks that banking institutions can take .
this will not only safeguard our system against crises , this will also make our system stronger and more competitive by instilling confidence here at home and across the globe .
markets depend on that confidence .
part of what led to the turmoil of the past two years was that in the absence of clear rules and sound practices , people did n't trust that our system was one in which it was safe to invest or lend .
as we 've seen , that harms all of us .
so by enacting these reforms , we 'll help ensure that our financial system -- and our economy -- continues to be the envy of the world .
that 's the first thing , making sure that we can wind down one firm if it gets into trouble without bringing the whole system down or forcing taxpayers to fund a bailout .
number two , reform would bring new transparency to many financial markets .
as you know , part of what led to this crisis was firms like aig and others who were making huge and risky bets , using derivatives and other complicated financial instruments , in ways that defied accountability , or even common sense .
in fact , many practices were so opaque , so confusing , so complex that the people inside the firms did n't understand them , much less those who were charged with overseeing them .
they were n't fully aware of the massive bets that were being placed .
that 's what led warren buffett to describe derivatives that were bought and sold with little oversight as " financial weapons of mass destruction . "
that 's what he called them .
and that 's why reform will rein in excess and help ensure that these kinds of transactions take place in the light of day .
now , there 's been a great deal of concern about these changes .
so i want to reiterate : there is a legitimate role for these financial instruments in our economy .
they can help allay risk and spur investment .
and there are a lot of companies that use these instruments to that legitimate end -- they are managing exposure to fluctuating prices or currencies , fluctuating markets .
for example , a business might hedge against rising oil prices by buying a financial product to secure stable fuel costs , so an airlines might have an interest in locking in a decent price .
that 's how markets are supposed to work .
the problem is these markets operated in the shadows of our economy , invisible to regulators , invisible to the public .
so reckless practices were rampant .
risks accrued until they threatened our entire financial system .
and that 's why these reforms are designed to respect legitimate activities but prevent reckless risk taking .
that 's why we want to ensure that financial products like standardized derivatives are traded out in the open , in the full view of businesses , investors , and those charged with oversight .
and i was encouraged to see a republican senator join with democrats this week in moving forward on this issue .
that 's a good sign .
that 's a good sign .
for without action , we 'll continue to see what amounts to highly - leveraged , loosely - monitored gambling in our financial system , putting taxpayers and the economy in jeopardy .
and the only people who ought to fear the kind of oversight and transparency that we 're proposing are those whose conduct will fail this scrutiny .
third , this plan would enact the strongest consumer financial protections ever .
and that 's absolutely necessary because this financial crisis was n't just the result of decisions made in the executive suites on wall street ; it was also the result of decisions made around kitchen tables across america , by folks who took on mortgages and credit cards and auto loans .
and while it 's true that many americans took on financial obligations that they knew or should have known they could not have afforded , millions of others were , frankly , duped .
they were misled by deceptive terms and conditions , buried deep in the fine print .
and while a few companies made out like bandits by exploiting their customers , our entire economy was made more vulnerable .
millions of people have now lost their homes .
tens of millions more have lost value in their homes .
just about every sector of our economy has felt the pain , whether you 're paving driveways in arizona , or selling houses in ohio , or you 're doing home repairs in california , or you 're using your home equity to start a small business in florida .
that 's why we need to give consumers more protection and more power in our financial system .
this is not about stifling competition , stifling innovation ; it 's just the opposite .
with a dedicated agency setting ground rules and looking out for ordinary people in our financial system , we will empower consumers with clear and concise information when they 're making financial decisions .
so instead of competing to offer confusing products , companies will compete the old - fashioned way , by offering better products .
and that will mean more choices for consumers , more opportunities for businesses , and more stability in our financial system .
and unless your business model depends on bilking people , there is little to fear from these new rules .
number four , the last key component of reform .
these wall street reforms will give shareholders new power in the financial system .
they will get what we call a say on pay , a voice with respect to the salaries and bonuses awarded to top executives .
and the sec will have the authority to give shareholders more say in corporate elections , so that investors and pension holders have a stronger role in determining who manages the company in which they 've placed their savings .
now , americans do n't begrudge anybody for success when that success is earned .
but when we read in the past , and sometimes in the present , about enormous executive bonuses at firms -- even as they 're relying on assistance from taxpayers or they 're taking huge risks that threaten the system as a whole or their company is doing badly -- it offends our fundamental values .
not only that , some of the salaries and bonuses that we 've seen creates perverse incentives to take reckless risks that contributed to the crisis .
it 's what helped lead to a relentless focus on a company 's next quarter , to the detriment of its next year or its next decade .
and it led to a situation in which folks with the most to lose -- stock and pension holders -- had the least to say in the process .
and that has to change .
let me close by saying this .
i have laid out a set of wall street reforms .
these are reforms that would put an end to taxpayer bailouts ; that would bring complex financial dealings out of the shadows ; that would protect consumers ; and that would give shareholders more power in the financial system .
but let 's face it , we also need reform in washington .
and the debate -- the debate over these changes is a perfect example .
i mean , we have seen battalions of financial industry lobbyists descending on capitol hill , firms spending millions to influence the outcome of this debate .
we 've seen misleading arguments and attacks that are designed not to improve the bill but to weaken or to kill it .
we 've seen a bipartisan process buckle under the weight of these withering forces , even as we 've produced a proposal that by all accounts is a commonsense , reasonable , non - ideological approach to target the root problems that led to the turmoil in our financial sector and ultimately in our entire economy .
so we 've seen business as usual in washington , but i believe we can and must put this kind of cynical politics aside .
we 've got to put an end to it .
that 's why i 'm here today .
that 's why i 'm here today .
and to those of you who are in the financial sector , let me say this , we will not always see eye to eye .
we will not always agree .
but that does n't mean that we 've got to choose between two extremes .
we do not have to choose between markets that are unfettered by even modest protections against crisis , or markets that are stymied by onerous rules that suppress enterprise and innovation .
that is a false choice .
and we need no more proof than the crisis that we 've just been through .
you see , there has always been a tension between the desire to allow markets to function without interference and the absolute necessity of rules to prevent markets from falling out of kilter .
but managing that tension , one that we 've debated since the founding of this nation , is what has allowed our country to keep up with a changing world .
for in taking up this debate , in figuring out how to apply well - worn principles with each new age , we ensure that we do n't tip too far one way or the other -- that our democracy remains as dynamic and our economy remains as dynamic as it has in the past .
so , yes , this debate can be contentious .
it can be heated .
but in the end it serves only to make our country stronger .
it has allowed us to adapt and to thrive .
and i read a report recently that i think fairly illustrates this point .
it 's from time magazine .
i 'm going to quote : " through the great banking houses of manhattan last week ran wild - eyed alarm .
big bankers stared at one another in anger and astonishment .
a bill just passed&hellip ; would rivet upon their institutions what they considered a monstrous system&hellip ; such a system , they felt , would not only rob them of their pride of profession but would reduce all u. s. banking to its lowest level . "
that appeared in time magazine in june of 1933 .
the system that caused so much consternation , so much concern was the federal deposit insurance corporation , also known as the fdic , an institution that has successfully secured the deposits of generations of americans .
in the end , our system only works -- our markets are only free -- when there are basic safeguards that prevent abuse , that check excesses , that ensure that it is more profitable to play by the rules than to game the system .
and that is what the reforms we 've been proposing are designed to achieve -- no more , no less .
and because that is how we will ensure that our economy works for consumers , that it works for investors , and that it works for financial institutions -- in other words , that it works for all of us -- that 's why we 're working so hard to get this stuff passed .
this is the central lesson not only of this crisis but of our history .
it 's what i said when i spoke here two years ago .
because ultimately , there is no dividing line between main street and wall street .
we will rise or we will fall together as one nation .
and that is why i urge all of you to join me .
i urge all of you to join me , to join those who are seeking to pass these commonsense reforms .
and for those of you in the financial industry , i urge you to join me not only because it is in the interest of your industry , but also because it 's in the interest of your country .
thank you so much .
god bless you , and god bless the united states of america .
thank you .

i stand here today humbled by the task before us , grateful for the trust you have bestowed , mindful of the sacrifices borne by our ancestors .
i thank president bush for his service to our nation , as well as the generosity and cooperation he has shown throughout this transition .
forty - four americans have now taken the presidential oath .
the words have been spoken during rising tides of prosperity and the still waters of peace .
yet , every so often the oath is taken amidst gathering clouds and raging storms .
at these moments , america has carried on not simply because of the skill or vision of those in high office , but because we the people have remained faithful to the ideals of our forbearers , and true to our founding documents .
so it has been .
so it must be with this generation of americans .
that we are in the midst of crisis is now well understood .
our nation is at war , against a far - reaching network of violence and hatred .
our economy is badly weakened , a consequence of greed and irresponsibility on the part of some , but also our collective failure to make hard choices and prepare the nation for a new age .
homes have been lost ; jobs shed ; businesses shuttered .
our health care is too costly ; our schools fail too many ; and each day brings further evidence that the ways we use energy strengthen our adversaries and threaten our planet .
these are the indicators of crisis , subject to data and statistics .
less measurable but no less profound is a sapping of confidence across our land -- a nagging fear that america 's decline is inevitable , and that the next generation must lower its sights .
today i say to you that the challenges we face are real .
they are serious and they are many .
they will not be met easily or in a short span of time .
but know this , america -- they will be met .
on this day , we gather because we have chosen hope over fear , unity of purpose over conflict and discord .
on this day , we come to proclaim an end to the petty grievances and false promises , the recriminations and worn out dogmas , that for far too long have strangled our politics .
we remain a young nation , but in the words of scripture , the time has come to set aside childish things .
the time has come to reaffirm our enduring spirit ; to choose our better history ; to carry forward that precious gift , that noble idea , passed on from generation to generation : the god - given promise that all are equal , all are free , and all deserve a chance to pursue their full measure of happiness .
in reaffirming the greatness of our nation , we understand that greatness is never a given .
it must be earned .
our journey has never been one of short - cuts or settling for less .
it has not been the path for the faint - hearted -- for those who prefer leisure over work , or seek only the pleasures of riches and fame .
rather , it has been the risk - takers , the doers , the makers of things -- some celebrated but more often men and women obscure in their labor , who have carried us up the long , rugged path towards prosperity and freedom .
for us , they packed up their few worldly possessions and traveled across oceans in search of a new life .
for us , they toiled in sweatshops and settled the west ; endured the lash of the whip and plowed the hard earth .
for us , they fought and died , in places like concord and gettysburg ; normandy and khe sahn .
time and again these men and women struggled and sacrificed and worked till their hands were raw so that we might live a better life .
they saw america as bigger than the sum of our individual ambitions ; greater than all the differences of birth or wealth or faction .
this is the journey we continue today .
we remain the most prosperous , powerful nation on earth .
our workers are no less productive than when this crisis began .
our minds are no less inventive , our goods and services no less needed than they were last week or last month or last year .
our capacity remains undiminished .
but our time of standing pat , of protecting narrow interests and putting off unpleasant decisions -- that time has surely passed .
starting today , we must pick ourselves up , dust ourselves off , and begin again the work of remaking america .
for everywhere we look , there is work to be done .
the state of the economy calls for action , bold and swift , and we will act -- not only to create new jobs , but to lay a new foundation for growth .
we will build the roads and bridges , the electric grids and digital lines that feed our commerce and bind us together .
we will restore science to its rightful place , and wield technology 's wonders to raise health care 's quality and lower its cost .
we will harness the sun and the winds and the soil to fuel our cars and run our factories .
and we will transform our schools and colleges and universities to meet the demands of a new age .
all this we can do .
and all this we will do .
now , there are some who question the scale of our ambitions -- who suggest that our system can not tolerate too many big plans .
their memories are short .
for they have forgotten what this country has already done ; what free men and women can achieve when imagination is joined to common purpose , and necessity to courage .
what the cynics fail to understand is that the ground has shifted beneath them -- that the stale political arguments that have consumed us for so long no longer apply .
the question we ask today is not whether our government is too big or too small , but whether it works -- whether it helps families find jobs at a decent wage , care they can afford , a retirement that is dignified .
where the answer is yes , we intend to move forward .
where the answer is no , programs will end .
and those of us who manage the public 's dollars will be held to account -- to spend wisely , reform bad habits , and do our business in the light of day -- because only then can we restore the vital trust between a people and their government .
nor is the question before us whether the market is a force for good or ill .
its power to generate wealth and expand freedom is unmatched , but this crisis has reminded us that without a watchful eye , the market can spin out of control -- and that a nation can not prosper long when it favors only the prosperous .
the success of our economy has always depended not just on the size of our gross domestic product , but on the reach of our prosperity ; on our ability to extend opportunity to every willing heart -- not out of charity , but because it is the surest route to our common good .
as for our common defense , we reject as false the choice between our safety and our ideals .
our founding fathers , faced with perils we can scarcely imagine , drafted a charter to assure the rule of law and the rights of man , a charter expanded by the blood of generations .
those ideals still light the world , and we will not give them up for expedience 's sake .
and so to all other peoples and governments who are watching today , from the grandest capitals to the small village where my father was born : know that america is a friend of each nation and every man , woman , and child who seeks a future of peace and dignity , and that we are ready to lead once more .
recall that earlier generations faced down fascism and communism not just with missiles and tanks , but with sturdy alliances and enduring convictions .
they understood that our power alone can not protect us , nor does it entitle us to do as we please .
instead , they knew that our power grows through its prudent use ; our security emanates from the justness of our cause , the force of our example , the tempering qualities of humility and restraint .
we are the keepers of this legacy .
guided by these principles once more , we can meet those new threats that demand even greater effort -- even greater cooperation and understanding between nations .
we will begin to responsibly leave iraq to its people , and forge a hard - earned peace in afghanistan .
with old friends and former foes , we will work tirelessly to lessen the nuclear threat , and roll back the specter of a warming planet .
we will not apologize for our way of life , nor will we waver in its defense , and for those who seek to advance their aims by inducing terror and slaughtering innocents , we say to you now that our spirit is stronger and can not be broken ; you can not outlast us , and we will defeat you .
for we know that our patchwork heritage is a strength , not a weakness .
we are a nation of christians and muslims , jews and hindus and non - believers .
we are shaped by every language and culture , drawn from every end of this earth ; and because we have tasted the bitter swill of civil war and segregation , and emerged from that dark chapter stronger and more united , we can not help but believe that the old hatreds shall someday pass ; that the lines of tribe shall soon dissolve ; that as the world grows smaller , our common humanity shall reveal itself ; and that america must play its role in ushering in a new era of peace .
to the muslim world , we seek a new way forward , based on mutual interest and mutual respect .
to those leaders around the globe who seek to sow conflict , or blame their society 's ills on the west , know that your people will judge you on what you can build , not what you destroy .
to those who cling to power through corruption and deceit and the silencing of dissent , know that you are on the wrong side of history ; but that we will extend a hand if you are willing to unclench your fist .
to the people of poor nations , we pledge to work alongside you to make your farms flourish and let clean waters flow ; to nourish starved bodies and feed hungry minds .
and to those nations like ours that enjoy relative plenty , we say we can no longer afford indifference to suffering outside our borders ; nor can we consume the world 's resources without regard to effect .
for the world has changed , and we must change with it .
as we consider the road that unfolds before us , we remember with humble gratitude those brave americans who , at this very hour , patrol far - off deserts and distant mountains .
they have something to tell us today , just as the fallen heroes who lie in arlington whisper through the ages .
we honor them not only because they are guardians of our liberty , but because they embody the spirit of service ; a willingness to find meaning in something greater than themselves .
and yet , at this moment -- a moment that will define a generation -- it is precisely this spirit that must inhabit us all .
for as much as government can do and must do , it is ultimately the faith and determination of the american people upon which this nation relies .
it is the kindness to take in a stranger when the levees break , the selflessness of workers who would rather cut their hours than see a friend lose their job which sees us through our darkest hours .
it is the firefighter 's courage to storm a stairway filled with smoke , but also a parent 's willingness to nurture a child , that finally decides our fate .
our challenges may be new .
the instruments with which we meet them may be new .
but those values upon which our success depends -- hard work and honesty , courage and fair play , tolerance and curiosity , loyalty and patriotism -- these things are old .
these things are true .
they have been the quiet force of progress throughout our history .
what is demanded then is a return to these truths .
what is required of us now is a new era of responsibility -- a recognition , on the part of every american , that we have duties to ourselves , our nation , and the world , duties that we do not grudgingly accept but rather seize gladly , firm in the knowledge that there is nothing so satisfying to the spirit , so defining of our character , than giving our all to a difficult task .
this is the price and the promise of citizenship .
this is the source of our confidence -- the knowledge that god calls on us to shape an uncertain destiny .
this is the meaning of our liberty and our creed -- why men and women and children of every race and every faith can join in celebration across this magnificent mall , and why a man whose father less than sixty years ago might not have been served at a local restaurant can now stand before you to take a most sacred oath .
so let us mark this day with remembrance , of who we are and how far we have traveled .
in the year of america 's birth , in the coldest of months , a small band of patriots huddled by dying campfires on the shores of an icy river .
the capital was abandoned .
the enemy was advancing .
the snow was stained with blood .
at a moment when the outcome of our revolution was most in doubt , the father of our nation ordered these words be read to the people : 
 " let it be told to the future world ... that in the depth of winter , when nothing but hope and virtue could survive ... that the city and the country , alarmed at one common danger , came forth to meet . "
america .
in the face of our common dangers , in this winter of our hardship , let us remember these timeless words .
with hope and virtue , let us brave once more the icy currents , and endure what storms may come .
let it be said by our children 's children that when we were tested we refused to let this journey end , that we did not turn back nor did we falter ; and with eyes fixed on the horizon and god 's grace upon us , we carried forth that great gift of freedom and delivered it safely to future generations .
thank you .
god bless you .
and may god bless the united states of america .

good afternoon , everybody .
last night i had a chance to speak to the leaders of the house and the senate and reached out to those who had both won and lost in both parties .
i told john boehner and mitch mcconnell that i look forward to working with them .
and i thanked nancy pelosi and harry reid for their extraordinary leadership over the last two years .
after what i 'm sure was a long night for a lot of you -- and needless to say it was for me -- i can tell you that some election nights are more fun than others .
some are exhilarating ; some are humbling .
but every election , regardless of who wins and who loses , is a reminder that in our democracy , power rests not with those of us in elected office , but with the people we have the privilege to serve .
over the last few months i 've had the opportunity to travel around the country and meet people where they live and where they work , from backyards to factory floors .
i did some talking , but mostly i did a lot of listening .
and yesterday 's vote confirmed what i 've heard from folks all across america : people are frustrated -- they 're deeply frustrated -- with the pace of our economic recovery and the opportunities that they hope for their children and their grandchildren .
they want jobs to come back faster , they want paychecks to go further , and they want the ability to give their children the same chances and opportunities as they 've had in life .
the men and women who sent us here do n't expect washington to solve all their problems .
but they do expect washington to work for them , not against them .
they want to know that their tax dollars are being spent wisely , not wasted , and that we 're not going to leave our children a legacy of debt .
they want to know that their voices are n't being drowned out by a sea of lobbyists and special interests and partisan bickering .
they want business to be done here openly and honestly .
now , i ran for this office to tackle these challenges and give voice to the concerns of everyday people .
over the last two years , we 've made progress .
but , clearly , too many americans have n't felt that progress yet , and they told us that yesterday .
and as president , i take responsibility for that .
what yesterday also told us is that no one party will be able to dictate where we go from here , that we must find common ground in order to set -- in order to make progress on some uncommonly difficult challenges .
and i told john boehner and mitch mcconnell last night i am very eager to sit down with members of both parties and figure out how we can move forward together .
i 'm not suggesting this will be easy .
i wo n't pretend that we will be able to bridge every difference or solve every disagreement .
there 's a reason we have two parties in this country , and both democrats and republicans have certain beliefs and certain principles that each feels can not be compromised .
but what i think the american people are expecting , and what we owe them , is to focus on those issues that affect their jobs , their security , and their future : reducing our deficit , promoting a clean energy economy , making sure that our children are the best educated in the world , making sure that we 're making the investments in technology that will allow us to keep our competitive edge in the global economy .
because the most important contest we face is not the contest between democrats and republicans .
in this century , the most important competition we face is between america and our economic competitors around the world .
to win that competition , and to continue our economic leadership , we 're going to need to be strong and we 're going to need to be united .
none of the challenges we face lend themselves to simple solutions or bumper - sticker slogans .
nor are the answers found in any one particular philosophy or ideology .
as i 've said before , no person , no party , has a monopoly on wisdom .
and that 's why i 'm eager to hear good ideas wherever they come from , whoever proposes them .
and that 's why i believe it 's important to have an honest and civil debate about the choices that we face .
that 's why i want to engage both democrats and republicans in serious conversations about where we 're going as a nation .
and with so much at stake , what the american people do n't want from us , especially here in washington , is to spend the next two years refighting the political battles of the last two .
we just had a tough election .
we will have another in 2012 .
i 'm not so na&iuml;ve as to think that everybody will put politics aside until then , but i do hope to make progress on the very serious problems facing us right now .
and that 's going to require all of us , including me , to work harder at building consensus .
you know , a little over a month ago , we held a town hall meeting in richmond , virginia .
and one of the most telling questions came from a small business owner who runs a tree care firm .
he told me how hard he works and how busy he was ; how he does n't have time to pay attention to all the back - and - forth in washington .
and he asked , is there hope for us returning to civility in our discourse , to a healthy legislative process , so as i strap on the boots again tomorrow , i know that you guys got it under control ?
it 's hard to have a faith in that right now , he said .
i do believe there is hope for civility .
i do believe there 's hope for progress .
and that 's because i believe in the resiliency of a nation that 's bounced back from much worse than what we 're going through right now -- a nation that 's overcome war and depression , that has been made more perfect in our struggle for individual rights and individual freedoms .
each time progress has come slowly and even painfully , but progress has always come -- because we 've worked at it and because we 've believed in it , and most of all , because we remembered that our first allegiance as citizens is not to party or region or faction , but to country -- because while we may be proud democrats or proud republicans , we are prouder to be americans .
and that 's something that we all need to remember right now and in the coming months .
and if we do , i have no doubt that we will continue this nation 's long journey towards a better future .
so with that , let me take some questions .
i 'm going to start off with ben feller at ap .
i think that there is no doubt that people 's number - one concern is the economy .
and what they were expressing great frustration about is the fact that we have n't made enough progress on the economy .
we 've stabilized the economy .
we 've got job growth in the private sectors .
but people all across america are n't feeling that progress .
they do n't see it .
and they understand that i 'm the president of the united states , and that my core responsibility is making sure that we 've got an economy that 's growing , a middle class that feels secure , that jobs are being created .
and so i think i 've got to take direct responsibility for the fact that we have not made as much progress as we need to make .
now , moving forward , i think the question is going to be can democrats and republicans sit down together and come up with a set of ideas that address those core concerns .
i 'm confident that we can .
i think that there are some areas where it 's going to be very difficult for us to agree on , but i think there are going to be a whole bunch of areas where we can agree on .
i do n't think there 's anybody in america who thinks that we 've got an energy policy that works the way it needs to ; that thinks that we should n't be working on energy independence .
and that gives opportunities for democrats and republicans to come together and think about , whether it 's natural gas or energy efficiency or how we can build electric cars in this country , how do we move forward on that agenda .
i think everybody in this country thinks that we 've got to make sure our kids are equipped in terms of their education , their science background , their math backgrounds , to compete in this new global economy .
and that 's going to be an area where i think there 's potential common ground .
so on a whole range of issues , there are going to be areas where we disagree .
i think the overwhelming message that i hear from the voters is that we want everybody to act responsibly in washington .
we want you to work harder to arrive at consensus .
we want you to focus completely on jobs and the economy and growing it , so that we 're ensuring a better future for our children and our grandchildren .
and i think that there 's no doubt that as i reflect on the results of the election , it underscores for me that i 've got to do a better job , just like everybody else in washington does .
well , i think john boehner and i and mitch mcconnell and harry reid and nancy pelosi are going to have to sit down and work together -- because i suspect that if you talk to any individual voter yesterday , they 'd say , there are some things i agree with democrats on , there are some things i agree with republicans on .
i do n't think people carry around with them a fixed ideology .
i think the majority of people , they 're going about their business , going about their lives .
they just want to make sure that we 're making progress .
and that 's going to be my top priority over the next couple of years .
savannah guthrie .
well , savannah , that was just the first question , so we 're going to have a few more here .
i 'm doing a whole lot of reflecting and i think that there are going to be areas in policy where we 're going to have to do a better job .
i think that over the last two years , we have made a series of very tough decisions , but decisions that were right in terms of moving the country forward in an emergency situation where we had the risk of slipping into a second great depression .
but what is absolutely true is that with all that stuff coming at folks fast and furious -- a recovery package , what we had to do with respect to the banks , what we had to do with respect to the auto companies -- i think people started looking at all this and it felt as if government was getting much more intrusive into people 's lives than they were accustomed to .
now , the reason was it was an emergency situation .
but i think it 's understandable that folks said to themselves , you know , maybe this is the agenda , as opposed to a response to an emergency .
and that 's something that i think everybody in the white house understood was a danger .
we thought it was necessary , but i 'm sympathetic to folks who looked at it and said this is looking like potential overreach .
in addition , there were a bunch of price tags that went with that .
and so , even though these were emergency situations , people rightly said , gosh , we already have all this debt , we already have these big deficits ; this is potentially going to compound it , and at what point are we going to get back to a situation where we 're doing what families all around the country do , which is make sure that if you spend something you know how to pay for it -- as opposed to racking up the credit card for the next generation .
and i think that the other thing that happened is that when i won election in 2008 , one of the reasons i think that people were excited about the campaign was the prospect that we would change how business is done in washington .
and we were in such a hurry to get things done that we did n't change how things got done .
and i think that frustrated people .
i 'm a strong believer that the earmarking process in congress is n't what the american people really want to see when it comes to making tough decisions about how taxpayer dollars are spent .
and i , in the rush to get things done , had to sign a bunch of bills that had earmarks in them , which was contrary to what i had talked about .
and i think folks look at that and they said , gosh , this feels like the same partisan squabbling , this seems like the same ways of doing business as happened before .
and so one of the things that i 've got to take responsibility for is not having moved enough on those fronts .
and i think there is an opportunity to move forward on some of those issues .
my understanding is eric cantor today said that he wanted to see a moratorium on earmarks continuing .
that 's something i think we can -- we can work on together .
well , savannah , i think that what i think is absolutely true is voters are not satisfied with the outcomes .
if right now we had 5 percent unemployment instead of 9.6 percent unemployment , then people would have more confidence in those policy choices .
the fact is , is that for most folks , proof of whether they work or not is has the economy gotten back to where it needs to be .
and it has n't .
and so my job is to make sure that i 'm looking at all ideas that are on the table .
when it comes to job creation , if republicans have good ideas for job growth that can drive down the unemployment rate , and we have n't thought of them , we have n't looked at them but we think they have a chance of working , we want to try some .
so on the policy front , i think the most important thing is to say that we 're not going to rule out ideas because they 're democrat or republican ; we want to just see what works .
and ultimately , i 'll be judged as president as to the bottom line , results .
mike emanuel .
well , i know that there 's some republican candidates who won last night who feel very strongly about it .
i 'm sure that this will be an issue that comes up in discussions with the republican leadership .
as i said before , though , i think we 'd be misreading the election if we thought that the american people want to see us for the next two years relitigate arguments that we had over the last two years .
with respect to the health care law , generally -- and this may go to some of the questions that savannah was raising -- you know , when i talk to a woman from new hampshire who does n't have to mortgage her house because she got cancer and is seeking treatment but now is able to get health insurance , when i talk to parents who are relieved that their child with a preexisting condition can now stay on their policy until they 're 26 years old and give them time to transition to find a job that will give them health insurance , or the small businesses that are now taking advantage of the tax credits that are provided -- then i say to myself , this was the right thing to do .
now , if the republicans have ideas for how to improve our health care system , if they want to suggest modifications that would deliver faster and more effective reform to a health care system that has been wildly expensive for too many families and businesses and certainly for our federal government , i 'm happy to consider some of those ideas .
you know , for example , i know one of the things that 's come up is that the 1099 provision in the health care bill appears to be too burdensome for small businesses .
it just involves too much paperwork , too much filing .
it 's probably counterproductive .
it was designed to make sure that revenue was raised to help pay for some of the other provisions , but if it ends up just being so much trouble that small businesses find it difficult to manage , that 's something that we should take a look at .
so there are going to be examples where i think we can tweak and make improvements on the progress that we 've made .
that 's true for any significant piece of legislation .
but i do n't think that if you ask the american people , should we stop trying to close the doughnut hole that will help senior citizens get prescription drugs , should we go back to a situation where people with preexisting conditions ca n't get health insurance , should we allow insurance companies to drop your coverage when you get sick even though you 've been paying premiums -- i do n't think that you 'd have a strong vote for people saying those are provisions i want to eliminate .
well , it also means one out of two voters think it was the right thing to do .
and obviously this is an issue that has been contentious .
but as i said , i think what 's going to be useful is for us to go through the issues that republicans have issues on -- not sort of talking generally , but let 's talk specifics .
does this particular provision -- when it comes to preexisting conditions , is this something you 're for or you 're against ?
helping seniors get their prescription drugs -- does that make sense or not ?
and if we take that approach -- which is different from campaigning -- i mean , this is now governing -- then i think that we can continue to make some progress and find some common ground .
chip reid .
well , i think this is going to be an important question for democrats and republicans .
i think the american people are absolutely concerned about spending and debt -- and deficits .
and i 'm going to have a deficit commission that is putting forward its ideas .
it 's a bipartisan group that includes republican and democratic members of congress .
hopefully they were able to arrive at some consensus on some areas where we can eliminate programs that do n't work , cut back on government spending that is inefficient , can streamline government , but is n't cutting into the core investments that are going to make sure that we are a competitive economy that is growing and providing opportunity for years to come .
so the question i think that my republican friends and me and democratic leaders are going to have answer is , what are our priorities ?
what do we care about ?
and that 's going to be a tough debate , because there are some tough choices here .
we already had a big deficit that i inherited , and that has been made worse because of the recession .
as we bring it down , i want to make sure that we 're not cutting into education that is going to help define whether or not we can compete around the world .
i do n't think we should be cutting back on research and development , because if we can develop new technologies in areas like clean energy , that could make all the difference in terms of job creation here at home .
i think the proposal that i put forward with respect to infrastructure is one that historically we 've had bipartisan agreement about .
and we should be able to agree now that it makes no sense for china to have better rail systems than us , and singapore having better airports than us .
and we just learned that china now has the fastest supercomputer on earth -- that used to be us .
they 're making investments because they know those investments will pay off over the long term .
and so in these budget discussions , the key is to be able to distinguish between stuff that is n't adding to our growth , is n't an investment in our future , and those things that are absolutely necessary for us to be able to increase job growth in the future as well .
now , the single most important thing i think we need to do economically -- and this is something that has to be done during the lame duck session -- is making sure that taxes do n't go up on middle - class families next year .
and so we 've got some work to do on that front to make sure that families not only are n't seeing a higher tax burden -- which will automatically happen if congress does n't act -- but also making sure that business provisions that historically we have extended each year that , for example , provide tax breaks for companies that are investing here in the united states in research and development , that those are extended .
i think it makes sense for us to extend unemployment insurance because there are still a lot of folks out there hurting .
so there are some things that we can do right now that will help sustain the recovery and advance it , even as we 're also sitting down and figuring out , okay , over the next several years what kinds of budget cuts can we make that are intelligent , that are smart , that wo n't be undermining our recovery but , in fact , will be encouraging job growth .
well , what is absolutely true is , is that without any republican support on anything , then it 's going to be hard to get things done .
but i 'm not going to anticipate that they 're not going to support anything .
i think that part of the message sent to republicans was we want to see stronger job growth in this country .
and if there are good ideas about putting people to work that traditionally have garnered republican support and that do n't add to the deficit , then my hope is and expectation is , is that that 's something they 're willing to have a serious conversation about .
when it comes to , for example , the proposal we put forward to accelerate depreciation for business , so that if they 're building a plant or investing in new equipment next year , that they can take a complete write - off next year , get a huge tax break next year , and that would then encourage a lot of businesses to get off the sidelines -- that 's not historically considered a liberal idea .
that 's actually an idea that business groups and republicans i think have supported for a very long time .
so again , the question is going to be do we all come to the table with an open mind and say to ourselves , what do we think is actually going to make a difference for the american people ?
that 's how we 're going to be judged over the next couple of years .
peter baker .
well , i think i 've been willing to compromise in the past and i 'm going to be willing to compromise going forward on a whole range of issues .
let me give you an example -- the issue of energy that i just mentioned .
i think there are a lot of republicans that ran against the energy bill that passed in the house last year .
and so it 's doubtful that you could get the votes to pass that through the house this year or next year or the year after .
but that does n't mean there is n't agreement that we should have a better energy policy .
and so let 's find those areas where we can agree .
we 've got , i think , broad agreement that we 've got terrific natural gas resources in this country .
are we doing everything we can to develop those ?
there 's a lot of agreement around the need to make sure that electric cars are developed here in the united states , that we do n't fall behind other countries .
are there things that we can do to encourage that ?
and there 's already been bipartisan interest on those issues .
there 's been discussion about how we can restart our nuclear industry as a means of reducing our dependence on foreign oil and reducing greenhouse gases .
is that an area where we can move forward ?
we were able , over the last two years , to increase for the first time in 30 years fuel - efficiency standards on cars and trucks .
we did n't even need legislation .
we just needed the cooperation of automakers and autoworkers and investors and other shareholders .
and that 's going to move us forward in a serious way .
so i think when it comes to something like energy , what we 're probably going to have to do is say here are some areas where there 's just too much disagreement between democrats and republicans , we ca n't get this done right now , but let 's not wait .
let 's go ahead and start making some progress on the things that we do agree on , and we can continue to have a strong and healthy debate about those areas where we do n't .
you know , i 'm sure there are going to be areas , particularly around , for example , reforming how washington works , that i 'll be interested in .
i think the american people want to see more transparency , more openness .
as i said , in the midst of economic crisis , i think one of the things i take responsibility for is not having pushed harder on some of those issues .
and i think if you take republicans and democrats at their word this is an area that they want to deliver on for the american people , i want to be supportive of that effort .
jake tapper .
and the second one is , president bush when he went through a similar thing came out and he said this was a " thumpin ' . "
you talked about how it was humbling , or you alluded to it perhaps being humbling .
and i 'm wondering , when you call your friends , like congressman perriello or governor strickland , and you see 19 state legislatures go to the other side , governorships in swing states , the democratic party set back , what does it feel like ?
it feels bad .
you know , the toughest thing over the last couple of days is seeing really terrific public servants not have the opportunity to serve anymore , at least in the short term .
and you mentioned -- there are just some terrific members of congress who took really tough votes because they thought it was the right thing , even though they knew this could cause them political problems , and even though a lot of them came from really tough swing districts or majority - republican districts .
and the amount of courage that they showed and conviction that they showed is something that i admire so much .
i ca n't overstate it .
and so there is a not only sadness about seeing them go , but there 's also a lot of questioning on my part in terms of could i have done something differently or done something more so that those folks would still be here .
it 's hard .
and i take responsibility for it in a lot of ways .
i will tell you , they 've been incredibly gracious when i have conversations with them .
and what they 've told me is , you know , we do n't have regrets because i feel like we were doing the right thing .
and they may be just saying that to make me feel better , which , again , is a sign of their character and their class .
and i hope a lot of them continue to pursue public service because i think they 're terrific public servants .
with respect to the tax cut issue , my goal is to make sure that we do n't have a huge spike in taxes for middle - class families .
not only would that be a terrible burden on families who are already going through tough times , it would be bad for our economy .
it is very important that we 're not taking a whole bunch of money out of the system from people who are most likely to spend that money on goods , services , groceries , buying a new winter coat for the kids .
that 's also why i think unemployment insurance is important .
not only is it the right thing to do for folks who are still looking for work and struggling in this really tough economy , but it 's the right thing to do for the economy as a whole .
so my goal is to sit down with speaker - elect boehner and mitch mcconnell and harry and nancy sometime in the next few weeks and see where we can move forward in a way that , first of all , does no harm ; that extends those tax cuts that are very important for middle - class families ; also extends those provisions that are important to encourage businesses to invest , and provide businesses some certainty over the next year or two .
and how that negotiation works itself out i think is too early to say .
but this is going to be one of my top priorities , and my hope is , is that given we all have an interest in growing the economy and encouraging job growth , that we 're not going to play brinksmanship but instead we 're going to act responsibly .
absolutely .
laura meckler .
and secondly , just to follow up on what you said about changing the way washington works , do you think that -- you said you did n't do enough to change the way things were handled in this city .
some of -- in order to get your health care bill passed you needed to make some of those deals .
do you wish , in retrospect , you had not made those deals even if it meant the collapse of the program ?
i think that making sure that families had security and were on a trajectory to lower health care costs was absolutely critical for this country .
but you are absolutely right that when you are navigating through a house and a senate in this kind of pretty partisan environment that it 's a ugly mess when it comes to process .
and i think that is something that really affected how people viewed the outcome .
that is something that i regret -- that we could n't have made the process more -- healthier than it ended up being .
but i think the outcome was a good one .
with respect to the epa , i think the smartest thing for us to do is to see if we can get democrats and republicans in a room who are serious about energy independence and are serious about keeping our air clean and our water clean and dealing with the issue of greenhouse gases -- and seeing are there ways that we can make progress in the short term and invest in technologies in the long term that start giving us the tools to reduce greenhouse gases and solve this problem .
the epa is under a court order that says greenhouse gases are a pollutant that fall under their jurisdiction .
and i think one of the things that 's very important for me is not to have us ignore the science , but rather to find ways that we can solve these problems that do n't hurt the economy , that encourage the development of clean energy in this country , that , in fact , may give us opportunities to create entire new industries and create jobs that -- and that put us in a competitive posture around the world .
so i think it 's too early to say whether or not we can make some progress on that front .
i think we can .
cap and trade was just one way of skinning the cat ; it was not the only way .
it was a means , not an end .
and i 'm going to be looking for other means to address this problem .
and i think epa wants help from the legislature on this .
i do n't think that the desire is to somehow be protective of their powers here .
i think what they want to do is make sure that the issue is being dealt with .
ed henry .
and just on a policy front , " do n't ask , do n't tell " is something that you promised to end .
and when you had 60 votes and 59 votes in the senate -- it 's a tough issue -- you have n't been able to do it .
do you now have to tell your liberal base that with maybe 52 or 53 votes in the senate , you 're just not going to be able to get it done in the next two years ?
well , let me take the second issue first .
i 've been a strong believer in the notion that if somebody is willing to serve in our military , in uniform , putting their lives on the line for our security , that they should not be prevented from doing so because of their sexual orientation .
and since there 's been a lot of discussion about polls over the last 48 hours , i think it 's worth noting that the overwhelming majority of americans feel the same way .
it 's the right thing to do .
now , as commander - in - chief , i 've said that making this change needs to be done in an orderly fashion .
i 've worked with the pentagon , worked with secretary gates , worked with admiral mullen to make sure that we are looking at this in a systemic way that maintains good order and discipline , but that we need to change this policy .
there 's going to be a review that comes out at the beginning of the month that will have surveyed attitudes and opinions within the armed forces .
i will expect that secretary of defense gates and chairman of the joint chiefs of staff admiral mullen will have something to say about that review .
i will look at it very carefully .
but that will give us time to act in -- potentially during the lame duck session to change this policy .
keep in mind we 've got a bunch of court cases that are out there as well .
and something that would be very disruptive to good order and discipline and unit cohesion is if we 've got this issue bouncing around in the courts , as it already has over the last several weeks , where the pentagon and the chain of command does n't know at any given time what rules they 're working under .
we need to provide certainty and it 's time for us to move this policy forward .
and this should not be a partisan issue .
this is an issue , as i said , where you 've got a sizable portion of the american people squarely behind the notion that folks who are willing to serve on our behalf should be treated fairly and equally .
now , in terms of how we move forward , i think that the american people understand that we 're still digging our way out of a pretty big mess .
so i do n't think anybody denies they think we 're in a ditch .
i just do n't think they feel like we 've gotten all the way out of the ditch yet .
and to move the analogy forward that i used in the campaign , i think what they want right now is the democrats and the republicans both pushing some more to get the car on level ground .
and we have n't done that .
if you think i was engaging in too much campaign rhetoric , saying the republicans were just sitting on the side of the road , watching us get that car out of the ditch , at the very least we were pushing in opposite directions .
and so -- 

  yes .
and i think , look , here 's the bottom line .
when i came into office , this economy was in a freefall , and the economy has stabilized .
the economy is growing .
we 've seen nine months of private sector job growth .
so i think it would be hard to argue that we 're going backwards .
i think what you can argue is we 're stuck in neutral .
we are not moving the way we need to , to make sure that folks have the jobs , have the opportunity , are seeing economic growth in their communities the way they need to .
and that 's going to require democrats and republicans to come together and look for the best ideas to move things forward .
it will not be easy , not just because democrats and republicans may have different priorities , as we were just discussing when it came to how we structure tax cuts , but because these issues are hard .
the republicans throughout the campaign said they 're very concerned about debt and deficits .
well , one of the most important things we can do for debt and deficits is economic growth .
so what other proposals do they have to grow the economy ?
if , in fact , they 're rejecting some of the proposals i 've made , i want to hear from them what affirmative policies can make a difference in terms of encouraging job growth and promoting the economy -- because i do n't think that tax cuts alone are going to be a recipe for the kind of expansion that we need .
from 2001 to 2009 , we cut taxes pretty significantly , and we just did n't see the kind of expansion that is going to be necessary in terms of driving the unemployment rate down significantly .
so i think what we 're going to need to do and what the american people want is for us to mix and match ideas , figure out those areas where we can agree on , move forward on those , disagree without being disagreeable on those areas that we ca n't agree on .
if we accomplish that , then there will be time for politics later , but over the next year i think we can solidify this recovery and give people a little more confidence out there .
hans nichols .
i might serve -- they 're delicious drinks .
the slurpee summit -- that 's good , chuck .
i like that .
yes , i think this is an important question that we 've been asking ourselves for several months now .
you 're right , as i reflect on what 's happened over the last two years , one of the things that i think has not been managed by me as well as it needed to be was finding the right balance in making sure that businesses have rules of the road and are treating customers fairly and -- whether it 's their credit cards or insurance or their mortgages -- but also making absolutely clear that the only way america succeeds is if businesses are succeeding .
the reason we 've got a unparalleled standard of living in the history of the world is because we 've got a free market that is dynamic and entrepreneurial , and that free market has to be nurtured and cultivated .
and there 's no doubt that when you had the financial crisis on wall street , the bonus controversies , the battle around health care , the battle around financial reform , and then you had bp -- you just had a successive set of issues in which i think business took the message that , well , gosh , it seems like we may be always painted at the bad guy .
and so i 've got to take responsibility in terms of making sure that i make clear to the business community as well as to the country that the most important thing we can do is to boost and encourage our business sector and make sure that they 're hiring .
and so we do have specific plans in terms of how we can structure that outreach .
now , keep in mind over the last two years , we 've been talking to ceos constantly .
and as i plan for my trip later this week to asia , the whole focus is on how are we going to open up markets so that american businesses can prosper , and we can sell more goods and create more jobs here in the united states .
and a whole bunch of corporate executives are going to be joining us so that i can help them open up those markets and allow them to sell their products .
so there 's been a lot of strong interaction behind the scenes .
but i think setting the right tone publicly is going to be important and could end up making a difference at the margins in terms of how businesses make investment decisions .
well , i already discussed a couple with chip that have n't been acted on yet .
you 're right that i made these proposals two months ago , but -- or three months ago -- but it was in the midst of a campaign season where it was doubtful that they were going to get a full hearing , just because there was so much political noise going on .
i think as we move forward , sitting down and talking to businesses , figuring out what exactly would help you make more investments that could create more jobs here in the united states , and listening hard to them -- in a context where maybe democrats and republicans are together so we 're receiving the same message at the same time -- and then acting on that agenda could make a big difference .
matt spetalnick of reuters .
there is a inherent danger in being in the white house and being in the bubble .
i mean , folks did n't have any complaints about my leadership style when i was running around iowa for a year .
and they got a pretty good look at me up close and personal , and they were able to lift the hood and kick the tires , and i think they understood that my story was theirs .
i might have a funny name , i might have lived in some different places , but the values of hard work and responsibility and honesty and looking out for one another that had been instilled in them by their parents , those were the same values that i took from my mom and my grandparents .
and so the track record has been that when i 'm out of this place , that 's not an issue .
when you 're in this place , it is hard not to seem removed .
and one of the challenges that we 've got to think about is how do i meet my responsibilities here in the white house , which require a lot of hours and a lot of work , but still have that opportunity to engage with the american people on a day - to - day basis , and know -- give them confidence that i 'm listening to them .
those letters that i read every night , some of them just break my heart .
some of them provide me encouragement and inspiration .
but nobody is filming me reading those letters .
and so it 's hard , i think , for people to get a sense of , well , how is he taking in all this information ?
so i think there are more things that we can do to make sure that i 'm getting out of here .
but , i mean , i think it 's important to point out as well that a couple of great communicators , ronald reagan and bill clinton , were standing at this podium two years into their presidency getting very similar questions because the economy was n't working the way it needed to be and there were a whole range of factors that made people concerned that maybe the party in power was n't listening to them .
this is something that i think every president needs to go through because the responsibilities of this office are so enormous and so many people are depending on what we do , and in the rush of activity , sometimes we lose track of the ways that we connected with folks that got us here in the first place .
and that 's something that -- now , i 'm not recommending for every future president that they take a shellacking like they -- like i did last night .
i 'm sure there are easier ways to learn these lessons .
but i do think that this is a growth process and an evolution .
and the relationship that i 've had with the american people is one that built slowly , peaked at this incredible high , and then during the course of the last two years , as we 've , together , gone through some very difficult times , has gotten rockier and tougher .
and it 's going to , i 'm sure , have some more ups and downs during the course of me being in this office .
but the one thing that i just want to end on is getting out of here is good for me , too , because when i travel around the country , even in the toughest of these debates -- in the midst of health care last year during the summer when there were protesters about , and when i 'm meeting families who 've lost loved ones in afghanistan or iraq -- i always come away from those interactions just feeling so much more optimistic about this country .
we have such good and decent people who , on a day - to - day basis , are finding all kinds of ways to live together and educate kids and grow their communities and improve their communities and create businesses and work together to create great new products and services .
the american people always make me optimistic .
and that 's why , during the course of the last two years , as tough as it 's been , as many sometimes scary moments as we 've gone through , i 've never doubted that we 're going to emerge stronger than we were before .
and i think that remains true , and i 'm just going to be looking forward to playing my part in helping that journey along .
all right ?
thank you very much , everybody .

tonight , more than 200 years after a former colony won the right to determine its own destiny , the task of perfecting our union moves forward .
it moves forward because of you .
it moves forward because you reaffirmed the spirit that has triumphed over war and depression ; the spirit that has lifted this country from the depths of despair to the great heights of hope -- the belief that while each of us will pursue our own individual dreams , we are an american family , and we rise or fall together , as one nation , and as one people .
tonight , in this election , you , the american people , reminded us that while our road has been hard , while our journey has been long , we have picked ourselves up , we have fought our way back , and we know in our hearts that for the united states of america , the best is yet to come .
i want to thank every american who participated in this election .
whether you voted for the very first time or waited in line for a very long time --   -- by the way , we have to fix that .
whether you pounded the pavement or picked up the phone --   -- whether you held an obama sign or a romney sign , you made your voice heard , and you made a difference .
i just spoke with governor romney , and i congratulated him and paul ryan on a hard - fought campaign .
we may have battled fiercely , but it 's only because we love this country deeply , and we care so strongly about its future .
from george to lenore to their son mitt , the romney family has chosen to give back to america through public service , and that is a legacy that we honor and applaud tonight .
in the weeks ahead , i also look forward to sitting down with governor romney to talk about where we can work together to move this country forward .
i want to thank my friend and partner of the last four years , america 's happy warrior --   -- the best vice president anybody could ever hope for -- joe biden .
and i would n't be the man i am today without the woman who agreed to marry me 20 years ago .
let me say this publicly -- michelle , i have never loved you more .
i have never been prouder to watch the rest of america fall in love with you , too , as our nation 's first lady .
sasha and malia , before our very eyes , you 're growing up to become two strong , smart , beautiful young women , just like your mom .
and i 'm so proud of you guys .
but i will say that for now , one dog is probably enough .
to the best campaign team and volunteers in the history of politics --   -- the best .
the best ever .
some of you were new this time around , and some of you have been at my side since the very beginning .
but all of you are family .
no matter what you do or where you go from here , you will carry the memory of the history we made together , and you will have the lifelong appreciation of a grateful president .
thank you for believing all the way , through every hill , through every valley .
you lifted me up the whole way .
and i will always be grateful for everything that you 've done and all the incredible work that you put in .
i know that political campaigns can sometimes seem small , even silly .
and that provides plenty of fodder for the cynics who tell us that politics is nothing more than a contest of egos , or the domain of special interests .
but if you ever get the chance to talk to folks who turned out at our rallies , and crowded along a rope line in a high school gym , or saw folks working late at a campaign office in some tiny county far away from home , you 'll discover something else .
you 'll hear the determination in the voice of a young field organizer who 's worked his way through college , and wants to make sure every child has that same opportunity .
you 'll hear the pride in the voice of a volunteer who 's going door to door because her brother was finally hired when the local auto plant added another shift .
you 'll hear the deep patriotism in the voice of a military spouse who 's working the phones late at night to make sure that no one who fights for this country ever has to fight for a job , or a roof over their head when they come home .
that 's why we do this .
that 's what politics can be .
that 's why elections matter .
it 's not small ; it 's big .
it 's important .
democracy in a nation of 300 million can be noisy and messy and complicated .
we have our own opinions .
each of us has deeply held beliefs .
and when we go through tough times , when we make big decisions as a country , it necessarily stirs passions , stirs up controversy .
that wo n't change after tonight -- and it should n't .
these arguments we have are a mark of our liberty , and we can never forget that as we speak , people in distant nations are risking their lives right now just for a chance to argue about the issues that matter , the chance to cast their ballots like we did today .
but despite all our differences , most of us share certain hopes for america 's future .
we want our kids to grow up in a country where they have access to the best schools and the best teachers --   -- a country that lives up to its legacy as the global leader in technology and discovery and innovation , with all the good jobs and new businesses that follow .
we want our children to live in an america that is n't burdened by debt ; that is n't weakened by inequality ; that is n't threatened by the destructive power of a warming planet .
we want to pass on a country that 's safe and respected and admired around the world ; a nation that is defended by the strongest military on earth and the best troops this world has ever known --   -- but also a country that moves with confidence beyond this time of war to shape a peace that is built on the promise of freedom and dignity for every human being .
we believe in a generous america ; in a compassionate america ; in a tolerant america , open to the dreams of an immigrant 's daughter who studies in our schools and pledges to our flag .
to the young boy on the south side of chicago who sees a life beyond the nearest street corner .
to the furniture worker 's child in north carolina who wants to become a doctor or a scientist , an engineer or entrepreneur , a diplomat or even a president .
that 's the future we hope for .
that 's the vision we share .
that 's where we need to go .
forward .
that 's where we need to go .
now , we will disagree , sometimes fiercely , about how to get there .
as it has for more than two centuries , progress will come in fits and starts .
it 's not always a straight line .
it 's not always a smooth path .
by itself , the recognition that we have common hopes and dreams wo n't end all the gridlock , or solve all our problems , or substitute for the painstaking work of building consensus , and making the difficult compromises needed to move this country forward .
but that common bond is where we must begin .
our economy is recovering .
a decade of war is ending .
a long campaign is now over .
and whether i earned your vote or not , i have listened to you .
i have learned from you .
and you 've made me a better president .
with your stories and your struggles , i return to the white house more determined and more inspired than ever about the work there is to do , and the future that lies ahead .
tonight , you voted for action , not politics as usual .
you elected us to focus on your jobs , not ours .
and in the coming weeks and months , i am looking forward to reaching out and working with leaders of both parties to meet the challenges we can only solve together : reducing our deficit ; reforming our tax code ; fixing our immigration system ; freeing ourselves from foreign oil .
we 've got more work to do .
but that does n't mean your work is done .
the role of citizen in our democracy does not end with your vote .
america has never been about what can be done for us .
it 's about what can be done by us , together , through the hard and frustrating but necessary work of self - government .
that 's the principle we were founded on .
this country has more wealth than any nation , but that 's not what makes us rich .
we have the most powerful military in history , but that 's not what makes us strong .
our university , culture are the envy of the world , but that 's not what keeps the world coming to our shores .
what makes america exceptional are the bonds that hold together the most diverse nation on earth -- the belief that our destiny is shared ; that this country only works when we accept certain obligations to one another , and to future generations ; that the freedom which so many americans have fought for and died for comes with responsibilities as well as rights , and among those are love and charity and duty and patriotism .
that 's what makes america great .
i am hopeful tonight because i have seen this spirit at work in america .
i 've seen it in the family business whose owners would rather cut their own pay than lay off their neighbors , and in the workers who would rather cut back their hours than see a friend lose a job .
i 've seen it in the soldiers who re - enlist after losing a limb , and in those seals who charged up the stairs into darkness and danger because they knew there was a buddy behind them , watching their back .
i 've seen it on the shores of new jersey and new york , where leaders from every party and level of government have swept aside their differences to help a community rebuild from the wreckage of a terrible storm .
and i saw it just the other day in mentor , ohio , where a father told the story of his eight - year - old daughter , whose long battle with leukemia nearly cost their family everything , had it not been for health care reform passing just a few months before the insurance company was about to stop paying for her care .
i had an opportunity to not just talk to the father , but meet this incredible daughter of his .
and when he spoke to the crowd , listening to that father 's story , every parent in that room had tears in their eyes , because we knew that little girl could be our own .
and i know that every american wants her future to be just as bright .
that 's who we are .
that 's the country i 'm so proud to lead as your president .
and tonight , despite all the hardship we 've been through , despite all the frustrations of washington , i 've never been more hopeful about our future .
i have never been more hopeful about america .
and i ask you to sustain that hope .
i 'm not talking about blind optimism -- the kind of hope that just ignores the enormity of the tasks ahead or the roadblocks that stand in our path .
i 'm not talking about the wishful idealism that allows us to just sit on the sidelines or shirk from a fight .
i have always believed that hope is that stubborn thing inside us that insists , despite all the evidence to the contrary , that something better awaits us , so long as we have the courage to keep reaching , to keep working , to keep fighting .
america , i believe we can build on the progress we 've made , and continue to fight for new jobs , and new opportunity , and new security for the middle class .
i believe we can keep the promise of our founding -- the idea that if you 're willing to work hard , it does n't matter who you are , or where you come from , or what you look like , or where you love -- it does n't matter whether you 're black or white , or hispanic or asian , or native american , or young or old , or rich or poor , abled , disabled , gay or straight -- you can make it here in america if you 're willing to try .
i believe we can seize this future together -- because we are not as divided as our politics suggest ; we 're not as cynical as the pundits believe ; we are greater than the sum of our individual ambitions ; and we remain more than a collection of red states and blue states .
we are , and forever will be , the united states of america .
and together , with your help , and god 's grace , we will continue our journey forward , and remind the world just why it is that we live in the greatest nation on earth .
thank you , america .
god bless you .
god bless these united states .

thank you .
thank you very much .
please , please be seated .
to the families of those we 've lost ; to all who called them friends ; to the students of this university , the public servants who are gathered here , the people of tucson and the people of arizona : i have come here tonight as an american who , like all americans , kneels to pray with you today and will stand by you tomorrow .
there is nothing i can say that will fill the sudden hole torn in your hearts .
but know this : the hopes of a nation are here tonight .
we mourn with you for the fallen .
we join you in your grief .
and we add our faith to yours that representative gabrielle giffords and the other living victims of this tragedy will pull through .
scripture tells us : 
 there is a river whose streams make glad the city of god , 
 the holy place where the most high dwells .
god is within her , she will not fall ; 
 god will help her at break of day .
on saturday morning , gabby , her staff and many of her constituents gathered outside a supermarket to exercise their right to peaceful assembly and free speech .
they were fulfilling a central tenet of the democracy envisioned by our founders -- - representatives of the people answering questions to their constituents , so as to carry their concerns back to our nation 's capital .
gabby called it " congress on your corner " - -- just an updated version of government of and by and for the people .
and that quintessentially american scene , that was the scene that was shattered by a gunman 's bullets .
and the six people who lost their lives on saturday -- - they , too , represented what is best in us , what is best in america .
judge john roll served our legal system for nearly 40 years .
a graduate of this university and a graduate of this law school --   -- judge roll was recommended for the federal bench by john mccain 20 years ago --   -- appointed by president george h. w. bush and rose to become arizona 's chief federal judge .
his colleagues described him as the hardest - working judge within the ninth circuit .
he was on his way back from attending mass , as he did every day , when he decided to stop by and say hi to his representative .
john is survived by his loving wife , maureen , his three sons and his five beautiful grandchildren .
george and dorothy morris - -- " dot " to her friends - -- were high school sweethearts who got married and had two daughters .
they did everything together -- traveling the open road in their rv , enjoying what their friends called a 50-year honeymoon .
saturday morning , they went by the safeway to hear what their congresswoman had to say .
when gunfire rang out , george , a former marine , instinctively tried to shield his wife .
both were shot .
dot passed away .
a new jersey native , phyllis schneck retired to tucson to beat the snow .
but in the summer , she would return east , where her world revolved around her three children , her seven grandchildren and 2-year - old great - granddaughter .
a gifted quilter , she 'd often work under a favorite tree , or sometimes she 'd sew aprons with the logos of the jets and the giants --   -- to give out at the church where she volunteered .
a republican , she took a liking to gabby , and wanted to get to know her better .
dorwan and mavy stoddard grew up in tucson together - -- about 70 years ago .
they moved apart and started their own respective families .
but after both were widowed they found their way back here , to , as one of mavy 's daughters put it , " be boyfriend and girlfriend again . "
when they were n't out on the road in their motor home , you could find them just up the road , helping folks in need at the mountain avenue church of christ .
a retired construction worker , dorwan spent his spare time fixing up the church along with his dog , tux .
his final act of selflessness was to dive on top of his wife , sacrificing his life for hers .
everything -- everything -- gabe zimmerman did , he did with passion .
but his true passion was helping people .
as gabby 's outreach director , he made the cares of thousands of her constituents his own , seeing to it that seniors got the medicare benefits that they had earned , that veterans got the medals and the care that they deserved , that government was working for ordinary folks .
he died doing what he loved - -- talking with people and seeing how he could help .
and gabe is survived by his parents , ross and emily , his brother , ben , and his fianc&eacute;e , kelly , who he planned to marry next year .
and then there is nine - year - old christina taylor green .
christina was an a student ; she was a dancer ; she was a gymnast ; she was a swimmer .
she decided that she wanted to be the first woman to play in the major leagues , and as the only girl on her little league team , no one put it past her .
she showed an appreciation for life uncommon for a girl her age .
she 'd remind her mother , " we are so blessed .
we have the best life . "
and she 'd pay those blessings back by participating in a charity that helped children who were less fortunate .
our hearts are broken by their sudden passing .
our hearts are broken - -- and yet , our hearts also have reason for fullness .
our hearts are full of hope and thanks for the 13 americans who survived the shooting , including the congresswoman many of them went to see on saturday .
i have just come from the university medical center , just a mile from here , where our friend gabby courageously fights to recover even as we speak .
and i want to tell you -- her husband mark is here and he allows me to share this with you -- right after we went to visit , a few minutes after we left her room and some of her colleagues in congress were in the room , gabby opened her eyes for the first time .
gabby opened her eyes for the first time .
gabby opened her eyes .
gabby opened her eyes , so i can tell you she knows we are here .
she knows we love her .
and she knows that we are rooting for her through what is undoubtedly going to be a difficult journey .
we are there for her .
our hearts are full of thanks for that good news , and our hearts are full of gratitude for those who saved others .
we are grateful to daniel hernandez --   -- a volunteer in gabby 's office .
and , daniel , i 'm sorry , you may deny it , but we 've decided you are a hero because --   -- you ran through the chaos to minister to your boss , and tended to her wounds and helped keep her alive .
we are grateful to the men who tackled the gunman as he stopped to reload .
right over there .
we are grateful for petite patricia maisch , who wrestled away the killer 's ammunition , and undoubtedly saved some lives .
and we are grateful for the doctors and nurses and first responders who worked wonders to heal those who 'd been hurt .
we are grateful to them .
these men and women remind us that heroism is found not only on the fields of battle .
they remind us that heroism does not require special training or physical strength .
heroism is here , in the hearts of so many of our fellow citizens , all around us , just waiting to be summoned - -- as it was on saturday morning .
their actions , their selflessness poses a challenge to each of us .
it raises a question of what , beyond prayers and expressions of concern , is required of us going forward .
how can we honor the fallen ?
how can we be true to their memory ?
you see , when a tragedy like this strikes , it is part of our nature to demand explanations -- - to try and pose some order on the chaos and make sense out of that which seems senseless .
already we 've seen a national conversation commence , not only about the motivations behind these killings , but about everything from the merits of gun safety laws to the adequacy of our mental health system .
and much of this process , of debating what might be done to prevent such tragedies in the future , is an essential ingredient in our exercise of self - government .
but at a time when our discourse has become so sharply polarized - -- at a time when we are far too eager to lay the blame for all that ails the world at the feet of those who happen to think differently than we do - -- it 's important for us to pause for a moment and make sure that we 're talking with each other in a way that heals , not in a way that wounds .
scripture tells us that there is evil in the world , and that terrible things happen for reasons that defy human understanding .
in the words of job , " when i looked for light , then came darkness . "
bad things happen , and we have to guard against simple explanations in the aftermath .
for the truth is none of us can know exactly what triggered this vicious attack .
none of us can know with any certainty what might have stopped these shots from being fired , or what thoughts lurked in the inner recesses of a violent man 's mind .
yes , we have to examine all the facts behind this tragedy .
we can not and will not be passive in the face of such violence .
we should be willing to challenge old assumptions in order to lessen the prospects of such violence in the future .
but what we can not do is use this tragedy as one more occasion to turn on each other .
that we can not do .
that we can not do .
as we discuss these issues , let each of us do so with a good dose of humility .
rather than pointing fingers or assigning blame , let 's use this occasion to expand our moral imaginations , to listen to each other more carefully , to sharpen our instincts for empathy and remind ourselves of all the ways that our hopes and dreams are bound together .
after all , that 's what most of us do when we lose somebody in our family - -- especially if the loss is unexpected .
we 're shaken out of our routines .
we 're forced to look inward .
we reflect on the past : did we spend enough time with an aging parent , we wonder .
did we express our gratitude for all the sacrifices that they made for us ?
did we tell a spouse just how desperately we loved them , not just once in a while but every single day ?
so sudden loss causes us to look backward - -- but it also forces us to look forward ; to reflect on the present and the future , on the manner in which we live our lives and nurture our relationships with those who are still with us .
we may ask ourselves if we 've shown enough kindness and generosity and compassion to the people in our lives .
perhaps we question whether we 're doing right by our children , or our community , whether our priorities are in order .
we recognize our own mortality , and we are reminded that in the fleeting time we have on this earth , what matters is not wealth , or status , or power , or fame - -- but rather , how well we have loved -- -- and what small part we have played in making the lives of other people better .
and that process -- that process of reflection , of making sure we align our values with our actions -- - that , i believe , is what a tragedy like this requires .
for those who were harmed , those who were killed -- - they are part of our family , an american family 300 million strong .
we may not have known them personally , but surely we see ourselves in them .
in george and dot , in dorwan and mavy , we sense the abiding love we have for our own husbands , our own wives , our own life partners .
phyllis -- - she 's our mom or our grandma ; gabe our brother or son .
in judge roll , we recognize not only a man who prized his family and doing his job well , but also a man who embodied america 's fidelity to the law .
and in gabby -- in gabby , we see a reflection of our public - spiritedness ; that desire to participate in that sometimes frustrating , sometimes contentious , but always necessary and never - ending process to form a more perfect union .
and in christina -- in christina we see all of our children .
so curious , so trusting , so energetic , so full of magic .
so deserving of our love .
and so deserving of our good example .
if this tragedy prompts reflection and debate -- as it should -- let 's make sure it 's worthy of those we have lost .
let 's make sure it 's not on the usual plane of politics and point - scoring and pettiness that drifts away in the next news cycle .
the loss of these wonderful people should make every one of us strive to be better .
to be better in our private lives , to be better friends and neighbors and coworkers and parents .
and if , as has been discussed in recent days , their death helps usher in more civility in our public discourse , let us remember it is not because a simple lack of civility caused this tragedy -- it did not -- but rather because only a more civil and honest public discourse can help us face up to the challenges of our nation in a way that would make them proud .
we should be civil because we want to live up to the example of public servants like john roll and gabby giffords , who knew first and foremost that we are all americans , and that we can question each other 's ideas without questioning each other 's love of country and that our task , working together , is to constantly widen the circle of our concern so that we bequeath the american dream to future generations .
they believed -- they believed , and i believe that we can be better .
those who died here , those who saved life here -- - they help me believe .
we may not be able to stop all evil in the world , but i know that how we treat one another , that 's entirely up to us .
and i believe that for all our imperfections , we are full of decency and goodness , and that the forces that divide us are not as strong as those that unite us .
that 's what i believe , in part because that 's what a child like christina taylor green believed .
imagine -- imagine for a moment , here was a young girl who was just becoming aware of our democracy ; just beginning to understand the obligations of citizenship ; just starting to glimpse the fact that some day she , too , might play a part in shaping her nation 's future .
she had been elected to her student council .
she saw public service as something exciting and hopeful .
she was off to meet her congresswoman , someone she was sure was good and important and might be a role model .
she saw all this through the eyes of a child , undimmed by the cynicism or vitriol that we adults all too often just take for granted .
i want to live up to her expectations .
i want our democracy to be as good as christina imagined it .
i want america to be as good as she imagined it .
all of us - -- we should do everything we can to make sure this country lives up to our children 's expectations .
as has already been mentioned , christina was given to us on september 11th , 2001 , one of 50 babies born that day to be pictured in a book called " faces of hope . "
on either side of her photo in that book were simple wishes for a child 's life . "
i hope you help those in need , " read one . "
i hope you know all the words to the national anthem and sing it with your hand over your heart . "
" i hope you jump in rain puddles . "
if there are rain puddles in heaven , christina is jumping in them today .
and here on this earth -- here on this earth , we place our hands over our hearts , and we commit ourselves as americans to forging a country that is forever worthy of her gentle , happy spirit .
may god bless and keep those we 've lost in restful and eternal peace .
may he love and watch over the survivors .
and may he bless the united states of america .

giving all praise and honor to god .
the bible calls us to hope .
to persevere , and have faith in things not seen .
" they were still living by faith when they died , " scripture tells us . "
they did not receive the things promised ; they only saw them and welcomed them from a distance , admitting that they were foreigners and strangers on earth . "
we are here today to remember a man of god who lived by faith .
a man who believed in things not seen .
a man who believed there were better days ahead , off in the distance .
a man of service who persevered , knowing full well he would not receive all those things he was promised , because he believed his efforts would deliver a better life for those who followed .
to jennifer , his beloved wife ; to eliana and malana , his beautiful , wonderful daughters ; to the mother emanuel family and the people of charleston , the people of south carolina .
i can not claim to have the good fortune to know reverend pinckney well .
but i did have the pleasure of knowing him and meeting him here in south carolina , back when we were both a little bit younger .
back when i did n't have visible grey hair .
the first thing i noticed was his graciousness , his smile , his reassuring baritone , his deceptive sense of humor -- all qualities that helped him wear so effortlessly a heavy burden of expectation .
friends of his remarked this week that when clementa pinckney entered a room , it was like the future arrived ; that even from a young age , folks knew he was special .
anointed .
he was the progeny of a long line of the faithful -- a family of preachers who spread god 's word , a family of protesters who sowed change to expand voting rights and desegregate the south .
clem heard their instruction , and he did not forsake their teaching .
he was in the pulpit by 13 , pastor by 18 , public servant by 23 .
he did not exhibit any of the cockiness of youth , nor youth 's insecurities ; instead , he set an example worthy of his position , wise beyond his years , in his speech , in his conduct , in his love , faith , and purity .
as a senator , he represented a sprawling swath of the lowcountry , a place that has long been one of the most neglected in america .
a place still wracked by poverty and inadequate schools ; a place where children can still go hungry and the sick can go without treatment .
a place that needed somebody like clem .
his position in the minority party meant the odds of winning more resources for his constituents were often long .
his calls for greater equity were too often unheeded , the votes he cast were sometimes lonely .
but he never gave up .
he stayed true to his convictions .
he would not grow discouraged .
after a full day at the capitol , he 'd climb into his car and head to the church to draw sustenance from his family , from his ministry , from the community that loved and needed him .
there he would fortify his faith , and imagine what might be .
reverend pinckney embodied a politics that was neither mean , nor small .
he conducted himself quietly , and kindly , and diligently .
he encouraged progress not by pushing his ideas alone , but by seeking out your ideas , partnering with you to make things happen .
he was full of empathy and fellow feeling , able to walk in somebody else 's shoes and see through their eyes .
no wonder one of his senate colleagues remembered senator pinckney as " the most gentle of the 46 of us -- the best of the 46 of us . "
clem was often asked why he chose to be a pastor and a public servant .
but the person who asked probably did n't know the history of the ame church .
as our brothers and sisters in the ame church know , we do n't make those distinctions . "
our calling , " clem once said , " is not just within the walls of the congregation , but&hellip;the life and community in which our congregation resides . "
he embodied the idea that our christian faith demands deeds and not just words ; that the " sweet hour of prayer " actually lasts the whole week long --   -- that to put our faith in action is more than individual salvation , it 's about our collective salvation ; that to feed the hungry and clothe the naked and house the homeless is not just a call for isolated charity but the imperative of a just society .
what a good man .
sometimes i think that 's the best thing to hope for when you 're eulogized -- after all the words and recitations and resumes are read , to just say someone was a good man .
you do n't have to be of high station to be a good man .
preacher by 13 .
pastor by 18 .
public servant by 23 .
what a life clementa pinckney lived .
what an example he set .
what a model for his faith .
and then to lose him at 41 -- slain in his sanctuary with eight wonderful members of his flock , each at different stages in life but bound together by a common commitment to god .
cynthia hurd .
susie jackson .
ethel lance .
depayne middleton - doctor .
tywanza sanders .
daniel l. simmons .
sharonda coleman - singleton .
myra thompson .
good people .
decent people .
god - fearing people .
people so full of life and so full of kindness .
people who ran the race , who persevered .
people of great faith .
to the families of the fallen , the nation shares in your grief .
our pain cuts that much deeper because it happened in a church .
the church is and always has been the center of african - american life --   -- a place to call our own in a too often hostile world , a sanctuary from so many hardships .
over the course of centuries , black churches served as " hush harbors " where slaves could worship in safety ; praise houses where their free descendants could gather and shout hallelujah --   -- rest stops for the weary along the underground railroad ; bunkers for the foot soldiers of the civil rights movement .
they have been , and continue to be , community centers where we organize for jobs and justice ; places of scholarship and network ; places where children are loved and fed and kept out of harm 's way , and told that they are beautiful and smart --   -- and taught that they matter .
that 's what happens in church .
that 's what the black church means .
our beating heart .
the place where our dignity as a people is inviolate .
when there 's no better example of this tradition than mother emanuel --   -- a church built by blacks seeking liberty , burned to the ground because its founder sought to end slavery , only to rise up again , a phoenix from these ashes .
when there were laws banning all - black church gatherings , services happened here anyway , in defiance of unjust laws .
when there was a righteous movement to dismantle jim crow , dr. martin luther king , jr. preached from its pulpit , and marches began from its steps .
a sacred place , this church .
not just for blacks , not just for christians , but for every american who cares about the steady expansion --   -- of human rights and human dignity in this country ; a foundation stone for liberty and justice for all .
that 's what the church meant .
we do not know whether the killer of reverend pinckney and eight others knew all of this history .
but he surely sensed the meaning of his violent act .
it was an act that drew on a long history of bombs and arson and shots fired at churches , not random , but as a means of control , a way to terrorize and oppress .
an act that he imagined would incite fear and recrimination ; violence and suspicion .
an act that he presumed would deepen divisions that trace back to our nation 's original sin .
oh , but god works in mysterious ways .
god has different ideas .
he did n't know he was being used by god .
blinded by hatred , the alleged killer could not see the grace surrounding reverend pinckney and that bible study group -- the light of love that shone as they opened the church doors and invited a stranger to join in their prayer circle .
the alleged killer could have never anticipated the way the families of the fallen would respond when they saw him in court -- in the midst of unspeakable grief , with words of forgiveness .
he could n't imagine that .
the alleged killer could not imagine how the city of charleston , under the good and wise leadership of mayor riley --   -- how the state of south carolina , how the united states of america would respond -- not merely with revulsion at his evil act , but with big - hearted generosity and , more importantly , with a thoughtful introspection and self - examination that we so rarely see in public life .
blinded by hatred , he failed to comprehend what reverend pinckney so well understood -- the power of god 's grace .
this whole week , i 've been reflecting on this idea of grace .
the grace of the families who lost loved ones .
the grace that reverend pinckney would preach about in his sermons .
the grace described in one of my favorite hymnals -- the one we all know : amazing grace , how sweet the sound that saved a wretch like me .
i once was lost , but now i 'm found ; was blind but now i see .
according to the christian tradition , grace is not earned .
grace is not merited .
it 's not something we deserve .
rather , grace is the free and benevolent favor of god --   -- as manifested in the salvation of sinners and the bestowal of blessings .
grace .
as a nation , out of this terrible tragedy , god has visited grace upon us , for he has allowed us to see where we 've been blind .
he has given us the chance , where we 've been lost , to find our best selves .
we may not have earned it , this grace , with our rancor and complacency , and short - sightedness and fear of each other -- but we got it all the same .
he gave it to us anyway .
he 's once more given us grace .
but it is up to us now to make the most of it , to receive it with gratitude , and to prove ourselves worthy of this gift .
for too long , we were blind to the pain that the confederate flag stirred in too many of our citizens .
it 's true , a flag did not cause these murders .
but as people from all walks of life , republicans and democrats , now acknowledge -- including governor haley , whose recent eloquence on the subject is worthy of praise --   -- as we all have to acknowledge , the flag has always represented more than just ancestral pride .
for many , black and white , that flag was a reminder of systemic oppression and racial subjugation .
we see that now .
removing the flag from this state 's capitol would not be an act of political correctness ; it would not be an insult to the valor of confederate soldiers .
it would simply be an acknowledgment that the cause for which they fought -- the cause of slavery -- was wrong --   -- the imposition of jim crow after the civil war , the resistance to civil rights for all people was wrong .
it would be one step in an honest accounting of america 's history ; a modest but meaningful balm for so many unhealed wounds .
it would be an expression of the amazing changes that have transformed this state and this country for the better , because of the work of so many people of goodwill , people of all races striving to form a more perfect union .
by taking down that flag , we express god 's grace .
but i do n't think god wants us to stop there .
for too long , we 've been blind to the way past injustices continue to shape the present .
perhaps we see that now .
perhaps this tragedy causes us to ask some tough questions about how we can permit so many of our children to languish in poverty , or attend dilapidated schools , or grow up without prospects for a job or for a career .
perhaps it causes us to examine what we 're doing to cause some of our children to hate .
perhaps it softens hearts towards those lost young men , tens and tens of thousands caught up in the criminal justice system --   -- and leads us to make sure that that system is not infected with bias ; that we embrace changes in how we train and equip our police so that the bonds of trust between law enforcement and the communities they serve make us all safer and more secure .
maybe we now realize the way racial bias can infect us even when we do n't realize it , so that we 're guarding against not just racial slurs , but we 're also guarding against the subtle impulse to call johnny back for a job interview but not jamal .
so that we search our hearts when we consider laws to make it harder for some of our fellow citizens to vote .
by recognizing our common humanity by treating every child as important , regardless of the color of their skin or the station into which they were born , and to do what 's necessary to make opportunity real for every american -- by doing that , we express god 's grace .
for too long -- 

  for too long , we 've been blind to the unique mayhem that gun violence inflicts upon this nation .
sporadically , our eyes are open : when eight of our brothers and sisters are cut down in a church basement , 12 in a movie theater , 26 in an elementary school .
but i hope we also see the 30 precious lives cut short by gun violence in this country every single day ; the countless more whose lives are forever changed -- the survivors crippled , the children traumatized and fearful every day as they walk to school , the husband who will never feel his wife 's warm touch , the entire communities whose grief overflows every time they have to watch what happened to them happen to some other place .
the vast majority of americans -- the majority of gun owners -- want to do something about this .
we see that now .
and i 'm convinced that by acknowledging the pain and loss of others , even as we respect the traditions and ways of life that make up this beloved country -- by making the moral choice to change , we express god 's grace .
we do n't earn grace .
we 're all sinners .
we do n't deserve it .
but god gives it to us anyway .
and we choose how to receive it .
it 's our decision how to honor it .
none of us can or should expect a transformation in race relations overnight .
every time something like this happens , somebody says we have to have a conversation about race .
we talk a lot about race .
there 's no shortcut .
and we do n't need more talk .
none of us should believe that a handful of gun safety measures will prevent every tragedy .
it will not .
people of goodwill will continue to debate the merits of various policies , as our democracy requires -- this is a big , raucous place , america is .
and there are good people on both sides of these debates .
whatever solutions we find will necessarily be incomplete .
but it would be a betrayal of everything reverend pinckney stood for , i believe , if we allowed ourselves to slip into a comfortable silence again .
once the eulogies have been delivered , once the tv cameras move on , to go back to business as usual -- that 's what we so often do to avoid uncomfortable truths about the prejudice that still infects our society .
to settle for symbolic gestures without following up with the hard work of more lasting change -- that 's how we lose our way again .
it would be a refutation of the forgiveness expressed by those families if we merely slipped into old habits , whereby those who disagree with us are not merely wrong but bad ; where we shout instead of listen ; where we barricade ourselves behind preconceived notions or well - practiced cynicism .
reverend pinckney once said , " across the south , we have a deep appreciation of history -- we have n't always had a deep appreciation of each other 's history . "
what is true in the south is true for america .
clem understood that justice grows out of recognition of ourselves in each other .
that my liberty depends on you being free , too .
that history ca n't be a sword to justify injustice , or a shield against progress , but must be a manual for how to avoid repeating the mistakes of the past -- how to break the cycle .
a roadway toward a better world .
he knew that the path of grace involves an open mind -- but , more importantly , an open heart .
that 's what i 've felt this week -- an open heart .
that , more than any particular policy or analysis , is what 's called upon right now , i think -- what a friend of mine , the writer marilyn robinson , calls " that reservoir of goodness , beyond , and of another kind , that we are able to do each other in the ordinary cause of things . "
that reservoir of goodness .
if we can find that grace , anything is possible .
if we can tap that grace , everything can change .
amazing grace .
amazing grace .
-- amazing grace --   -- how sweet the sound , that saved a wretch like me ; i once was lost , but now i 'm found ; was blind but now i see .
clementa pinckney found that grace .
cynthia hurd found that grace .
susie jackson found that grace .
ethel lance found that grace .
depayne middleton - doctor found that grace .
tywanza sanders found that grace .
daniel l. simmons , sr .
found that grace .
sharonda coleman - singleton found that grace .
myra thompson found that grace .
through the example of their lives , they 've now passed it on to us .
may we find ourselves worthy of that precious and extraordinary gift , as long as our lives endure .
may grace now lead them home .
may god continue to shed his grace on the united states of america .

it is fitting that with the very first bill i sign -- the lilly ledbetter fair pay restoration act -- we are upholding one of this nation 's first principles : that we are all created equal and each deserve a chance to pursue our own version of happiness .
it is also fitting that we are joined today by the woman after whom this bill is named -- someone michelle and i have had the privilege of getting to know for ourselves .
lilly ledbetter did n't set out to be a trailblazer or a household name .
she was just a good hard worker who did her job -- and did it well -- for nearly two decades before discovering that for years , she was paid less than her male colleagues for the very same work .
over the course of her career , she lost more than $ 200,000 in salary , and even more in pension and social security benefits -- losses she still feels today .
now , lilly could have accepted her lot and moved on .
she could have decided that it was n't worth the hassle and harassment that would inevitably come with speaking up for what she deserved .
but instead , she decided that there was a principle at stake , something worth fighting for .
so she set out on a journey that would take more than ten years , take her all the way to the supreme court , and lead to this bill which will help others get the justice she was denied .
because while this bill bears her name , lilly knows this story is n't just about her .
it 's the story of women across this country still earning just 78 cents for every dollar men earn -- women of color even less -- which means that today , in the year 2009 , countless women are still losing thousands of dollars in salary , income and retirement savings over the course of a lifetime .
but equal pay is by no means just a women 's issue -- it 's a family issue .
it 's about parents who find themselves with less money for tuition or child care ; couples who wind up with less to retire on ; households where , when one breadwinner is paid less than she deserves , that 's the difference between affording the mortgage -- or not ; between keeping the heat on , or paying the doctor 's bills -- or not .
and in this economy , when so many folks are already working harder for less and struggling to get by , the last thing they can afford is losing part of each month 's paycheck to simple discrimination .
so in signing this bill today , i intend to send a clear message : that making our economy work means making sure it works for everyone .
that there are no second class citizens in our workplaces , and that it 's not just unfair and illegal -- but bad for business -- to pay someone less because of their gender , age , race , ethnicity , religion or disability .
and that justice is n't about some abstract legal theory , or footnote in a casebook -- it 's about how our laws affect the daily realities of people 's lives : their ability to make a living and care for their families and achieve their goals .
ultimately , though , equal pay is n't just an economic issue for millions of americans and their families , it 's a question of who we are -- and whether we 're truly living up to our fundamental ideals .
whether we 'll do our part , as generations before us , to ensure those words put to paper more than 200 years ago really mean something -- to breathe new life into them with the more enlightened understandings of our time .
that is what lilly ledbetter challenged us to do .
and today , i sign this bill not just in her honor , but in honor of those who came before her .
women like my grandmother who worked in a bank all her life , and even after she hit that glass ceiling , kept getting up and giving her best every day , without complaint , because she wanted something better for me and my sister .
and i sign this bill for my daughters , and all those who will come after us , because i want them to grow up in a nation that values their contributions , where there are no limits to their dreams and they have opportunities their mothers and grandmothers never could have imagined .
in the end , that 's why lilly stayed the course .
she knew it was too late for her -- that this bill would n't undo the years of injustice she faced or restore the earnings she was denied .
but this grandmother from alabama kept on fighting , because she was thinking about the next generation .
it 's what we 've always done in america -- set our sights high for ourselves , but even higher for our children and grandchildren .
now it 's up to us to continue this work .
this bill is an important step -- a simple fix to ensure fundamental fairness to american workers -- and i want to thank this remarkable and bi - partisan group of legislators who worked so hard to get it passed .
and this is only the beginning .
i know that if we stay focused , as lilly did -- and keep standing for what 's right , as lilly did -- we will close that pay gap and ensure that our daughters have the same rights , the same chances , and the same freedom to pursue their dreams as our sons .
thank you .

vice president biden , mr. chief justice , 
 members of the united states congress , distinguished guests , and fellow citizens : 
 each time we gather to inaugurate a president we bear witness to the enduring strength of our constitution .
we affirm the promise of our democracy .
we recall that what binds this nation together is not the colors of our skin or the tenets of our faith or the origins of our names .
what makes us exceptional -- what makes us american -- is our allegiance to an idea articulated in a declaration made more than two centuries ago : 
 " we hold these truths to be self - evident , that all men are created equal ; that they are endowed by their creator with certain unalienable rights ; that among these are life , liberty , and the pursuit of happiness . "
today we continue a never - ending journey to bridge the meaning of those words with the realities of our time .
for history tells us that while these truths may be self - evident , they 've never been self - executing ; that while freedom is a gift from god , it must be secured by his people here on earth .
the patriots of 1776 did not fight to replace the tyranny of a king with the privileges of a few or the rule of a mob .
they gave to us a republic , a government of , and by , and for the people , entrusting each generation to keep safe our founding creed .
and for more than two hundred years , we have .
through blood drawn by lash and blood drawn by sword , we learned that no union founded on the principles of liberty and equality could survive half - slave and half - free .
we made ourselves anew , and vowed to move forward together .
together , we determined that a modern economy requires railroads and highways to speed travel and commerce , schools and colleges to train our workers .
together , we discovered that a free market only thrives when there are rules to ensure competition and fair play .
together , we resolved that a great nation must care for the vulnerable , and protect its people from life 's worst hazards and misfortune .
through it all , we have never relinquished our skepticism of central authority , nor have we succumbed to the fiction that all society 's ills can be cured through government alone .
our celebration of initiative and enterprise , our insistence on hard work and personal responsibility , these are constants in our character .
but we have always understood that when times change , so must we ; that fidelity to our founding principles requires new responses to new challenges ; that preserving our individual freedoms ultimately requires collective action .
for the american people can no more meet the demands of today 's world by acting alone than american soldiers could have met the forces of fascism or communism with muskets and militias .
no single person can train all the math and science teachers we 'll need to equip our children for the future , or build the roads and networks and research labs that will bring new jobs and businesses to our shores .
now , more than ever , we must do these things together , as one nation and one people .
this generation of americans has been tested by crises that steeled our resolve and proved our resilience .
a decade of war is now ending .
an economic recovery has begun .
america 's possibilities are limitless , for we possess all the qualities that this world without boundaries demands : youth and drive ; diversity and openness ; an endless capacity for risk and a gift for reinvention .
my fellow americans , we are made for this moment , and we will seize it -- so long as we seize it together .
for we , the people , understand that our country can not succeed when a shrinking few do very well and a growing many barely make it .
we believe that america 's prosperity must rest upon the broad shoulders of a rising middle class .
we know that america thrives when every person can find independence and pride in their work ; when the wages of honest labor liberate families from the brink of hardship .
we are true to our creed when a little girl born into the bleakest poverty knows that she has the same chance to succeed as anybody else , because she is an american ; she is free , and she is equal , not just in the eyes of god but also in our own .
we understand that outworn programs are inadequate to the needs of our time .
so we must harness new ideas and technology to remake our government , revamp our tax code , reform our schools , and empower our citizens with the skills they need to work harder , learn more , reach higher .
but while the means will change , our purpose endures : a nation that rewards the effort and determination of every single american .
that is what this moment requires .
that is what will give real meaning to our creed .
we , the people , still believe that every citizen deserves a basic measure of security and dignity .
we must make the hard choices to reduce the cost of health care and the size of our deficit .
but we reject the belief that america must choose between caring for the generation that built this country and investing in the generation that will build its future .
for we remember the lessons of our past , when twilight years were spent in poverty and parents of a child with a disability had nowhere to turn .
we do not believe that in this country freedom is reserved for the lucky , or happiness for the few .
we recognize that no matter how responsibly we live our lives , any one of us at any time may face a job loss , or a sudden illness , or a home swept away in a terrible storm .
the commitments we make to each other through medicare and medicaid and social security , these things do not sap our initiative , they strengthen us .
they do not make us a nation of takers ; they free us to take the risks that make this country great .
we , the people , still believe that our obligations as americans are not just to ourselves , but to all posterity .
we will respond to the threat of climate change , knowing that the failure to do so would betray our children and future generations .
some may still deny the overwhelming judgment of science , but none can avoid the devastating impact of raging fires and crippling drought and more powerful storms .
the path towards sustainable energy sources will be long and sometimes difficult .
but america can not resist this transition , we must lead it .
we can not cede to other nations the technology that will power new jobs and new industries , we must claim its promise .
that 's how we will maintain our economic vitality and our national treasure -- our forests and waterways , our crop lands and snow - capped peaks .
that is how we will preserve our planet , commanded to our care by god .
that 's what will lend meaning to the creed our fathers once declared .
we , the people , still believe that enduring security and lasting peace do not require perpetual war .
our brave men and women in uniform , tempered by the flames of battle , are unmatched in skill and courage .
our citizens , seared by the memory of those we have lost , know too well the price that is paid for liberty .
the knowledge of their sacrifice will keep us forever vigilant against those who would do us harm .
but we are also heirs to those who won the peace and not just the war ; who turned sworn enemies into the surest of friends -- and we must carry those lessons into this time as well .
we will defend our people and uphold our values through strength of arms and rule of law .
we will show the courage to try and resolve our differences with other nations peacefully -- - not because we are na&iuml;ve about the dangers we face , but because engagement can more durably lift suspicion and fear .
america will remain the anchor of strong alliances in every corner of the globe .
and we will renew those institutions that extend our capacity to manage crisis abroad , for no one has a greater stake in a peaceful world than its most powerful nation .
we will support democracy from asia to africa , from the americas to the middle east , because our interests and our conscience compel us to act on behalf of those who long for freedom .
and we must be a source of hope to the poor , the sick , the marginalized , the victims of prejudice -- - not out of mere charity , but because peace in our time requires the constant advance of those principles that our common creed describes : tolerance and opportunity , human dignity and justice .
we , the people , declare today that the most evident of truths -- - that all of us are created equal -- - is the star that guides us still ; just as it guided our forebears through seneca falls , and selma , and stonewall ; just as it guided all those men and women , sung and unsung , who left footprints along this great mall , to hear a preacher say that we can not walk alone ; to hear a king proclaim that our individual freedom is inextricably bound to the freedom of every soul on earth .
it is now our generation 's task to carry on what those pioneers began .
for our journey is not complete until our wives , our mothers and daughters can earn a living equal to their efforts .
our journey is not complete until our gay brothers and sisters are treated like anyone else under the law -- -   -- for if we are truly created equal , then surely the love we commit to one another must be equal as well .
our journey is not complete until no citizen is forced to wait for hours to exercise the right to vote .
our journey is not complete until we find a better way to welcome the striving , hopeful immigrants who still see america as a land of opportunity --   -- until bright young students and engineers are enlisted in our workforce rather than expelled from our country .
our journey is not complete until all our children , from the streets of detroit to the hills of appalachia , to the quiet lanes of newtown , know that they are cared for and cherished and always safe from harm .
that is our generation 's task -- to make these words , these rights , these values of life and liberty and the pursuit of happiness real for every american .
being true to our founding documents does not require us to agree on every contour of life .
it does not mean we all define liberty in exactly the same way or follow the same precise path to happiness .
progress does not compel us to settle centuries - long debates about the role of government for all time , but it does require us to act in our time .
for now decisions are upon us and we can not afford delay .
we can not mistake absolutism for principle , or substitute spectacle for politics , or treat name - calling as reasoned debate .
we must act , knowing that our work will be imperfect .
we must act , knowing that today 's victories will be only partial and that it will be up to those who stand here in four years and 40 years and 400 years hence to advance the timeless spirit once conferred to us in a spare philadelphia hall .
my fellow americans , the oath i have sworn before you today , like the one recited by others who serve in this capitol , was an oath to god and country , not party or faction .
and we must faithfully execute that pledge during the duration of our service .
but the words i spoke today are not so different from the oath that is taken each time a soldier signs up for duty or an immigrant realizes her dream .
my oath is not so different from the pledge we all make to the flag that waves above and that fills our hearts with pride .
they are the words of citizens and they represent our greatest hope .
you and i , as citizens , have the power to set this country 's course .
you and i , as citizens , have the obligation to shape the debates of our time -- not only with the votes we cast , but with the voices we lift in defense of our most ancient values and enduring ideals .
let us , each of us , now embrace with solemn duty and awesome joy what is our lasting birthright .
with common effort and common purpose , with passion and dedication , let us answer the call of history and carry into an uncertain future that precious light of freedom .
thank you .
god bless you , and may he forever bless these united states of america .

to chairman dean and my great friend dick durbin ; and to all my fellow citizens of this great nation ; 
 with profound gratitude and great humility , i accept your nomination for the presidency of the united states .
let me express my thanks to the historic slate of candidates who accompanied me on this journey , and especially the one who traveled the farthest -- a champion for working americans and an inspiration to my daughters and to yours -- hillary rodham clinton .
to president clinton , who last night made the case for change as only he can make it ; to ted kennedy , who embodies the spirit of service ; and to the next vice president of the united states , joe biden , i thank you .
i am grateful to finish this journey with one of the finest statesmen of our time , a man at ease with everyone from world leaders to the conductors on the amtrak train he still takes home every night .
to the love of my life , our next first lady , michelle obama , and to sasha and malia -- i love you so much , and i 'm so proud of all of you .
four years ago , i stood before you and told you my story -- of the brief union between a young man from kenya and a young woman from kansas who were n't well - off or well - known , but shared a belief that in america , their son could achieve whatever he put his mind to .
it is that promise that has always set this country apart -- that through hard work and sacrifice , each of us can pursue our individual dreams but still come together as one american family , to ensure that the next generation can pursue their dreams as well .
that 's why i stand here tonight .
because for two hundred and thirty two years , at each moment when that promise was in jeopardy , ordinary men and women -- students and soldiers , farmers and teachers , nurses and janitors -- found the courage to keep it alive .
we meet at one of those defining moments -- a moment when our nation is at war , our economy is in turmoil , and the american promise has been threatened once more .
tonight , more americans are out of work and more are working harder for less .
more of you have lost your homes and even more are watching your home values plummet .
more of you have cars you ca n't afford to drive , credit card bills you ca n't afford to pay , and tuition that 's beyond your reach .
these challenges are not all of government 's making .
but the failure to respond is a direct result of a broken politics in washington and the failed policies of george w. bush .
america , we are better than these last eight years .
we are a better country than this .
this country is more decent than one where a woman in ohio , on the brink of retirement , finds herself one illness away from disaster after a lifetime of hard work .
this country is more generous than one where a man in indiana has to pack up the equipment he 's worked on for twenty years and watch it shipped off to china , and then chokes up as he explains how he felt like a failure when he went home to tell his family the news .
we are more compassionate than a government that lets veterans sleep on our streets and families slide into poverty ; that sits on its hands while a major american city drowns before our eyes .
tonight , i say to the american people , to democrats and republicans and independents across this great land -- enough !
this moment -- this election -- is our chance to keep , in the 21st century , the american promise alive .
because next week , in minnesota , the same party that brought you two terms of george bush and dick cheney will ask this country for a third .
and we are here because we love this country too much to let the next four years look like the last eight .
on november 4th , we must stand up and say : " eight is enough . "
now let there be no doubt .
the republican nominee , john mccain , has worn the uniform of our country with bravery and distinction , and for that we owe him our gratitude and respect .
and next week , we 'll also hear about those occasions when he 's broken with his party as evidence that he can deliver the change that we need .
but the record 's clear : john mccain has voted with george bush ninety percent of the time .
senator mccain likes to talk about judgment , but really , what does it say about your judgment when you think george bush has been right more than ninety percent of the time ?
i do n't know about you , but i 'm not ready to take a ten percent chance on change .
the truth is , on issue after issue that would make a difference in your lives -- on health care and education and the economy -- senator mccain has been anything but independent .
he said that our economy has made " great progress " under this president .
he said that the fundamentals of the economy are strong .
and when one of his chief advisors -- the man who wrote his economic plan -- was talking about the anxiety americans are feeling , he said that we were just suffering from a " mental recession , " and that we 've become , and i quote , " a nation of whiners . "
a nation of whiners ?
tell that to the proud auto workers at a michigan plant who , after they found out it was closing , kept showing up every day and working as hard as ever , because they knew there were people who counted on the brakes that they made .
tell that to the military families who shoulder their burdens silently as they watch their loved ones leave for their third or fourth or fifth tour of duty .
these are not whiners .
they work hard and give back and keep going without complaint .
these are the americans that i know .
now , i do n't believe that senator mccain does n't care what 's going on in the lives of americans .
i just think he does n't know .
why else would he define middle - class as someone making under five million dollars a year ?
how else could he propose hundreds of billions in tax breaks for big corporations and oil companies but not one penny of tax relief to more than one hundred million americans ?
how else could he offer a health care plan that would actually tax people 's benefits , or an education plan that would do nothing to help families pay for college , or a plan that would privatize social security and gamble your retirement ?
it 's not because john mccain does n't care .
it 's because john mccain does n't get it .
for over two decades , he 's subscribed to that old , discredited republican philosophy -- give more and more to those with the most and hope that prosperity trickles down to everyone else .
in washington , they call this the ownership society , but what it really means is -- you 're on your own .
out of work ?
tough luck .
no health care ?
the market will fix it .
born into poverty ?
pull yourself up by your own bootstraps -- even if you do n't have boots .
you 're on your own .
well it 's time for them to own their failure .
it 's time for us to change america .
you see , we democrats have a very different measure of what constitutes progress in this country .
we measure progress by how many people can find a job that pays the mortgage ; whether you can put a little extra money away at the end of each month so you can someday watch your child receive her college diploma .
we measure progress in the 23 million new jobs that were created when bill clinton was president -- when the average american family saw its income go up $ 7,500 instead of down $ 2,000 like it has under george bush .
we measure the strength of our economy not by the number of billionaires we have or the profits of the fortune 500 , but by whether someone with a good idea can take a risk and start a new business , or whether the waitress who lives on tips can take a day off to look after a sick kid without losing her job -- an economy that honors the dignity of work .
the fundamentals we use to measure economic strength are whether we are living up to that fundamental promise that has made this country great -- a promise that is the only reason i am standing here tonight .
because in the faces of those young veterans who come back from iraq and afghanistan , i see my grandfather , who signed up after pearl harbor , marched in patton 's army , and was rewarded by a grateful nation with the chance to go to college on the gi bill .
in the face of that young student who sleeps just three hours before working the night shift , i think about my mom , who raised my sister and me on her own while she worked and earned her degree ; who once turned to food stamps but was still able to send us to the best schools in the country with the help of student loans and scholarships .
when i listen to another worker tell me that his factory has shut down , i remember all those men and women on the south side of chicago who i stood by and fought for two decades ago after the local steel plant closed .
and when i hear a woman talk about the difficulties of starting her own business , i think about my grandmother , who worked her way up from the secretarial pool to middle - management , despite years of being passed over for promotions because she was a woman .
she 's the one who taught me about hard work .
she 's the one who put off buying a new car or a new dress for herself so that i could have a better life .
she poured everything she had into me .
and although she can no longer travel , i know that she 's watching tonight , and that tonight is her night as well .
i do n't know what kind of lives john mccain thinks that celebrities lead , but this has been mine .
these are my heroes .
theirs are the stories that shaped me .
and it is on their behalf that i intend to win this election and keep our promise alive as president of the united states .
what is that promise ?
it 's a promise that says each of us has the freedom to make of our own lives what we will , but that we also have the obligation to treat each other with dignity and respect .
it 's a promise that says the market should reward drive and innovation and generate growth , but that businesses should live up to their responsibilities to create american jobs , look out for american workers , and play by the rules of the road .
ours is a promise that says government can not solve all our problems , but what it should do is that which we can not do for ourselves -- protect us from harm and provide every child a decent education ; keep our water clean and our toys safe ; invest in new schools and new roads and new science and technology .
our government should work for us , not against us .
it should help us , not hurt us .
it should ensure opportunity not just for those with the most money and influence , but for every american who 's willing to work .
that 's the promise of america -- the idea that we are responsible for ourselves , but that we also rise or fall as one nation ; the fundamental belief that i am my brother 's keeper ; i am my sister 's keeper .
that 's the promise we need to keep .
that 's the change we need right now .
so let me spell out exactly what that change would mean if i am president .
change means a tax code that does n't reward the lobbyists who wrote it , but the american workers and small businesses who deserve it .
unlike john mccain , i will stop giving tax breaks to corporations that ship jobs overseas , and i will start giving them to companies that create good jobs right here in america .
i will eliminate capital gains taxes for the small businesses and the start - ups that will create the high - wage , high - tech jobs of tomorrow .
i will cut taxes -- cut taxes -- for 95 percent of all working families .
because in an economy like this , the last thing we should do is raise taxes on the middle - class .
and for the sake of our economy , our security , and the future of our planet , i will set a clear goal as president : in ten years , we will finally end our dependence on oil from the middle east .
washington 's been talking about our oil addiction for the last thirty years , and john mccain has been there for twenty - six of them .
in that time , he 's said no to higher fuel - efficiency standards for cars , no to investments in renewable energy , no to renewable fuels .
and today , we import triple the amount of oil as the day that senator mccain took office .
now is the time to end this addiction , and to understand that drilling is a stop - gap measure , not a long - term solution .
not even close .
as president , i will tap our natural gas reserves , invest in clean coal technology , and find ways to safely harness nuclear power .
i 'll help our auto companies re - tool , so that the fuel - efficient cars of the future are built right here in america .
i 'll make it easier for the american people to afford these new cars .
and i 'll invest 150 billion dollars over the next decade in affordable , renewable sources of energy -- wind power and solar power and the next generation of biofuels ; an investment that will lead to new industries and five million new jobs that pay well and ca n't ever be outsourced .
america , now is not the time for small plans .
now is the time to finally meet our moral obligation to provide every child a world - class education , because it will take nothing less to compete in the global economy .
michelle and i are only here tonight because we were given a chance at an education .
and i will not settle for an america where some kids do n't have that chance .
i 'll invest in early childhood education .
i 'll recruit an army of new teachers , and pay them higher salaries and give them more support .
and in exchange , i 'll ask for higher standards and more accountability .
and we will keep our promise to every young american - if you commit to serving your community or your country , we will make sure you can afford a college education .
now is the time to finally keep the promise of affordable , accessible health care for every single american .
if you have health care , my plan will lower your premiums .
if you do n't , you 'll be able to get the same kind of coverage that members of congress give themselves .
and as someone who watched my mother argue with insurance companies while she lay in bed dying of cancer , i will make certain those companies stop discriminating against those who are sick and need care the most .
now is the time to help families with paid sick days and better family leave , because nobody in america should have to choose between keeping their jobs and caring for a sick child or ailing parent .
now is the time to change our bankruptcy laws , so that your pensions are protected ahead of ceo bonuses ; and the time to protect social security for future generations .
and now is the time to keep the promise of equal pay for an equal day 's work , because i want my daughters to have exactly the same opportunities as your sons .
now , many of these plans will cost money , which is why i 've laid out how i 'll pay for every dime -- by closing corporate loopholes and tax havens that do n't help america grow .
but i will also go through the federal budget , line by line , eliminating programs that no longer work and making the ones we do need work better and cost less -- because we can not meet twenty - first century challenges with a twentieth century bureaucracy .
and democrats , we must also admit that fulfilling america 's promise will require more than just money .
it will require a renewed sense of responsibility from each of us to recover what john f. kennedy called our " intellectual and moral strength . "
yes , government must lead on energy independence , but each of us must do our part to make our homes and businesses more efficient .
yes , we must provide more ladders to success for young men who fall into lives of crime and despair .
but we must also admit that programs alone ca n't replace parents ; that government ca n't turn off the television and make a child do her homework ; that fathers must take more responsibility for providing the love and guidance their children need .
individual responsibility and mutual responsibility -- that 's the essence of america 's promise .
and just as we keep our keep our promise to the next generation here at home , so must we keep america 's promise abroad .
if john mccain wants to have a debate about who has the temperament , and judgment , to serve as the next commander - in - chief , that 's a debate i 'm ready to have .
for while senator mccain was turning his sights to iraq just days after 9/11 , i stood up and opposed this war , knowing that it would distract us from the real threats we face .
when john mccain said we could just " muddle through " in afghanistan , i argued for more resources and more troops to finish the fight against the terrorists who actually attacked us on 9/11 , and made clear that we must take out osama bin laden and his lieutenants if we have them in our sights .
john mccain likes to say that he 'll follow bin laden to the gates of hell -- but he wo n't even go to the cave where he lives .
and today , as my call for a time frame to remove our troops from iraq has been echoed by the iraqi government and even the bush administration , even after we learned that iraq has a $ 79 billion surplus while we 're wallowing in deficits , john mccain stands alone in his stubborn refusal to end a misguided war .
that 's not the judgment we need .
that wo n't keep america safe .
we need a president who can face the threats of the future , not keep grasping at the ideas of the past .
you do n't defeat a terrorist network that operates in eighty countries by occupying iraq .
you do n't protect israel and deter iran just by talking tough in washington .
you ca n't truly stand up for georgia when you 've strained our oldest alliances .
if john mccain wants to follow george bush with more tough talk and bad strategy , that is his choice -- but it is not the change we need .
we are the party of roosevelt .
we are the party of kennedy .
so do n't tell me that democrats wo n't defend this country .
do n't tell me that democrats wo n't keep us safe .
the bush - mccain foreign policy has squandered the legacy that generations of americans -- democrats and republicans -- have built , and we are here to restore that legacy .
as commander - in - chief , i will never hesitate to defend this nation , but i will only send our troops into harm 's way with a clear mission and a sacred commitment to give them the equipment they need in battle and the care and benefits they deserve when they come home .
i will end this war in iraq responsibly , and finish the fight against al qaeda and the taliban in afghanistan .
i will rebuild our military to meet future conflicts .
but i will also renew the tough , direct diplomacy that can prevent iran from obtaining nuclear weapons and curb russian aggression .
i will build new partnerships to defeat the threats of the 21st century : terrorism and nuclear proliferation ; poverty and genocide ; climate change and disease .
and i will restore our moral standing , so that america is once again that last , best hope for all who are called to the cause of freedom , who long for lives of peace , and who yearn for a better future .
these are the policies i will pursue .
and in the weeks ahead , i look forward to debating them with john mccain .
but what i will not do is suggest that the senator takes his positions for political purposes .
because one of the things that we have to change in our politics is the idea that people can not disagree without challenging each other 's character and patriotism .
the times are too serious , the stakes are too high for this same partisan playbook .
so let us agree that patriotism has no party .
i love this country , and so do you , and so does john mccain .
the men and women who serve in our battlefields may be democrats and republicans and independents , but they have fought together and bled together and some died together under the same proud flag .
they have not served a red america or a blue america -- they have served the united states of america .
so i 've got news for you , john mccain .
we all put our country first .
america , our work will not be easy .
the challenges we face require tough choices , and democrats as well as republicans will need to cast off the worn - out ideas and politics of the past .
for part of what has been lost these past eight years ca n't just be measured by lost wages or bigger trade deficits .
what has also been lost is our sense of common purpose -- our sense of higher purpose .
and that 's what we have to restore .
we may not agree on abortion , but surely we can agree on reducing the number of unwanted pregnancies in this country .
the reality of gun ownership may be different for hunters in rural ohio than for those plagued by gang - violence in cleveland , but do n't tell me we ca n't uphold the second amendment while keeping ak-47s out of the hands of criminals .
i know there are differences on same - sex marriage , but surely we can agree that our gay and lesbian brothers and sisters deserve to visit the person they love in the hospital and to live lives free of discrimination .
passions fly on immigration , but i do n't know anyone who benefits when a mother is separated from her infant child or an employer undercuts american wages by hiring illegal workers .
this too is part of america 's promise -- the promise of a democracy where we can find the strength and grace to bridge divides and unite in common effort .
i know there are those who dismiss such beliefs as happy talk .
they claim that our insistence on something larger , something firmer and more honest in our public life is just a trojan horse for higher taxes and the abandonment of traditional values .
and that 's to be expected .
because if you do n't have any fresh ideas , then you use stale tactics to scare the voters .
if you do n't have a record to run on , then you paint your opponent as someone people should run from .
you make a big election about small things .
and you know what -- it 's worked before .
because it feeds into the cynicism we all have about government .
when washington does n't work , all its promises seem empty .
if your hopes have been dashed again and again , then it 's best to stop hoping , and settle for what you already know .
i get it .
i realize that i am not the likeliest candidate for this office .
i do n't fit the typical pedigree , and i have n't spent my career in the halls of washington .
but i stand before you tonight because all across america something is stirring .
what the nay - sayers do n't understand is that this election has never been about me .
it 's been about you .
for eighteen long months , you have stood up , one by one , and said enough to the politics of the past .
you understand that in this election , the greatest risk we can take is to try the same old politics with the same old players and expect a different result .
you have shown what history teaches us -- that at defining moments like this one , the change we need does n't come from washington .
change comes to washington .
change happens because the american people demand it -- because they rise up and insist on new ideas and new leadership , a new politics for a new time .
america , this is one of those moments .
i believe that as hard as it will be , the change we need is coming .
because i 've seen it .
because i 've lived it .
i 've seen it in illinois , when we provided health care to more children and moved more families from welfare to work .
i 've seen it in washington , when we worked across party lines to open up government and hold lobbyists more accountable , to give better care for our veterans and keep nuclear weapons out of terrorist hands .
and i 've seen it in this campaign .
in the young people who voted for the first time , and in those who got involved again after a very long time .
in the republicans who never thought they 'd pick up a democratic ballot , but did .
i 've seen it in the workers who would rather cut their hours back a day than see their friends lose their jobs , in the soldiers who re - enlist after losing a limb , in the good neighbors who take a stranger in when a hurricane strikes and the floodwaters rise .
this country of ours has more wealth than any nation , but that 's not what makes us rich .
we have the most powerful military on earth , but that 's not what makes us strong .
our universities and our culture are the envy of the world , but that 's not what keeps the world coming to our shores .
instead , it is that american spirit -- that american promise -- that pushes us forward even when the path is uncertain ; that binds us together in spite of our differences ; that makes us fix our eye not on what is seen , but what is unseen , that better place around the bend .
that promise is our greatest inheritance .
it 's a promise i make to my daughters when i tuck them in at night , and a promise that you make to yours -- a promise that has led immigrants to cross oceans and pioneers to travel west ; a promise that led workers to picket lines , and women to reach for the ballot .
and it is that promise that forty five years ago today , brought americans from every corner of this land to stand together on a mall in washington , before lincoln 's memorial , and hear a young preacher from georgia speak of his dream .
the men and women who gathered there could 've heard many things .
they could 've heard words of anger and discord .
they could 've been told to succumb to the fear and frustration of so many dreams deferred .
but what the people heard instead -- people of every creed and color , from every walk of life -- is that in america , our destiny is inextricably linked .
that together , our dreams can be one .
" we can not walk alone , " the preacher cried . "
and as we walk , we must make the pledge that we shall always march ahead .
we can not turn back . "
america , we can not turn back .
not with so much work to be done .
not with so many children to educate , and so many veterans to care for .
not with an economy to fix and cities to rebuild and farms to save .
not with so many families to protect and so many lives to mend .
america , we can not turn back .
we can not walk alone .
at this moment , in this election , we must pledge once more to march into the future .
let us keep that promise - that american promise - and in the words of scripture hold firmly , without wavering , to the hope that we confess .
thank you , god bless you , and god bless the united states of america .

thank you , everybody .
thank you .
thank you so much .
thank you , everybody .
please have a seat .
thank you .
i want to thank senator bill nelson and nasa administrator charlie bolden for their extraordinary leadership .
i want to recognize dr. buzz aldrin as well , who 's in the house .
four decades ago , buzz became a legend .
but in the four decades since he 's also been one of america 's leading visionaries and authorities on human space flight .
few people -- present company excluded -- can claim the expertise of buzz and bill and charlie when it comes to space exploration .
i have to say that few people are as singularly unimpressed by air force one as those three .
sure , it 's comfortable , but it ca n't even reach low earth orbit .
and that obviously is in striking contrast to the falcon 9 rocket we just saw on the launch pad , which will be tested for the very first time in the coming weeks .
a couple of other acknowledgments i want to make .
we 've got congresswoman sheila jackson lee from texas visiting us , a big supporter of the space program .
my director , office of science and technology policy -- in other words my chief science advisor -- john holdren is here .
and most of all i want to acknowledge your congresswoman suzanne kosmas , because every time i meet with her , including the flight down here , she reminds me of how important our nasa programs are and how important this facility is .
and she is fighting for every single one of you and for her district and for the jobs in her district .
and you should know that you 've got a great champion in congresswoman kosmas .
please give her a big round of applause .
i also want to thank everybody for participating in today 's conference .
and gathered here are scientists , engineers , business leaders , public servants , and a few more astronauts as well .
last but not least , i want to thank the men and women of nasa for welcoming me to the kennedy space center , and for your contributions not only to america , but to the world .
here at the kennedy space center we are surrounded by monuments and milestones of those contributions .
it was from here that nasa launched the missions of mercury and gemini and apollo .
it was from here that space shuttle discovery , piloted by charlie bolden , carried the hubble telescope into orbit , allowing us to plumb the deepest recesses of our galaxy .
and i should point out , by the way , that in my private office just off the oval , i 've got the picture of jupiter from the hubble .
so thank you , charlie , for helping to decorate my office .
it was from here that men and women , propelled by sheer nerve and talent , set about pushing the boundaries of humanity 's reach .
that 's the story of nasa .
and it 's a story that started a little more than half a century ago , far from the space coast , in a remote and desolate region of what is now called kazakhstan .
because it was from there that the soviet union launched sputnik , the first artificial satellite to orbit the earth , which was little more than a few pieces of metal with a transmitter and a battery strapped to the top of a missile .
but the world was stunned .
americans were dumbfounded .
the soviets , it was perceived , had taken the lead in a race for which we were not yet fully prepared .
but we caught up very quick .
president eisenhower signed legislation to create nasa and to invest in science and math education , from grade school to graduate school .
in 1961 , president kennedy boldly declared before a joint session of congress that the united states would send a man to the moon and return him safely to the earth within the decade .
and as a nation , we set about meeting that goal , reaping rewards that have in the decades since touched every facet of our lives .
nasa was at the forefront .
many gave their careers to the effort .
and some have given far more .
in the years that have followed , the space race inspired a generation of scientists and innovators , including , i 'm sure , many of you .
it 's contributed to immeasurable technological advances that have improved our health and well - being , from satellite navigation to water purification , from aerospace manufacturing to medical imaging .
although , i have to say , during a meeting right before i came out on stage somebody said , you know , it 's more than just tang -- and i had to point out i actually really like tang .
i thought that was very cool .
and leading the world to space helped america achieve new heights of prosperity here on earth , while demonstrating the power of a free and open society to harness the ingenuity of its people .
and on a personal note , i have been part of that generation so inspired by the space program .
1961 was the year of my birth -- the year that kennedy made his announcement .
and one of my earliest memories is sitting on my grandfather 's shoulders , waving a flag as astronauts arrived in hawaii .
for me , the space program has always captured an essential part of what it means to be an american -- reaching for new heights , stretching beyond what previously did not seem possible .
and so , as president , i believe that space exploration is not a luxury , it 's not an afterthought in america 's quest for a brighter future -- it is an essential part of that quest .
so today , i 'd like to talk about the next chapter in this story .
the challenges facing our space program are different , and our imperatives for this program are different , than in decades past .
we 're no longer racing against an adversary .
we 're no longer competing to achieve a singular goal like reaching the moon .
in fact , what was once a global competition has long since become a global collaboration .
but while the measure of our achievements has changed a great deal over the past 50 years , what we do -- or fail to do -- in seeking new frontiers is no less consequential for our future in space and here on earth .
so let me start by being extremely clear : i am 100 percent committed to the mission of nasa and its future .
because broadening our capabilities in space will continue to serve our society in ways that we can scarcely imagine .
because exploration will once more inspire wonder in a new generation -- sparking passions and launching careers .
and because , ultimately , if we fail to press forward in the pursuit of discovery , we are ceding our future and we are ceding that essential element of the american character .
i know there have been a number of questions raised about my administration 's plan for space exploration , especially in this part of florida where so many rely on nasa as a source of income as well as a source of pride and community .
and these questions come at a time of transition , as the space shuttle nears its scheduled retirement after almost 30 years of service .
and understandably , this adds to the worries of folks concerned not only about their own futures but about the future of the space program to which they 've devoted their lives .
but i also know that underlying these concerns is a deeper worry , one that precedes not only this plan but this administration .
it stems from the sense that people in washington -- driven sometimes less by vision than by politics -- have for years neglected nasa 's mission and undermined the work of the professionals who fulfill it .
we 've seen that in the nasa budget , which has risen and fallen with the political winds .
but we can also see it in other ways : in the reluctance of those who hold office to set clear , achievable objectives ; to provide the resources to meet those objectives ; and to justify not just these plans but the larger purpose of space exploration in the 21st century .
all that has to change .
and with the strategy i 'm outlining today , it will .
we start by increasing nasa 's budget by $ 6 billion over the next five years , even --   -- i want people to understand the context of this .
this is happening even as we have instituted a freeze on discretionary spending and sought to make cuts elsewhere in the budget .
so nasa , from the start , several months ago when i issued my budget , was one of the areas where we did n't just maintain a freeze but we actually increased funding by $ 6 billion .
by doing that we will ramp up robotic exploration of the solar system , including a probe of the sun 's atmosphere ; new scouting missions to mars and other destinations ; and an advanced telescope to follow hubble , allowing us to peer deeper into the universe than ever before .
we will increase earth - based observation to improve our understanding of our climate and our world -- science that will garner tangible benefits , helping us to protect our environment for future generations .
and we will extend the life of the international space station likely by more than five years , while actually using it for its intended purpose : conducting advanced research that can help improve the daily lives of people here on earth , as well as testing and improving upon our capabilities in space .
this includes technologies like more efficient life support systems that will help reduce the cost of future missions .
and in order to reach the space station , we will work with a growing array of private companies competing to make getting to space easier and more affordable .
now , i recognize that some have said it is unfeasible or unwise to work with the private sector in this way .
i disagree .
the truth is , nasa has always relied on private industry to help design and build the vehicles that carry astronauts to space , from the mercury capsule that carried john glenn into orbit nearly 50 years ago , to the space shuttle discovery currently orbiting overhead .
by buying the services of space transportation -- rather than the vehicles themselves -- we can continue to ensure rigorous safety standards are met .
but we will also accelerate the pace of innovations as companies -- from young startups to established leaders -- compete to design and build and launch new means of carrying people and materials out of our atmosphere .
in addition , as part of this effort , we will build on the good work already done on the orion crew capsule .
i 've directed charlie bolden to immediately begin developing a rescue vehicle using this technology , so we are not forced to rely on foreign providers if it becomes necessary to quickly bring our people home from the international space station .
and this orion effort will be part of the technological foundation for advanced spacecraft to be used in future deep space missions .
in fact , orion will be readied for flight right here in this room .
next , we will invest more than $ 3 billion to conduct research on an advanced " heavy lift rocket " -- a vehicle to efficiently send into orbit the crew capsules , propulsion systems , and large quantities of supplies needed to reach deep space .
in developing this new vehicle , we will not only look at revising or modifying older models ; we want to look at new designs , new materials , new technologies that will transform not just where we can go but what we can do when we get there .
and we will finalize a rocket design no later than 2015 and then begin to build it .
and i want everybody to understand : that 's at least two years earlier than previously planned -- and that 's conservative , given that the previous program was behind schedule and over budget .
at the same time , after decades of neglect , we will increase investment -- right away -- in other groundbreaking technologies that will allow astronauts to reach space sooner and more often , to travel farther and faster for less cost , and to live and work in space for longer periods of time more safely .
that means tackling major scientific and technological challenges .
how do we shield astronauts from radiation on longer missions ?
how do we harness resources on distant worlds ?
how do we supply spacecraft with energy needed for these far - reaching journeys ?
these are questions that we can answer and will answer .
and these are the questions whose answers no doubt will reap untold benefits right here on earth .
so the point is what we 're looking for is not just to continue on the same path -- we want to leap into the future ; we want major breakthroughs ; a transformative agenda for nasa .
now , yes , pursuing this new strategy will require that we revise the old strategy .
in part , this is because the old strategy -- including the constellation program -- was not fulfilling its promise in many ways .
that 's not just my assessment ; that 's also the assessment of a panel of respected non - partisan experts charged with looking at these issues closely .
now , despite this , some have had harsh words for the decisions we 've made , including some individuals who i 've got enormous respect and admiration for .
but what i hope is , is that everybody will take a look at what we are planning , consider the details of what we 've laid out , and see the merits as i 've described them .
the bottom line is nobody is more committed to manned space flight , to human exploration of space than i am .
but we 've got to do it in a smart way , and we ca n't just keep on doing the same old things that we 've been doing and thinking that somehow is going to get us to where we want to go .
some have said , for instance , that this plan gives up our leadership in space by failing to produce plans within nasa to reach low earth orbit , instead of relying on companies and other countries .
but we will actually reach space faster and more often under this new plan , in ways that will help us improve our technological capacity and lower our costs , which are both essential for the long - term sustainability of space flight .
in fact , through our plan , we 'll be sending many more astronauts to space over the next decade .
there are also those who criticized our decision to end parts of constellation as one that will hinder space exploration below   low earth orbit .
but it 's precisely by investing in groundbreaking research and innovative companies that we will have the potential to rapidly transform our capabilities -- even as we build on the important work already completed , through projects like orion , for future missions .
and unlike the previous program , we are setting a course with specific and achievable milestones .
early in the next decade , a set of crewed flights will test and prove the systems required for exploration beyond low earth orbit .
and by 2025 , we expect new spacecraft designed for long journeys to allow us to begin the first - ever crewed missions beyond the moon into deep space .
so we 'll start -- we 'll start by sending astronauts to an asteroid for the first time in history .
by the mid-2030s , i believe we can send humans to orbit mars and return them safely to earth .
and a landing on mars will follow .
and i expect to be around to see it .
but i want to repeat -- i want to repeat this : critical to deep space exploration will be the development of breakthrough propulsion systems and other advanced technologies .
so i 'm challenging nasa to break through these barriers .
and we 'll give you the resources to break through these barriers .
and i know you will , with ingenuity and intensity , because that 's what you 've always done .
now , i understand that some believe that we should attempt a return to the surface of the moon first , as previously planned .
but i just have to say pretty bluntly here : we 've been there before .
buzz has been there .
there 's a lot more of space to explore , and a lot more to learn when we do .
so i believe it 's more important to ramp up our capabilities to reach -- and operate at -- a series of increasingly demanding targets , while advancing our technological capabilities with each step forward .
and that 's what this strategy does .
and that 's how we will ensure that our leadership in space is even stronger in this new century than it was in the last .
finally , i want to say a few words about jobs .
suzanne pointed out to me that the last time i was here , i made a very clear promise that i would help in the transition into a new program to make sure that people who are already going through a tough time here in this region were helped .
and despite some reports to the contrary , my plan will add more than 2,500 jobs along the space coast in the next two years compared to the plan under the previous administration .
so i want to make that point .
we 're going to modernize the kennedy space center , creating jobs as we upgrade launch facilities .
and there 's potential for even more jobs as companies in florida and across america compete to be part of a new space transportation industry .
and some of those industry leaders are here today .
this holds the promise of generating more than 10,000 jobs nationwide over the next few years .
and many of these jobs will be created right here in florida because this is an area primed to lead in this competition .
now , it 's true -- there are floridians who will see their work on the shuttle end as the program winds down .
this is based on a decision that was made six years ago , not six months ago , but that does n't make it any less painful for families and communities affected as this decision becomes reality .
so i 'm proposing -- in part because of strong lobbying by bill and by suzanne , as well as charlie -- i 'm proposing a $ 40 million initiative led by a high - level team from the white house , nasa , and other agencies to develop a plan for regional economic growth and job creation .
and i expect this plan to reach my desk by august 15th .
it 's an effort that will help prepare this already skilled workforce for new opportunities in the space industry and beyond .
so this is the next chapter that we can write together here at nasa .
we will partner with industry .
we will invest in cutting - edge research and technology .
we will set far - reaching milestones and provide the resources to reach those milestones .
and step by step , we will push the boundaries not only of where we can go but what we can do .
fifty years after the creation of nasa , our goal is no longer just a destination to reach .
our goal is the capacity for people to work and learn and operate and live safely beyond the earth for extended periods of time , ultimately in ways that are more sustainable and even indefinite .
and in fulfilling this task , we will not only extend humanity 's reach in space -- we will strengthen america 's leadership here on earth .
now , i 'll close by saying this .
i know that some americans have asked a question that 's particularly apt on tax day : why spend money on nasa at all ?
why spend money solving problems in space when we do n't lack for problems to solve here on the ground ?
and obviously our country is still reeling from the worst economic turmoil we 've known in generations .
we have massive structural deficits that have to be closed in the coming years .
but you and i know this is a false choice .
we have to fix our economy .
we need to close our deficits .
but for pennies on the dollar , the space program has fueled jobs and entire industries .
for pennies on the dollar , the space program has improved our lives , advanced our society , strengthened our economy , and inspired generations of americans .
and i have no doubt that nasa can continue to fulfill this role .
but that is why -- but i want to say clearly to those of you who work for nasa , but to the entire community that has been so supportive of the space program in this area : that is exactly why it 's so essential that we pursue a new course and that we revitalize nasa and its mission -- not just with dollars , but with clear aims and a larger purpose .
now , little more than 40 years ago , astronauts descended the nine - rung ladder of the lunar module called eagle , and allowed their feet to touch the dusty surface of the earth 's only moon .
this was the culmination of a daring and perilous gambit -- of an endeavor that pushed the boundaries of our knowledge , of our technological prowess , of our very capacity as human beings to solve problems .
it was n't just the greatest achievement in nasa 's history -- it was one of the greatest achievements in human history .
and the question for us now is whether that was the beginning of something or the end of something .
i choose to believe it was only the beginning .
so thank you .
god bless you .
and may god bless the united states of america .
thank you .

mr. speaker , mr. vice president , members of congress , my fellow americans : 
 we are 15 years into this new century .
fifteen years that dawned with terror touching our shores ; that unfolded with a new generation fighting two long and costly wars ; that saw a vicious recession spread across our nation and the world .
it has been , and still is , a hard time for many .
but tonight , we turn the page .
tonight , after a breakthrough year for america , our economy is growing and creating jobs at the fastest pace since 1999 .
our unemployment rate is now lower than it was before the financial crisis .
more of our kids are graduating than ever before .
more of our people are insured than ever before .
and we are as free from the grip of foreign oil as we 've been in almost 30 years .
tonight , for the first time since 9/11 , our combat mission in afghanistan is over .
six years ago , nearly 180,000 american troops served in iraq and afghanistan .
today , fewer than 15,000 remain .
and we salute the courage and sacrifice of every man and woman in this 9/11 generation who has served to keep us safe .
we are humbled and grateful for your service .
america , for all that we have endured ; for all the grit and hard work required to come back ; for all the tasks that lie ahead , know this : the shadow of crisis has passed , and the state of the union is strong .
at this moment -- with a growing economy , shrinking deficits , bustling industry , booming energy production -- we have risen from recession freer to write our own future than any other nation on earth .
it 's now up to us to choose who we want to be over the next 15 years and for decades to come .
will we accept an economy where only a few of us do spectacularly well ?
or will we commit ourselves to an economy that generates rising incomes and chances for everyone who makes the effort ?
will we approach the world fearful and reactive , dragged into costly conflicts that strain our military and set back our standing ?
or will we lead wisely , using all elements of our power to defeat new threats and protect our planet ?
will we allow ourselves to be sorted into factions and turned against one another ?
or will we recapture the sense of common purpose that has always propelled america forward ?
in two weeks , i will send this congress a budget filled with ideas that are practical , not partisan .
and in the months ahead , i 'll crisscross the country making a case for those ideas .
so tonight , i want to focus less on a checklist of proposals , and focus more on the values at stake in the choices before us .
it begins with our economy .
seven years ago , rebekah and ben erler of minneapolis were newlyweds .
she waited tables .
he worked construction .
their first child , jack , was on the way .
they were young and in love in america .
and it does n't get much better than that . "
if only we had known , " rebekah wrote to me last spring , " what was about to happen to the housing and construction market . "
as the crisis worsened , ben 's business dried up , so he took what jobs he could find , even if they kept him on the road for long stretches of time .
rebekah took out student loans and enrolled in community college , and retrained for a new career .
they sacrificed for each other .
and slowly , it paid off .
they bought their first home .
they had a second son , henry .
rebekah got a better job and then a raise .
ben is back in construction -- and home for dinner every night .
" it is amazing , " rebekah wrote , " what you can bounce back from when you have to ... we are a strong , tight - knit family who has made it through some very , very hard times . "
we are a strong , tight - knit family who has made it through some very , very hard times .
america , rebekah and ben 's story is our story .
they represent the millions who have worked hard and scrimped , and sacrificed and retooled .
you are the reason that i ran for this office .
you are the people i was thinking of six years ago today , in the darkest months of the crisis , when i stood on the steps of this capitol and promised we would rebuild our economy on a new foundation .
and it has been your resilience , your effort that has made it possible for our country to emerge stronger .
we believed we could reverse the tide of outsourcing and draw new jobs to our shores .
and over the past five years , our businesses have created more than 11 million new jobs .
we believed we could reduce our dependence on foreign oil and protect our planet .
and today , america is number one in oil and gas .
america is number one in wind power .
every three weeks , we bring online as much solar power as we did in all of 2008 .
and thanks to lower gas prices and higher fuel standards , the typical family this year should save about $ 750 at the pump .
we believed we could prepare our kids for a more competitive world .
and today , our younger students have earned the highest math and reading scores on record .
our high school graduation rate has hit an all - time high .
more americans finish college than ever before .
we believed that sensible regulations could prevent another crisis , shield families from ruin , and encourage fair competition .
today , we have new tools to stop taxpayer - funded bailouts , and a new consumer watchdog to protect us from predatory lending and abusive credit card practices .
and in the past year alone , about 10 million uninsured americans finally gained the security of health coverage .
at every step , we were told our goals were misguided or too ambitious ; that we would crush jobs and explode deficits .
instead , we 've seen the fastest economic growth in over a decade , our deficits cut by two - thirds , a stock market that has doubled , and health care inflation at its lowest rate in 50 years .
this is good news , people .
so the verdict is clear .
middle - class economics works .
expanding opportunity works .
and these policies will continue to work as long as politics do n't get in the way .
we ca n't slow down businesses or put our economy at risk with government shutdowns or fiscal showdowns .
we ca n't put the security of families at risk by taking away their health insurance , or unraveling the new rules on wall street , or refighting past battles on immigration when we 've got to fix a broken system .
and if a bill comes to my desk that tries to do any of these things , i will veto it .
it will have earned my veto .
today , thanks to a growing economy , the recovery is touching more and more lives .
wages are finally starting to rise again .
we know that more small business owners plan to raise their employees ' pay than at any time since 2007 .
but here 's the thing : those of us here tonight , we need to set our sights higher than just making sure government does n't screw things up ; that government does n't halt the progress we 're making .
we need to do more than just do no harm .
tonight , together , let 's do more to restore the link between hard work and growing opportunity for every american .
because families like rebekah 's still need our help .
she and ben are working as hard as ever , but they 've had to forego vacations and a new car so that they can pay off student loans and save for retirement .
friday night pizza , that 's a big splurge .
basic childcare for jack and henry costs more than their mortgage , and almost as much as a year at the university of minnesota .
like millions of hardworking americans , rebekah is n't asking for a handout , but she is asking that we look for more ways to help families get ahead .
and in fact , at every moment of economic change throughout our history , this country has taken bold action to adapt to new circumstances and to make sure everyone gets a fair shot .
we set up worker protections , social security , medicare , medicaid to protect ourselves from the harshest adversity .
we gave our citizens schools and colleges , infrastructure and the internet -- tools they needed to go as far as their effort and their dreams will take them .
that 's what middle - class economics is -- the idea that this country does best when everyone gets their fair shot , everyone does their fair share , everyone plays by the same set of rules .
we do n't just want everyone to share in america 's success , we want everyone to contribute to our success .
so what does middle - class economics require in our time ?
first , middle - class economics means helping working families feel more secure in a world of constant change .
that means helping folks afford childcare , college , health care , a home , retirement .
and my budget will address each of these issues , lowering the taxes of working families and putting thousands of dollars back into their pockets each year .
here 's one example .
during world war ii , when men like my grandfather went off to war , having women like my grandmother in the workforce was a national security priority -- so this country provided universal childcare .
in today 's economy , when having both parents in the workforce is an economic necessity for many families , we need affordable , high - quality childcare more than ever .
it 's not a nice - to - have -- it 's a must - have .
so it 's time we stop treating childcare as a side issue , or as a women 's issue , and treat it like the national economic priority that it is for all of us .
and that 's why my plan will make quality childcare more available and more affordable for every middle - class and low - income family with young children in america -- by creating more slots and a new tax cut of up to $ 3,000 per child , per year .
here 's another example .
today , we are the only advanced country on earth that does n't guarantee paid sick leave or paid maternity leave to our workers .
forty - three million workers have no paid sick leave -- 43 million .
think about that .
and that forces too many parents to make the gut - wrenching choice between a paycheck and a sick kid at home .
so i 'll be taking new action to help states adopt paid leave laws of their own .
and since paid sick leave won where it was on the ballot last november , let 's put it to a vote right here in washington .
send me a bill that gives every worker in america the opportunity to earn seven days of paid sick leave .
it 's the right thing to do .
it 's the right thing to do .
of course , nothing helps families make ends meet like higher wages .
that 's why this congress still needs to pass a law that makes sure a woman is paid the same as a man for doing the same work .
it 's 2015 .
it 's time .
we still need to make sure employees get the overtime they 've earned .
and to everyone in this congress who still refuses to raise the minimum wage , i say this : if you truly believe you could work full - time and support a family on less than $ 15,000 a year , try it .
if not , vote to give millions of the hardest - working people in america a raise .
now , these ideas wo n't make everybody rich , wo n't relieve every hardship .
that 's not the job of government .
to give working families a fair shot , we still need more employers to see beyond next quarter 's earnings and recognize that investing in their workforce is in their company 's long - term interest .
we still need laws that strengthen rather than weaken unions , and give american workers a voice .
but you know , things like childcare and sick leave and equal pay ; things like lower mortgage premiums and a higher minimum wage -- these ideas will make a meaningful difference in the lives of millions of families .
that 's a fact .
and that 's what all of us , republicans and democrats alike , were sent here to do .
second , to make sure folks keep earning higher wages down the road , we have to do more to help americans upgrade their skills .
america thrived in the 20th century because we made high school free , sent a generation of gis to college , trained the best workforce in the world .
we were ahead of the curve .
but other countries caught on .
and in a 21st century economy that rewards knowledge like never before , we need to up our game .
we need to do more .
by the end of this decade , two in three job openings will require some higher education -- two in three .
and yet , we still live in a country where too many bright , striving americans are priced out of the education they need .
it 's not fair to them , and it 's sure not smart for our future .
that 's why i 'm sending this congress a bold new plan to lower the cost of community college -- to zero .
keep in mind 40 percent of our college students choose community college .
some are young and starting out .
some are older and looking for a better job .
some are veterans and single parents trying to transition back into the job market .
whoever you are , this plan is your chance to graduate ready for the new economy without a load of debt .
understand , you 've got to earn it .
you 've got to keep your grades up and graduate on time .
tennessee , a state with republican leadership , and chicago , a city with democratic leadership , are showing that free community college is possible .
i want to spread that idea all across america , so that two years of college becomes as free and universal in america as high school is today .
let 's stay ahead of the curve .
and i want to work with this congress to make sure those already burdened with student loans can reduce their monthly payments so that student debt does n't derail anyone 's dreams .
thanks to vice president biden 's great work to update our job training system , we're connecting community colleges with local employers to train workers to fill high - paying jobs like coding , and nursing , and robotics .
tonight , i 'm also asking more businesses to follow the lead of companies like cvs and ups , and offer more educational benefits and paid apprenticeships-- opportunities that give workers the chance to earn higher - paying jobs even if they do n't have a higher education .
and as a new generation of veterans comes home , we owe them every opportunity to live the american dream they helped defend .
already , we 've made strides towards ensuring that every veteran has access to the highest quality care .
we 're slashing the backlog that had too many veterans waiting years to get the benefits they need .
and we 're making it easier for vets to translate their training and experience into civilian jobs .
and joining forces , the national campaign launched by michelle and jill biden --   -- thank you , michelle ; thank you , jill -- has helped nearly 700,000 veterans and military spouses get a new job .
so to every ceo in america , let me repeat : if you want somebody who 's going to get the job done and done right , hire a veteran .
finally , as we better train our workers , we need the new economy to keep churning out high - wage jobs for our workers to fill .
since 2010 , america has put more people back to work than europe , japan , and all advanced economies combined .
our manufacturers have added almost 800,000 new jobs .
some of our bedrock sectors , like our auto industry , are booming .
but there are also millions of americans who work in jobs that did n't even exist 10 or 20 years ago -- jobs at companies like google , and ebay , and tesla .
so no one knows for certain which industries will generate the jobs of the future .
but we do know we want them here in america .
we know that .
and that 's why the third part of middle - class economics is all about building the most competitive economy anywhere , the place where businesses want to locate and hire .
twenty - first century businesses need 21st century infrastructure -- modern ports , and stronger bridges , faster trains and the fastest internet .
democrats and republicans used to agree on this .
so let 's set our sights higher than a single oil pipeline .
let 's pass a bipartisan infrastructure plan that could create more than 30 times as many jobs per year , and make this country stronger for decades to come .
let 's do it .
let 's get it done .
let 's get it done .
twenty - first century businesses , including small businesses , need to sell more american products overseas .
today , our businesses export more than ever , and exporters tend to pay their workers higher wages .
but as we speak , china wants to write the rules for the world 's fastest - growing region .
that would put our workers and our businesses at a disadvantage .
why would we let that happen ?
we should write those rules .
we should level the playing field .
that 's why i 'm asking both parties to give me trade promotion authority to protect american workers , with strong new trade deals from asia to europe that are n't just free , but are also fair .
it 's the right thing to do .
look , i 'm the first one to admit that past trade deals have n't always lived up to the hype , and that 's why we 've gone after countries that break the rules at our expense .
but 95 percent of the world 's customers live outside our borders .
we ca n't close ourselves off from those opportunities .
more than half of manufacturing executives have said they 're actively looking to bring jobs back from china .
so let 's give them one more reason to get it done .
twenty - first century businesses will rely on american science and technology , research and development .
i want the country that eliminated polio and mapped the human genome to lead a new era of medicine -- one that delivers the right treatment at the right time .
in some patients with cystic fibrosis , this approach has reversed a disease once thought unstoppable .
so tonight , i 'm launching a new precision medicine initiative to bring us closer to curing diseases like cancer and diabetes , and to give all of us access to the personalized information we need to keep ourselves and our families healthier .
we can do this .
i intend to protect a free and open internet , extend its reach to every classroom , and every community --   -- and help folks build the fastest networks so that the next generation of digital innovators and entrepreneurs have the platform to keep reshaping our world .
i want americans to win the race for the kinds of discoveries that unleash new jobs -- converting sunlight into liquid fuel ; creating revolutionary prosthetics , so that a veteran who gave his arms for his country can play catch with his kids again .
pushing out into the solar system not just to visit , but to stay .
last month , we launched a new spacecraft as part of a reenergized space program that will send american astronauts to mars .
and in two months , to prepare us for those missions , scott kelly will begin a year - long stay in space .
so good luck , captain .
make sure to instagram it .
we 're proud of you .
now , the truth is , when it comes to issues like infrastructure and basic research , i know there 's bipartisan support in this chamber .
members of both parties have told me so .
where we too often run onto the rocks is how to pay for these investments .
as americans , we do n't mind paying our fair share of taxes as long as everybody else does , too .
but for far too long , lobbyists have rigged the tax code with loopholes that let some corporations pay nothing while others pay full freight .
they 've riddled it with giveaways that the super - rich do n't need , while denying a break to middle - class families who do .
this year , we have an opportunity to change that .
let 's close loopholes so we stop rewarding companies that keep profits abroad , and reward those that invest here in america .
let 's use those savings to rebuild our infrastructure and to make it more attractive for companies to bring jobs home .
let 's simplify the system and let a small business owner file based on her actual bank statement , instead of the number of accountants she can afford .
and let 's close the loopholes that lead to inequality by allowing the top one percent to avoid paying taxes on their accumulated wealth .
we can use that money to help more families pay for childcare and send their kids to college .
we need a tax code that truly helps working americans trying to get a leg up in the new economy , and we can achieve that together .
we can achieve it together .
helping hardworking families make ends meet .
giving them the tools they need for good - paying jobs in this new economy .
maintaining the conditions of growth and competitiveness .
this is where america needs to go .
i believe it 's where the american people want to go .
it will make our economy stronger a year from now , 15 years from now , and deep into the century ahead .
of course , if there 's one thing this new century has taught us , it 's that we can not separate our work here at home from challenges beyond our shores .
my first duty as commander - in - chief is to defend the united states of america .
in doing so , the question is not whether america leads in the world , but how .
when we make rash decisions , reacting to the headlines instead of using our heads ; when the first response to a challenge is to send in our military -- then we risk getting drawn into unnecessary conflicts , and neglect the broader strategy we need for a safer , more prosperous world .
that 's what our enemies want us to do .
i believe in a smarter kind of american leadership .
we lead best when we combine military power with strong diplomacy ; when we leverage our power with coalition building ; when we do n't let our fears blind us to the opportunities that this new century presents .
that 's exactly what we 're doing right now .
and around the globe , it is making a difference .
first , we stand united with people around the world who have been targeted by terrorists -- from a school in pakistan to the streets of paris .
we will continue to hunt down terrorists and dismantle their networks , and we reserve the right to act unilaterally , as we have done relentlessly since i took office to take out terrorists who pose a direct threat to us and our allies .
at the same time , we 've learned some costly lessons over the last 13 years .
instead of americans patrolling the valleys of afghanistan , we 've trained their security forces , who have now taken the lead , and we 've honored our troops ' sacrifice by supporting that country 's first democratic transition .
instead of sending large ground forces overseas , we 're partnering with nations from south asia to north africa to deny safe haven to terrorists who threaten america .
in iraq and syria , american leadership -- including our military power -- is stopping isil 's advance .
instead of getting dragged into another ground war in the middle east , we are leading a broad coalition , including arab nations , to degrade and ultimately destroy this terrorist group .
we 're also supporting a moderate opposition in syria that can help us in this effort , and assisting people everywhere who stand up to the bankrupt ideology of violent extremism .
now , this effort will take time .
it will require focus .
but we will succeed .
and tonight , i call on this congress to show the world that we are united in this mission by passing a resolution to authorize the use of force against isil .
we need that authority .
second , we 're demonstrating the power of american strength and diplomacy .
we 're upholding the principle that bigger nations ca n't bully the small -- by opposing russian aggression , and supporting ukraine 's democracy , and reassuring our nato allies .
last year , as we were doing the hard work of imposing sanctions along with our allies , as we were reinforcing our presence with frontline states , mr. putin 's aggression it was suggested was a masterful display of strategy and strength .
that 's what i heard from some folks .
well , today , it is america that stands strong and united with our allies , while russia is isolated with its economy in tatters .
that 's how america leads -- not with bluster , but with persistent , steady resolve .
in cuba , we are ending a policy that was long past its expiration date .
when what you 're doing does n't work for 50 years , it 's time to try something new .
and our shift in cuba policy has the potential to end a legacy of mistrust in our hemisphere .
it removes a phony excuse for restrictions in cuba .
it stands up for democratic values , and extends the hand of friendship to the cuban people .
and this year , congress should begin the work of ending the embargo .
as his holiness , pope francis , has said , diplomacy is the work of " small steps . "
these small steps have added up to new hope for the future in cuba .
and after years in prison , we are overjoyed that alan gross is back where he belongs .
welcome home , alan .
we 're glad you 're here .
our diplomacy is at work with respect to iran , where , for the first time in a decade , we 've halted the progress of its nuclear program and reduced its stockpile of nuclear material .
between now and this spring , we have a chance to negotiate a comprehensive agreement that prevents a nuclear - armed iran , secures america and our allies -- including israel , while avoiding yet another middle east conflict .
there are no guarantees that negotiations will succeed , and i keep all options on the table to prevent a nuclear iran .
but new sanctions passed by this congress , at this moment in time , will all but guarantee that diplomacy fails -- alienating america from its allies ; making it harder to maintain sanctions ; and ensuring that iran starts up its nuclear program again .
it does n't make sense .
and that 's why i will veto any new sanctions bill that threatens to undo this progress .
the american people expect us only to go to war as a last resort , and i intend to stay true to that wisdom .
third , we 're looking beyond the issues that have consumed us in the past to shape the coming century .
no foreign nation , no hacker , should be able to shut down our networks , steal our trade secrets , or invade the privacy of american families , especially our kids .
so we 're making sure our government integrates intelligence to combat cyber threats , just as we have done to combat terrorism .
and tonight , i urge this congress to finally pass the legislation we need to better meet the evolving threat of cyber attacks , combat identity theft , and protect our children 's information .
that should be a bipartisan effort .
if we do n't act , we 'll leave our nation and our economy vulnerable .
if we do , we can continue to protect the technologies that have unleashed untold opportunities for people around the globe .
in west africa , our troops , our scientists , our doctors , our nurses , our health care workers are rolling back ebola -- saving countless lives and stopping the spread of disease .
i could not be prouder of them , and i thank this congress for your bipartisan support of their efforts .
but the job is not yet done , and the world needs to use this lesson to build a more effective global effort to prevent the spread of future pandemics , invest in smart development , and eradicate extreme poverty .
in the asia pacific , we are modernizing alliances while making sure that other nations play by the rules -- in how they trade , how they resolve maritime disputes , how they participate in meeting common international challenges like nonproliferation and disaster relief .
and no challenge -- no challenge -- poses a greater threat to future generations than climate change .
2014 was the planet 's warmest year on record .
now , one year does n't make a trend , but this does : 14 of the 15 warmest years on record have all fallen in the first 15 years of this century .
i 've heard some folks try to dodge the evidence by saying they 're not scientists ; that we do n't have enough information to act .
well , i 'm not a scientist , either .
but you know what , i know a lot of really good scientists at nasa , and at noaa , and at our major universities .
and the best scientists in the world are all telling us that our activities are changing the climate , and if we do n't act forcefully , we 'll continue to see rising oceans , longer , hotter heat waves , dangerous droughts and floods , and massive disruptions that can trigger greater migration and conflict and hunger around the globe .
the pentagon says that climate change poses immediate risks to our national security .
we should act like it .
and that 's why , over the past six years , we 've done more than ever to combat climate change , from the way we produce energy to the way we use it .
that 's why we 've set aside more public lands and waters than any administration in history .
and that 's whyi will not let this congress endanger the health of our children by turning back the clock on our efforts .
i am determined to make sure that american leadership drives international action .
in beijing , we made a historic announcement : the united states will double the pace at which we cut carbon pollution .
and china committed , for the first time , to limiting their emissions .
and because the world 's two largest economies came together , other nations are now stepping up , and offering hope that this year the world will finally reach an agreement to protect the one planet we 've got .
and there 's one last pillar of our leadership , and that 's the example of our values .
as americans , we respect human dignity , even when we 're threatened , which is why i have prohibited torture , and worked to make sure our use of new technology like drones is properly constrained .
it 's why we speak out against the deplorable anti - semitism that has resurfaced in certain parts of the world .
it 's why we continue to reject offensive stereotypes of muslims , the vast majority of whom share our commitment to peace .
that 's why we defend free speech , and advocate for political prisoners , and condemn the persecution of women , or religious minorities , or people who are lesbian , gay , bisexual or transgender .
we do these things not only because they are the right thing to do , but because ultimately they will make us safer .
as americans , we have a profound commitment to justice .
so it makes no sense to spend $ 3 million per prisoner to keep open a prison that the world condemns and terrorists use to recruit .
since i 've been president , we 've worked responsibly to cut the population of gitmo in half .
now it is time to finish the job .
and i will not relent in my determination to shut it down .
it is not who we are .
it 's time to close gitmo .
as americans , we cherish our civil liberties , and we need to uphold that commitment if we want maximum cooperation from other countries and industry in our fight against terrorist networks .
so while some have moved on from the debates over our surveillance programs , i have not .
as promised , our intelligence agencies have worked hard , with the recommendations of privacy advocates , to increase transparency and build more safeguards against potential abuse .
and next month , we 'll issue a report on how we 're keeping our promise to keep our country safe while strengthening privacy .
looking to the future instead of the past .
making sure we match our power with diplomacy , and use force wisely .
building coalitions to meet new challenges and opportunities .
leading -- always -- with the example of our values .
that 's what makes us exceptional .
that 's what keeps us strong .
that 's why we have to keep striving to hold ourselves to the highest of standards -- our own .
you know , just over a decade ago , i gave a speech in boston where i said there was n't a liberal america or a conservative america ; a black america or a white america -- but a united states of america .
i said this because i had seen it in my own life , in a nation that gave someone like me a chance ; because i grew up in hawaii , a melting pot of races and customs ; because i made illinois my home -- a state of small towns , rich farmland , one of the world 's great cities ; a microcosm of the country where democrats and republicans and independents , good people of every ethnicity and every faith , share certain bedrock values .
over the past six years , the pundits have pointed out more than once that my presidency has n't delivered on this vision .
how ironic , they say , that our politics seems more divided than ever .
it 's held up as proof not just of my own flaws -- of which there are many -- but also as proof that the vision itself is misguided , naive , that there are too many people in this town who actually benefit from partisanship and gridlock for us to ever do anything about it .
i know how tempting such cynicism may be .
but i still think the cynics are wrong .
i still believe that we are one people .
i still believe that together , we can do great things , even when the odds are long .
i believe this because over and over in my six years in office , i have seen america at its best .
i 've seen the hopeful faces of young graduates from new york to california , and our newest officers at west point , annapolis , colorado springs , new london .
i 've mourned with grieving families in tucson and newtown , in boston , in west texas , and west virginia .
i 've watched americans beat back adversity from the gulf coast to the great plains , from midwest assembly lines to the mid - atlantic seaboard .
i 've seen something like gay marriage go from a wedge issue used to drive us apart to a story of freedom across our country , a civil right now legal in states that seven in 10 americans call home .
so i know the good , and optimistic , and big - hearted generosity of the american people who every day live the idea that we are our brother 's keeper and our sister 's keeper .
and i know they expect those of us who serve here to set a better example .
so the question for those of us here tonight is how we , all of us , can better reflect america 's hopes .
i 've served in congress with many of you .
i know many of you well .
there are a lot of good people here , on both sides of the aisle .
and many of you have told me that this is n't what you signed up for -- arguing past each other on cable shows , the constant fundraising , always looking over your shoulder at how the base will react to every decision .
imagine if we broke out of these tired old patterns .
imagine if we did something different .
understand , a better politics is n't one where democrats abandon their agenda or republicans simply embrace mine .
a better politics is one where we appeal to each other 's basic decency instead of our basest fears .
a better politics is one where we debate without demonizing each other ; where we talk issues and values , and principles and facts , rather than " gotcha " moments , or trivial gaffes , or fake controversies that have nothing to do with people 's daily lives .
a politics -- a better politics is one where we spend less time drowning in dark money for ads that pull us into the gutter , and spend more time lifting young people up with a sense of purpose and possibility , asking them to join in the great mission of building america .
if we 're going to have arguments , let 's have arguments , but let 's make them debates worthy of this body and worthy of this country .
we still may not agree on a woman 's right to choose , but surely we can agree it 's a good thing that teen pregnancies and abortions are nearing all - time lows , and that every woman should have access to the health care that she needs .
yes , passions still fly on immigration , but surely we can all see something of ourselves in the striving young student , and agree that no one benefits when a hardworking mom is snatched from her child , and that it 's possible to shape a law that upholds our tradition as a nation of laws and a nation of immigrants .
i 've talked to republicans and democrats about that .
that 's something that we can share .
we may go at it in campaign season , but surely we can agree that the right to vote is sacred ; that it 's being denied to too many--   -- and that on this 50th anniversary of the great march from selma to montgomery and the passage of the voting rights act , we can come together , democrats and republicans , to make voting easier for every single american .
we may have different takes on the events of ferguson and new york .
but surely we can understand a father who fears his son ca n't walk home without being harassed .
and surely we can understand the wife who wo n't rest until the police officer she married walks through the front door at the end of his shift .
and surely we can agree that it 's a good thing that for the first time in 40 years , the crime rate and the incarceration rate have come down together , and use that as a starting point for democrats and republicans , community leaders and law enforcement , to reform america 's criminal justice system so that it protects and serves all of us .
that 's a better politics .
that 's how we start rebuilding trust .
that 's how we move this country forward .
that 's what the american people want .
and that 's what they deserve .
i have no more campaigns to run .
my only agenda --   --i know because i won both of them .
my only agenda for the next two years is the same as the one i 've had since the day i swore an oath on the steps of this capitol -- to do what i believe is best for america .
if you share the broad vision i outlined tonight , i ask you to join me in the work at hand .
if you disagree with parts of it , i hope you 'll at least work with me where you do agree .
and i commit to every republican here tonight that i will not only seek out your ideas , i will seek to work with you to make this country stronger .
because i want this chamber , i want this city to reflect the truth -- that for all our blind spots and shortcomings , we are a people with the strength and generosity of spirit to bridge divides , to unite in common effort , to help our neighbors , whether down the street or on the other side of the world .
i want our actions to tell every child in every neighborhood , your life matters , and we are committed to improving your life chances as committed as we are to working on behalf of our own kids .
i want future generations to know that we are a people who see our differences as a great gift , that we 're a people who value the dignity and worth of every citizen -- man and woman , young and old , black and white , latino , asian , immigrant , native american , gay , straight , americans with mental illness or physical disability .
everybody matters .
i want them to grow up in a country that shows the world what we still know to be true : that we are still more than a collection of red states and blue states ; that we are the united states of america .
i want them to grow up in a country where a young mom can sit down and write a letter to her president with a story that sums up these past six years : " it 's amazing what you can bounce back from when you have to ... we are a strong , tight - knit family who 's made it through some very , very hard times . "
my fellow americans , we , too , are a strong , tight - knit family .
we , too , have made it through some hard times .
fifteen years into this new century , we have picked ourselves up , dusted ourselves off , and begun again the work of remaking america .
we have laid a new foundation .
a brighter future is ours to write .
let 's begin this new chapter together -- and let 's start the work right now .
thank you .
god bless you .
god bless this country we love .
thank you .

thank you so much .
good afternoon .
i am honored to be in the timeless city of cairo and to be hosted by two remarkable institutions .
for over a thousand years , al - azhar has stood as a beacon of islamic learning , and for over a century , cairo university has been a source of egypt 's advancement .
and together , you represent the harmony between tradition and progress .
i 'm grateful for your hospitality and the hospitality of the people of egypt .
and i 'm also proud to carry with me the good will of the american people and a greeting of peace from muslim communities in my country : as - salaamu alaykum .
we meet at a time of great tension between the united states and muslims around the world , tension rooted in historical forces that go beyond any current policy debate .
the relationship between islam and the west includes centuries of coexistence and cooperation , but also conflict and religious wars .
more recently , tension has been fed by colonialism that denied rights and opportunities to many muslims and a cold war in which muslim - majority countries were too often treated as proxies without regard to their own aspirations .
moreover , the sweeping change brought by modernity and globalization led many muslims to view the west as hostile to the traditions of islam .
violent extremists have exploited these tensions in a small , but potent minority of muslims .
the attacks of september 11 , 2001 , and the continued efforts of these extremists to engage in violence against civilians has led some in my country to view islam as inevitably hostile not only to america and western countries , but also to human rights .
all this has bred more fear and more mistrust .
so long as our relationship is defined by our differences , we will empower those who sow hatred rather than peace , those who promote conflict rather than the cooperation that can help all of our people achieve justice and prosperity .
and this cycle of suspicion and discord must end .
i 've come here to cairo to seek a new beginning between the united states and muslims around the world , one based on mutual interest and mutual respect and one based upon the truth that america and islam are not exclusive and need not be in competition .
instead , they overlap and share common principles , principles of justice and progress , tolerance and the dignity of all human beings .
i do so recognizing that change can not happen overnight .
i know there 's been a lot of publicity about this speech , but no single speech can eradicate years of mistrust .
nor can i answer in the time that i have this afternoon all the complex questions that brought us to this point .
but i am convinced that in order to move forward , we must say openly to each other the things we hold in our hearts and that too often are said only behind closed doors .
there must be a sustained effort to listen to each other , to learn from each other , to respect one another , and to seek common ground .
as the holy koran tells us : " be conscious of god and speak always the truth . "
that is what i will try to do today , to speak the truth as best i can , humbled by the task before us and firm in my belief that the interests we share as human beings are far more powerful than the forces that drive us apart .
now part of this conviction is rooted in my own experience .
i 'm a christian , but my father came from a kenyan family that includes generations of muslims .
as a boy , i spent several years in indonesia and heard the call of the azaan at the break of dawn and at the fall of dusk .
as a young man , i worked in chicago communities where many found dignity and peace in their muslim faith .
as a student of history , i also know civilization 's debt to islam .
it was islam , at places like al - azhar , that carried the light of learning through so many centuries , paving the way for europe 's renaissance and enlightenment .
it was innovation in muslim communities that developed the order of algebra , our magnetic compass and tools of navigation , our mastery of pens and printing , our understanding of how disease spreads and how it can be healed .
islamic culture has given us majestic arches and soaring spires , timeless poetry and cherished music , elegant calligraphy and places of peaceful contemplation .
and throughout history , islam has demonstrated through words and deeds the possibilities of religious tolerance and racial equality .
i also know that islam has always been a part of america 's story .
the first nation to recognize my country was morocco .
in signing the treaty of tripoli in 1796 , our second president , john adams , wrote : " the united states has in itself no character of enmity against the laws , religion , or tranquillity of muslims . "
and since our founding , american muslims have enriched the united states .
they have fought in our wars ; they have served in our government ; they have stood for civil rights ; they have started businesses ; they have taught at our universities ; they 've excelled in our sports arenas ; they 've won nobel prizes , built our tallest building , and lit the olympic torch .
and when the first muslim american was recently elected to congress , he took the oath to defend our constitution using the same holy koran that one of our founding fathers , thomas jefferson , kept in his personal library .
so , i have known islam on three continents before coming to the region where it was first revealed .
that experience guides my conviction that partnership between america and islam must be based on what islam is , not what it is n't .
and i consider it part of my responsibility as president of the united states to fight against negative stereotypes of islam wherever they appear .
but that same principle must apply to muslim perceptions of america .
just as muslims do not fit a crude stereotype , america is not the crude stereotype of a self - interested empire .
the united states has been one of the greatest sources of progress that the world has ever known .
we were born out of revolution against an empire .
we were founded upon the ideal that all are created equal , and we have shed blood and struggled for centuries to give meaning to those words , within our borders and around the world .
we are shaped by every culture , drawn from every end of the earth , and dedicated to a simple concept : e pluribus unum -- " out of many , one . "
now , much has been made of the fact that an african american with the name barack hussein obama could be elected president .
but my personal story is not so unique .
the dream of opportunity for all people has not come true for everyone in america , but its promise exists for all who come to our shores , and that includes nearly 7 million american muslims in our country today , who , by the way , enjoy incomes and educational levels that are higher than the american average .
moreover , freedom in america is indivisible from the freedom to practice one 's religion .
that is why there is a mosque in every state in our union and over 1,200 mosques within our borders .
that 's why the united states government has gone to court to protect the right of women and girls to wear the hijab and to punish those who would deny it .
so let there be no doubt , islam is a part of america .
and i believe that america holds within her the truth that regardless of race , religion , or station in life , all of us share common aspirations to live in peace and security , to get an education and to work with dignity , to love our families , our communities , and our god .
these things we share .
this is the hope of all humanity .
of course , recognizing our common humanity is only the beginning of our task .
words alone can not meet the needs of our people .
these needs will be met only if we act boldly in the years ahead and if we understand that the challenges we face are shared and our failure to meet them will hurt us all .
for we have learned from recent experience that when a financial system weakens in one country , prosperity is hurt everywhere .
when a new flu infects one human being , all are at risk .
when one nation pursues a nuclear weapon , the risk of nuclear attack rises for all nations .
when violent extremists operate in one stretch of mountains , people are endangered across an ocean .
when innocents in bosnia and darfur are slaughtered , that is a stain on our collective conscience .
that is what it means to share this world in the 21st century .
that is the responsibility we have to one another as human beings .
and this is a difficult responsibility to embrace , for human history has often been a record of nations and tribes and , yes , religions subjugating one another in pursuit of their own interests .
yet in this new age , such attitudes are self - defeating .
given our interdependence , any world order that elevates one nation or group of people over another will inevitably fail .
so whatever we think of the past , we must not be prisoners to it .
our problems must be dealt with through partnership ; our progress must be shared .
now , that does not mean we should ignore sources of tension .
indeed , it suggests the opposite .
we must face these tensions squarely .
and so in that spirit , let me speak as clearly and as plainly as i can about some specific issues that i believe we must finally confront together .
the first issue that we have to confront is violent extremism in all of its forms .
in ankara , i made clear that america is not , and never will be , at war with islam .
we will , however , relentlessly confront violent extremists who pose a grave threat to our security , because we reject the same thing that people of all faiths reject : the killing of innocent men , women , and children .
and it is my first duty as president to protect the american people .
the situation in afghanistan demonstrates america 's goals and our need to work together .
over 7 years ago , the united states pursued al qaida and the taliban with broad international support .
we did not go by choice ; we went because of necessity .
i 'm aware that there 's still some who would question or even justify the events of 9/11 .
but let us be clear : al qaida killed nearly 3,000 people on that day .
the victims were innocent men , women , and children from america and many other nations who had done nothing to harm anybody .
and yet , al qaida chose to ruthlessly murder these people , claimed credit for the attack , and even now states their determination to kill on a massive scale .
they have affiliates in many countries and are trying to expand their reach .
these are not opinions to be debated ; these are facts to be dealt with .
make no mistake , we do not want to keep our troops in afghanistan .
we see no -- we seek no military bases there .
it is agonizing for america to lose our young men and women .
it is costly and politically difficult to continue this conflict .
we would gladly bring every single one of our troops home , if we could be confident that there were not violent extremists in afghanistan and now pakistan determined to kill as many americans as they possibly can .
but that is not yet the case .
and that 's why we 're partnering with a coalition of 46 countries .
and despite the costs involved , america 's commitment will not weaken .
indeed , none of us should tolerate these extremists .
they have killed in many countries .
they have killed people of different faiths , but more than any other , they have killed muslims .
their actions are irreconcilable with the rights of human beings , the progress of nations , and with islam .
the holy koran teaches that " whoever kills an innocent " is as -- " it is as if he has killed all mankind . "
and the holy koran also says , " whoever saves a person , it is as if he has saved all mankind . "
the enduring faith of over a billion people is so much bigger than the narrow hatred of a few .
islam is not part of the problem in combating violent extremism , it is an important part of promoting peace .
now , we also know that military power alone is not going to solve the problems in afghanistan and pakistan .
that 's why we plan to invest $ 1.5 billion each year over the next 5 years to partner with pakistanis to build schools and hospitals , roads and businesses , and hundreds of millions to help those who 've been displaced .
that 's why we are providing more than $ 2.8 billion to help afghans develop their economy and deliver services that people depend on .
let me also address the issue of iraq .
unlike afghanistan , iraq was a war of choice that provoked strong differences in my country and around the world .
although i believe that the iraqi people are ultimately better off without the tyranny of saddam hussein , i also believe that events in iraq have reminded america of the need to use diplomacy and build international consensus to resolve our problems whenever possible .
indeed , we can recall the words of thomas jefferson , who said : " i hope that our wisdom will grow with our power and teach us that the less we use our power , the greater it will be . "
today , america has a dual responsibility to help iraq forge a better future and to leave iraq to iraqis .
and i have made it clear to the iraqi people that we pursue no bases and no claim on their territory or resources .
iraq 's sovereignty is its own .
and that 's why i ordered the removal of our combat brigades by next august .
that is why we will honor our agreement with iraq 's democratically elected government to remove combat troops from iraqi cities by july and to remove all of our troops from iraq by 2012 .
we will help iraq train its security forces and develop its economy , but we will support a secure and united iraq as a partner , and never as a patron .
and finally , just as america can never tolerate violence by extremists , we must never alter or forget our principles .
nine - eleven was an enormous trauma to our country .
the fear and anger that it provoked was understandable , but in some cases , it led us to act contrary to our traditions and our ideals .
we are taking concrete actions to change course .
i have unequivocally prohibited the use of torture by the united states , and i have ordered the prison at guantanamo bay closed by early next year .
so america will defend itself , respectful of the sovereignty of nations and the rule of law , and we will do so in partnership with muslim communities , which are also threatened .
the sooner the extremists are isolated and unwelcome in muslim communities , the sooner we will all be safer .
the second major source of tension that we need to discuss is the situation between israelis , palestinians , and the arab world .
america 's strong bonds with israel are well known .
this bond is unbreakable .
it is based upon cultural and historical ties and the recognition that the aspiration for a jewish homeland is rooted in a tragic history that can not be denied .
around the world , the jewish people were persecuted for centuries , and anti - semitism in europe culminated in an unprecedented holocaust .
tomorrow i will visit buchenwald , which was part of a network of camps where jews were enslaved , tortured , shot , and gassed to death by the third reich .
six million jews were killed , more than the entire jewish population of israel today .
denying that fact is baseless , it is ignorant , and it is hateful .
threatening israel with destruction or repeating vile stereotypes about jews is deeply wrong and only serves to evoke in the minds of israelis this most painful of memories while preventing the peace that the people of this region deserve .
on the other hand , it is also undeniable that the palestinian people , muslims and christians , have suffered in pursuit of a homeland .
for more than 60 years , they 've endured the pain of dislocation .
many wait in refugee camps in the west bank , gaza , and neighboring lands for a life of peace and security that they have never been able to lead .
they endure the daily humiliations , large and small , that come with occupation .
so let there be no doubt , the situation for the palestinian people is intolerable , and america will not turn our backs on the legitimate palestinian aspiration for dignity , opportunity , and a state of their own .
for decades then , there has been a stalemate : two peoples with legitimate aspirations , each with a painful history that makes compromise elusive .
it 's easy to point fingers , for palestinians to point to the displacement brought about by israel 's founding and for israelis to point to the constant hostility and attacks throughout its history from within its borders , as well as beyond .
but if we see this conflict only from one side or the other , then we will be blind to the truth .
the only resolution is for the aspirations of both sides to be met through two states , where israelis and palestinians each live in peace and security .
that is in israel 's interest , palestine 's interest , america 's interest , and the world 's interest .
and that is why i intend to personally pursue this outcome with all the patience and dedication that the task requires .
the obligations that the parties have agreed to under the road map are clear .
for peace to come , it is time for them , and all of us , to live up to our responsibilities .
palestinians must abandon violence .
resistance through violence and killing is wrong , and it does not succeed .
for centuries , black people in america suffered the lash of the whip as slaves and the humiliation of segregation .
but it was not violence that won full and equal rights .
it was a peaceful and determined insistence upon the ideals at the center of america 's founding .
this same story can be told by people from south africa to south asia , from eastern europe to indonesia .
it 's a story with a simple truth : violence is a dead end .
it is a sign neither of courage nor power to shoot rockets at sleeping children or to blow up old women on a bus .
that 's not how moral authority is claimed ; that 's how it is surrendered .
now is the time for palestinians to focus on what they can build .
the palestinian authority must develop its capacity to govern with institutions that serve the needs of its people .
hamas does have support among some palestinians , but they also have to recognize they have responsibilities .
to play a role in fulfilling palestinian aspirations , to unify the palestinian people , hamas must put an end to violence , recognize past agreements , recognize israel 's right to exist .
at the same time , israelis must acknowledge that just as israel 's right to exist can not be denied , neither can palestine 's .
the united states does not accept the legitimacy of continued israeli settlements .
this construction violates previous agreements and undermines efforts to achieve peace .
it is time for these settlements to stop .
and israel must also live up to its obligation to ensure that palestinians can live and work and develop their society .
just as it devastates palestinian families , the continuing humanitarian crisis in gaza does not serve israel 's security , neither does the continuing lack of opportunity in the west bank .
progress in the daily lives of the palestinian people must be a critical part of a road to peace , and israel must take concrete steps to enable such progress .
and finally , the arab states must recognize that the arab peace initiative was an important beginning , but not the end of their responsibilities .
the arab - israeli conflict should no longer be used to distract the people of arab nations from other problems .
instead , it must be a cause for action to help the palestinian people develop the institutions that will sustain their state , to recognize israel 's legitimacy , and to choose progress over a self - defeating focus on the past .
america will align our policies with those who pursue peace , and we will say in public what we say in private to israelis and palestinians and arabs .
we can not impose peace .
but privately , many muslims recognize that israel will not go away .
likewise , many israelis recognize the need for a palestinian state .
it is time for us to act on what everyone knows to be true .
too many tears have been shed .
too much blood has been shed .
all of us have a responsibility to work for the day when the mothers of israelis and palestinians can see their children grow up without fear , when the holy land of the three great faiths is the place of peace that god intended it to be , when jerusalem is a secure and lasting home for jews and christians and muslims and a place for all of the children of abraham to mingle peacefully together as in the story of isra , when moses , jesus , and muhammed , peace be upon them , joined in prayer .
the third source of tension is our shared interest in the rights and responsibilities of nations on nuclear weapons .
this issue has been a source of tension between the united states and the islamic republic of iran .
for many years , iran has defined itself in part by its opposition to my country , and there is in fact a tumultuous history between us .
in the middle of the cold war , the united states played a role in the overthrow of a democratically elected iranian government .
since the islamic revolution , iran has played a role in acts of hostage - taking and violence against u. s. troops and civilians .
this history is well known .
rather than remain trapped in the past , i 've made it clear to iran 's leaders and people that my country is prepared to move forward .
the question now is not what iran is against , but rather what future it wants to build .
i recognize it will be hard to overcome decades of mistrust , but we will proceed with courage , rectitude , and resolve .
there will be many issues to discuss between our two countries , and we are willing to move forward without preconditions on the basis of mutual respect .
but it is clear to all concerned that when it comes to nuclear weapons , we have reached a decisive point .
this is not simply about america 's interests .
it 's about preventing a nuclear arms race in the middle east that could lead this region and the world down a hugely dangerous path .
i understand those who protest that some countries have weapons that others do not .
no single nation should pick and choose which nation holds nuclear weapons .
and that 's why i strongly reaffirmed america 's commitment to seek a world in which no nations hold nuclear weapons .
and any nation , including iran , should have the right to access peaceful nuclear power , if it complies with its responsibilities under the nuclear non - proliferation treaty .
that commitment is at the core of the treaty , and it must be kept for all who fully abide by it .
and i 'm hopeful that all countries in the region can share in this goal .
the fourth issue that i will address is democracy .
i know there has been controversy about the promotion of democracy in recent years , and much of this controversy is connected to the war in iraq .
so let me be clear : no system of government can or should be imposed by one nation by any other .
that does not lessen my commitment , however , to governments that reflect the will of the people .
each nation gives life to this principle in its own way , grounded in the traditions of its own people .
america does not presume to know what is best for everyone , just as we would not presume to pick the outcome of a peaceful election .
but i do have an unyielding belief that all people yearn for certain things : the ability to speak your mind and have a say in how you are governed , confidence in the rule of law and the equal administration of justice , government that is transparent and does n't steal from the people , the freedom to live as you choose .
these are not just american ideas , they are human rights .
and that is why we will support them everywhere .
now , there is no straight line to realize this promise , but this much is clear : governments that protect these rights are ultimately more stable , successful , and secure .
suppressing ideas never succeeds in making them go away .
america respects the right of all peaceful and law - abiding voices to be heard around the world , even if we disagree with them .
and we will welcome all elected , peaceful governments , provided they govern with respect for all their people .
this last point is important , because there are some who advocate for democracy only when they 're out of power .
once in power , they are ruthless in suppressing the rights of others .
so no matter where it takes hold , government of the people and by the people sets a single standard for all who would hold power .
you must maintain your power through consent , not coercion ; you must respect the rights of minorities and participate with a spirit of tolerance and compromise ; you must place the interests of your people and the legitimate workings of the political process above your party .
without these ingredients , elections alone do not make true democracy .
audience member .
we love you !
the president .
thank you .
the fifth issue that we must address together is religious freedom .
islam has a proud tradition of tolerance .
we see it in the history of andalusia and cordoba during the inquisition .
i saw it firsthand as a child in indonesia , where devout christians worshiped freely in an overwhelmingly muslim country .
that is the spirit we need today .
people in every country should be free to choose and live their faith based upon the persuasion of the mind and the heart and the soul .
this tolerance is essential for religion to thrive , but it 's being challenged in many different ways .
among some muslims , there 's a disturbing tendency to measure one 's own faith by the rejection of somebody else 's faith .
the richness of religious diversity must be upheld , whether it is for maronites in lebanon or the copts in egypt .
and if we are being honest , fault lines must be closed among muslims as well , as the divisions between sunni and shi'a have led to tragic violence , particularly in iraq .
freedom of religion is central to the ability of peoples to live together .
we must always examine the ways in which we protect it .
for instance , in the united states , rules on charitable giving have made it harder for muslims to fulfill their religious obligation .
that 's why i 'm committed to working with american muslims to ensure that they can fulfill zakat .
likewise , it is important for western countries to avoid impeding muslim citizens from practicing religion as they see fit , for instance , by dictating what clothes a muslim woman should wear .
we ca n't disguise hostility towards any religion behind the pretence of liberalism .
in fact , faith should bring us together .
and that 's why we 're forging service projects in america to bring together christians , muslims , and jews .
that 's why we welcome efforts like saudi arabian king abdallah 's interfaith dialog and turkey 's leadership in the alliance of civilizations .
around the world , we can turn dialog into interfaith service , so bridges between peoples lead to action , whether it is combating malaria in africa or providing relief after a natural disaster .
the sixth issue that i want to address is women 's rights .
i know --   -- i know , and you can tell from this audience , that there is a healthy debate about this issue .
i reject the view of some in the west that a woman who chooses to cover her hair is somehow less equal , but i do believe that a woman who is denied an education is denied equality .
and it is no coincidence that countries where women are well educated are far more likely to be prosperous .
now , let me be clear : issues of women 's equality are by no means simply an issue for islam .
in turkey , pakistan , bangladesh , indonesia , we 've seen muslim - majority countries elect a woman to lead .
meanwhile , the struggle for women 's equality continues in many aspects of american life and in countries around the world .
i am convinced that our daughters can contribute just as much to society as our sons .
our common prosperity will be advanced by allowing all humanity , men and women , to reach their full potential .
i do not believe that women must make the same choices as men in order to be equal , and i respect those women who choose to live their lives in traditional roles .
but it should be their choice .
and that is why the united states will partner with any muslim - majority country to support expanded literacy for girls and to help young women pursue employment through microfinancing that helps people live their dreams .
finally , i want to discuss economic development and opportunity .
i know that for many , the face of globalization is contradictory .
the internet and television can bring knowledge and information , but also offensive sexuality and mindless violence into the home .
trade can bring new wealth and opportunities , but also huge disruptions and change in communities .
in all nations , including america , this change can bring fear .
fear that because of modernity , we lose control over our economic choices , our politics , and , most importantly , our identities , those things we most cherish about our communities , our families , our traditions , and our faith .
but i also know that human progress can not be denied .
there need not be contradictions between development and tradition .
countries like japan and south korea grew their economies enormously while maintaining distinct cultures .
the same is true for the astonishing progress within muslim - majority countries from kuala lumpur to dubai .
in ancient times and in our times , muslim communities have been at the forefront of innovation and education .
and this is important , because no development strategy can be based only upon what comes out of the ground , nor can it be sustained while young people are out of work .
many gulf states have enjoyed great wealth as a consequence of oil , and some are beginning to focus it on broader development .
but all of us must recognize that education and innovation will be the currency of the 21st century , and in too many muslim communities there remains underinvestment in these areas .
i 'm emphasizing such investment within my own country .
and while america in the past has focused on oil and gas when it comes to this part of the world , we now seek a broader engagement .
on education , we will expand exchange programs and increase scholarships like the one that brought my father to america .
at the same time , we will encourage more americans to study in muslim communities .
and we will match promising muslim students with internships in america , invest in online learning for teachers and children around the world , and create a new online network so a young person in kansas can communicate instantly with a young person in cairo .
on economic development , we will create a new corps of business volunteers to partner with counterparts in muslim - majority countries .
and i will host a summit on entrepreneurship this year to identify how we can deepen ties between business leaders , foundations , and social entrepreneurs in the united states and muslim communities around the world .
on science and technology , we will launch a new fund to support technological development in muslim - majority countries and to help transfer ideas to mark -- to the marketplace so they can create more jobs .
we 'll open centers of scientific excellence in africa , the middle east , and southeast asia and appoint new science envoys to collaborate on programs that develop new sources of energy , create green jobs , digitize records , clean water , grow new crops .
today i 'm announcing a new global effort with the organization of the islamic conference to eradicate polio .
and we will also expand partnerships with muslim communities to promote child and maternal health .
all these things must be done in partnership .
americans are ready to join with citizens and governments , community organizations , religious leaders , and businesses in muslim communities around the world to help our people pursue a better life .
and the issues that i have described will not be easy to address , but we have a responsibility to join together on behalf of the world that we seek , a world where extremists no longer threaten our people and american troops have come home , a world where israelis and palestinians are each secure in a state of their own and nuclear energy is used for peaceful purposes , a world where governments serve their citizens and the rights of all god 's children are respected .
those are mutual interests .
that is the world we seek , but we can only achieve it together .
i know there are many , muslim and non - muslim , who question whether we can forge this new beginning .
some are eager to stoke the flames of division and to stand in the way of progress .
some suggest that it is n't worth the effort , that we are fated to disagree and civilizations are doomed to clash .
many more are simply skeptical that real change can occur .
there 's so much fear , so much mistrust that has built up over the years .
but if we choose to be bound by the past , we will never move forward .
and i want to particularly say this to young people of every faith in every country : you , more than anyone , have the ability to reimagine the world , to remake this world .
all of us share this world for but a brief moment in time .
the question is whether we spend that time focused on what pushes us apart , or whether we commit ourselves to an effort , a sustained effort to find common ground , to focus on the future we seek for our children , and to respect the dignity of all human beings .
it 's easier to start wars than to end them .
it 's easier to blame others than to look inward .
it 's easier to see what is different about someone than to find the things we share .
but we should choose the right path , not just the easy path .
there 's one rule that lies at the heart of every religion , that we do unto others as we would have them do unto us .
this truth transcends nations and peoples , a belief that is n't new , that is n't black or white or brown , that is n't christian or muslim or jew .
it 's a belief that pulsed in the cradle of civilization and that still beats in the hearts of billions around the world .
it 's a faith in other people , and it 's what brought me here today .
we have the power to make the world we seek , but only if we have the courage to make a new beginning , keeping in mind what has been written .
the holy koran tells us : " o mankind !
we have created you male and a female , and we have made you into nations and tribes so that you may know one another . "
the talmud tells us : " the whole of the torah is for the purpose of promoting peace . "
the holy bible tells us : " blessed are the peacemakers , for they shall be called sons of god . "
the people of the world can live together in peace .
we know that is god 's vision , now that must be our work here on earth .
thank you , and may god 's peace be upon you .
thank you very much .
thank you .

good evening .
tonight , i can report to the american people and to the world that the united states has conducted an operation that killed osama bin laden , the leader of al qaeda , and a terrorist who 's responsible for the murder of thousands of innocent men , women , and children .
it was nearly 10 years ago that a bright september day was darkened by the worst attack on the american people in our history .
the images of 9/11 are seared into our national memory -- hijacked planes cutting through a cloudless september sky ; the twin towers collapsing to the ground ; black smoke billowing up from the pentagon ; the wreckage of flight 93 in shanksville , pennsylvania , where the actions of heroic citizens saved even more heartbreak and destruction .
and yet we know that the worst images are those that were unseen to the world .
the empty seat at the dinner table .
children who were forced to grow up without their mother or their father .
parents who would never know the feeling of their child 's embrace .
nearly 3,000 citizens taken from us , leaving a gaping hole in our hearts .
on september 11 , 2001 , in our time of grief , the american people came together .
we offered our neighbors a hand , and we offered the wounded our blood .
we reaffirmed our ties to each other , and our love of community and country .
on that day , no matter where we came from , what god we prayed to , or what race or ethnicity we were , we were united as one american family .
we were also united in our resolve to protect our nation and to bring those who committed this vicious attack to justice .
we quickly learned that the 9/11 attacks were carried out by al qaeda -- an organization headed by osama bin laden , which had openly declared war on the united states and was committed to killing innocents in our country and around the globe .
and so we went to war against al qaeda to protect our citizens , our friends , and our allies .
over the last 10 years , thanks to the tireless and heroic work of our military and our counterterrorism professionals , we 've made great strides in that effort .
we 've disrupted terrorist attacks and strengthened our homeland defense .
in afghanistan , we removed the taliban government , which had given bin laden and al qaeda safe haven and support .
and around the globe , we worked with our friends and allies to capture or kill scores of al qaeda terrorists , including several who were a part of the 9/11 plot .
yet osama bin laden avoided capture and escaped across the afghan border into pakistan .
meanwhile , al qaeda continued to operate from along that border and operate through its affiliates across the world .
and so shortly after taking office , i directed leon panetta , the director of the cia , to make the killing or capture of bin laden the top priority of our war against al qaeda , even as we continued our broader efforts to disrupt , dismantle , and defeat his network .
then , last august , after years of painstaking work by our intelligence community , i was briefed on a possible lead to bin laden .
it was far from certain , and it took many months to run this thread to ground .
i met repeatedly with my national security team as we developed more information about the possibility that we had located bin laden hiding within a compound deep inside of pakistan .
and finally , last week , i determined that we had enough intelligence to take action , and authorized an operation to get osama bin laden and bring him to justice .
today , at my direction , the united states launched a targeted operation against that compound in abbottabad , pakistan .
a small team of americans carried out the operation with extraordinary courage and capability .
no americans were harmed .
they took care to avoid civilian casualties .
after a firefight , they killed osama bin laden and took custody of his body .
for over two decades , bin laden has been al qaeda 's leader and symbol , and has continued to plot attacks against our country and our friends and allies .
the death of bin laden marks the most significant achievement to date in our nation 's effort to defeat al qaeda .
yet his death does not mark the end of our effort .
there 's no doubt that al qaeda will continue to pursue attacks against us .
we must -- - and we will -- remain vigilant at home and abroad .
as we do , we must also reaffirm that the united states is not -- - and never will be - -- at war with islam .
i 've made clear , just as president bush did shortly after 9/11 , that our war is not against islam .
bin laden was not a muslim leader ; he was a mass murderer of muslims .
indeed , al qaeda has slaughtered scores of muslims in many countries , including our own .
so his demise should be welcomed by all who believe in peace and human dignity .
over the years , i 've repeatedly made clear that we would take action within pakistan if we knew where bin laden was .
that is what we 've done .
but it 's important to note that our counterterrorism cooperation with pakistan helped lead us to bin laden and the compound where he was hiding .
indeed , bin laden had declared war against pakistan as well , and ordered attacks against the pakistani people .
tonight , i called president zardari , and my team has also spoken with their pakistani counterparts .
they agree that this is a good and historic day for both of our nations .
and going forward , it is essential that pakistan continue to join us in the fight against al qaeda and its affiliates .
the american people did not choose this fight .
it came to our shores , and started with the senseless slaughter of our citizens .
after nearly 10 years of service , struggle , and sacrifice , we know well the costs of war .
these efforts weigh on me every time i , as commander - in - chief , have to sign a letter to a family that has lost a loved one , or look into the eyes of a service member who 's been gravely wounded .
so americans understand the costs of war .
yet as a country , we will never tolerate our security being threatened , nor stand idly by when our people have been killed .
we will be relentless in defense of our citizens and our friends and allies .
we will be true to the values that make us who we are .
and on nights like this one , we can say to those families who have lost loved ones to al qaeda 's terror : justice has been done .
tonight , we give thanks to the countless intelligence and counterterrorism professionals who 've worked tirelessly to achieve this outcome .
the american people do not see their work , nor know their names .
but tonight , they feel the satisfaction of their work and the result of their pursuit of justice .
we give thanks for the men who carried out this operation , for they exemplify the professionalism , patriotism , and unparalleled courage of those who serve our country .
and they are part of a generation that has borne the heaviest share of the burden since that september day .
finally , let me say to the families who lost loved ones on 9/11 that we have never forgotten your loss , nor wavered in our commitment to see that we do whatever it takes to prevent another attack on our shores .
and tonight , let us think back to the sense of unity that prevailed on 9/11 .
i know that it has , at times , frayed .
yet today 's achievement is a testament to the greatness of our country and the determination of the american people .
the cause of securing our country is not complete .
but tonight , we are once again reminded that america can do whatever we set our mind to .
that is the story of our history , whether it 's the pursuit of prosperity for our people , or the struggle for equality for all our citizens ; our commitment to stand up for our values abroad , and our sacrifices to make the world a safer place .
let us remember that we can do these things not just because of wealth or power , but because of who we are : one nation , under god , indivisible , with liberty and justice for all .
thank you .
may god bless you .
and may god bless the united states of america .

good evening .
as we speak , our nation faces a multitude of challenges .
at home , our top priority is to recover and rebuild from a recession that has touched the lives of nearly every american .
abroad , our brave men and women in uniform are taking the fight to al qaeda wherever it exists .
and tonight , i 've returned from a trip to the gulf coast to speak with you about the battle we 're waging against an oil spill that is assaulting our shores and our citizens .
on april 20th , an explosion ripped through bp deepwater horizon drilling rig , about 40 miles off the coast of louisiana .
eleven workers lost their lives .
seventeen others were injured .
and soon , nearly a mile beneath the surface of the ocean , oil began spewing into the water .
because there has never been a leak this size at this depth , stopping it has tested the limits of human technology .
that 's why just after the rig sank , i assembled a team of our nation 's best scientists and engineers to tackle this challenge -- a team led by dr. steven chu , a nobel prize - winning physicist and our nation 's secretary of energy .
scientists at our national labs and experts from academia and other oil companies have also provided ideas and advice .
as a result of these efforts , we 've directed bp to mobilize additional equipment and technology .
and in the coming weeks and days , these efforts should capture up to 90 percent of the oil leaking out of the well .
this is until the company finishes drilling a relief well later in the summer that 's expected to stop the leak completely .
already , this oil spill is the worst environmental disaster america has ever faced .
and unlike an earthquake or a hurricane , it 's not a single event that does its damage in a matter of minutes or days .
the millions of gallons of oil that have spilled into the gulf of mexico are more like an epidemic , one that we will be fighting for months and even years .
but make no mistake : we will fight this spill with everything we 've got for as long as it takes .
we will make bp pay for the damage their company has caused .
and we will do whatever 's necessary to help the gulf coast and its people recover from this tragedy .
tonight i 'd like to lay out for you what our battle plan is going forward : what we 're doing to clean up the oil , what we 're doing to help our neighbors in the gulf , and what we 're doing to make sure that a catastrophe like this never happens again .
first , the cleanup .
from the very beginning of this crisis , the federal government has been in charge of the largest environmental cleanup effort in our nation 's history -- an effort led by admiral thad allen , who has almost 40 years of experience responding to disasters .
we now have nearly 30,000 personnel who are working across four states to contain and clean up the oil .
thousands of ships and other vessels are responding in the gulf .
and i 've authorized the deployment of over 17,000 national guard members along the coast .
these servicemen and women are ready to help stop the oil from coming ashore , they 're ready to help clean the beaches , train response workers , or even help with processing claims -- and i urge the governors in the affected states to activate these troops as soon as possible .
because of our efforts , millions of gallons of oil have already been removed from the water through burning , skimming and other collection methods .
over five and a half million feet of boom has been laid across the water to block and absorb the approaching oil .
we 've approved the construction of new barrier islands in louisiana to try to stop the oil before it reaches the shore , and we 're working with alabama , mississippi and florida to implement creative approaches to their unique coastlines .
as the cleanup continues , we will offer whatever additional resources and assistance our coastal states may need .
now , a mobilization of this speed and magnitude will never be perfect , and new challenges will always arise .
i saw and heard evidence of that during this trip .
so if something is n't working , we want to hear about it .
if there are problems in the operation , we will fix them .
but we have to recognize that despite our best efforts , oil has already caused damage to our coastline and its wildlife .
and sadly , no matter how effective our response is , there will be more oil and more damage before this siege is done .
that 's why the second thing we 're focused on is the recovery and restoration of the gulf coast .
you know , for generations , men and women who call this region home have made their living from the water .
that living is now in jeopardy .
i 've talked to shrimpers and fishermen who do n't know how they 're going to support their families this year .
i 've seen empty docks and restaurants with fewer customers - -- even in areas where the beaches are not yet affected .
i 've talked to owners of shops and hotels who wonder when the tourists might start coming back .
the sadness and the anger they feel is not just about the money they 've lost .
it 's about a wrenching anxiety that their way of life may be lost .
i refuse to let that happen .
tomorrow , i will meet with the chairman of bp and inform him that he is to set aside whatever resources are required to compensate the workers and business owners who have been harmed as a result of his company 's recklessness .
and this fund will not be controlled by bp .
in order to ensure that all legitimate claims are paid out in a fair and timely manner , the account must and will be administered by an independent third party .
beyond compensating the people of the gulf in the short term , it 's also clear we need a long - term plan to restore the unique beauty and bounty of this region .
the oil spill represents just the latest blow to a place that 's already suffered multiple economic disasters and decades of environmental degradation that has led to disappearing wetlands and habitats .
and the region still has n't recovered from hurricanes katrina and rita .
that 's why we must make a commitment to the gulf coast that goes beyond responding to the crisis of the moment .
i make that commitment tonight .
earlier , i asked ray mabus , the secretary of the navy , who is also a former governor of mississippi and a son of the gulf coast , to develop a long - term gulf coast restoration plan as soon as possible .
the plan will be designed by states , local communities , tribes , fishermen , businesses , conservationists and other gulf residents .
and bp will pay for the impact this spill has had on the region .
the third part of our response plan is the steps we 're taking to ensure that a disaster like this does not happen again .
a few months ago , i approved a proposal to consider new , limited offshore drilling under the assurance that it would be absolutely safe -- - that the proper technology would be in place and the necessary precautions would be taken .
that obviously was not the case in the deepwater horizon rig , and i want to know why .
the american people deserve to know why .
the families i met with last week who lost their loved ones in the explosion -- these families deserve to know why .
and so i 've established a national commission to understand the causes of this disaster and offer recommendations on what additional safety and environmental standards we need to put in place .
already , i 've issued a six - month moratorium on deepwater drilling .
i know this creates difficulty for the people who work on these rigs , but for the sake of their safety , and for the sake of the entire region , we need to know the facts before we allow deepwater drilling to continue .
and while i urge the commission to complete its work as quickly as possible , i expect them to do that work thoroughly and impartially .
one place we 've already begun to take action is at the agency in charge of regulating drilling and issuing permits , known as the minerals management service .
over the last decade , this agency has become emblematic of a failed philosophy that views all regulation with hostility -- a philosophy that says corporations should be allowed to play by their own rules and police themselves .
at this agency , industry insiders were put in charge of industry oversight .
oil companies showered regulators with gifts and favors , and were essentially allowed to conduct their own safety inspections and write their own regulations .
when ken salazar became my secretary of the interior , one of his very first acts was to clean up the worst of the corruption at this agency .
but it 's now clear that the problem there ran much deeper , and the pace of reform was just too slow .
and so secretary salazar and i are bringing in new leadership at the agency -- michael bromwich , who was a tough federal prosecutor and inspector general .
and his charge over the next few months is to build an organization that acts as the oil industry 's watchdog -- not its partner .
so one of the lessons we 've learned from this spill is that we need better regulations , better safety standards , and better enforcement when it comes to offshore drilling .
but a larger lesson is that no matter how much we improve our regulation of the industry , drilling for oil these days entails greater risk .
after all , oil is a finite resource .
we consume more than 20 percent of the world 's oil , but have less than 2 percent of the world 's oil reserves .
and that 's part of the reason oil companies are drilling a mile beneath the surface of the ocean -- because we 're running out of places to drill on land and in shallow water .
for decades , we have known the days of cheap and easily accessible oil were numbered .
for decades , we 've talked and talked about the need to end america 's century - long addiction to fossil fuels .
and for decades , we have failed to act with the sense of urgency that this challenge requires .
time and again , the path forward has been blocked -- not only by oil industry lobbyists , but also by a lack of political courage and candor .
the consequences of our inaction are now in plain sight .
countries like china are investing in clean energy jobs and industries that should be right here in america .
each day , we send nearly $ 1 billion of our wealth to foreign countries for their oil .
and today , as we look to the gulf , we see an entire way of life being threatened by a menacing cloud of black crude .
we can not consign our children to this future .
the tragedy unfolding on our coast is the most painful and powerful reminder yet that the time to embrace a clean energy future is now .
now is the moment for this generation to embark on a national mission to unleash america 's innovation and seize control of our own destiny .
this is not some distant vision for america .
the transition away from fossil fuels is going to take some time , but over the last year and a half , we 've already taken unprecedented action to jumpstart the clean energy industry .
as we speak , old factories are reopening to produce wind turbines , people are going back to work installing energy - efficient windows , and small businesses are making solar panels .
consumers are buying more efficient cars and trucks , and families are making their homes more energy - efficient .
scientists and researchers are discovering clean energy technologies that someday will lead to entire new industries .
each of us has a part to play in a new future that will benefit all of us .
as we recover from this recession , the transition to clean energy has the potential to grow our economy and create millions of jobs - -- but only if we accelerate that transition .
only if we seize the moment .
and only if we rally together and act as one nation -- - workers and entrepreneurs ; scientists and citizens ; the public and private sectors .
when i was a candidate for this office , i laid out a set of principles that would move our country towards energy independence .
last year , the house of representatives acted on these principles by passing a strong and comprehensive energy and climate bill -- - a bill that finally makes clean energy the profitable kind of energy for america 's businesses .
now , there are costs associated with this transition .
and there are some who believe that we ca n't afford those costs right now .
i say we ca n't afford not to change how we produce and use energy - -- because the long - term costs to our economy , our national security , and our environment are far greater .
so i 'm happy to look at other ideas and approaches from either party - -- as long they seriously tackle our addiction to fossil fuels .
some have suggested raising efficiency standards in our buildings like we did in our cars and trucks .
some believe we should set standards to ensure that more of our electricity comes from wind and solar power .
others wonder why the energy industry only spends a fraction of what the high - tech industry does on research and development - -- and want to rapidly boost our investments in such research and development .
all of these approaches have merit , and deserve a fair hearing in the months ahead .
but the one approach i will not accept is inaction .
the one answer i will not settle for is the idea that this challenge is somehow too big and too difficult to meet .
you know , the same thing was said about our ability to produce enough planes and tanks in world war ii .
the same thing was said about our ability to harness the science and technology to land a man safely on the surface of the moon .
and yet , time and again , we have refused to settle for the paltry limits of conventional wisdom .
instead , what has defined us as a nation since our founding is the capacity to shape our destiny - -- our determination to fight for the america we want for our children .
even if we 're unsure exactly what that looks like .
even if we do n't yet know precisely how we 're going to get there .
we know we 'll get there .
it 's a faith in the future that sustains us as a people .
it is that same faith that sustains our neighbors in the gulf right now .
each year , at the beginning of shrimping season , the region 's fishermen take part in a tradition that was brought to america long ago by fishing immigrants from europe .
it 's called " the blessing of the fleet , " and today it 's a celebration where clergy from different religions gather to say a prayer for the safety and success of the men and women who will soon head out to sea - -- some for weeks at a time .
the ceremony goes on in good times and in bad .
it took place after katrina , and it took place a few weeks ago -- - at the beginning of the most difficult season these fishermen have ever faced .
and still , they came and they prayed .
for as a priest and former fisherman once said of the tradition , " the blessing is not that god has promised to remove all obstacles and dangers .
the blessing is that he is with us always , " a blessing that 's granted " even in the midst of the storm . "
the oil spill is not the last crisis america will face .
this nation has known hard times before and we will surely know them again .
what sees us through - -- what has always seen us through -- - is our strength , our resilience , and our unyielding faith that something better awaits us if we summon the courage to reach for it .
tonight , we pray for that courage .
we pray for the people of the gulf .
and we pray that a hand may guide us through the storm towards a brighter day .
thank you , god bless you , and may god bless the united states of america .

mr. speaker , mr. vice president , members of congress , distinguished guests , and fellow americans : 
 last month , i went to andrews air force base and welcomed home some of our last troops to serve in iraq .
together , we offered a final , proud salute to the colors under which more than a million of our fellow citizens fought -- and several thousand gave their lives .
we gather tonight knowing that this generation of heroes has made the united states safer and more respected around the world .
for the first time in nine years , there are no americans fighting in iraq .
for the first time in two decades , osama bin laden is not a threat to this country .
most of al qaeda 's top lieutenants have been defeated .
the taliban 's momentum has been broken , and some troops in afghanistan have begun to come home .
these achievements are a testament to the courage , selflessness and teamwork of america 's armed forces .
at a time when too many of our institutions have let us down , they exceed all expectations .
they 're not consumed with personal ambition .
they do n't obsess over their differences .
they focus on the mission at hand .
they work together .
imagine what we could accomplish if we followed their example .
think about the america within our reach : a country that leads the world in educating its people .
an america that attracts a new generation of high - tech manufacturing and high - paying jobs .
a future where we 're in control of our own energy , and our security and prosperity are n't so tied to unstable parts of the world .
an economy built to last , where hard work pays off , and responsibility is rewarded .
we can do this .
i know we can , because we 've done it before .
at the end of world war ii , when another generation of heroes returned home from combat , they built the strongest economy and middle class the world has ever known .
my grandfather , a veteran of patton 's army , got the chance to go to college on the gi bill .
my grandmother , who worked on a bomber assembly line , was part of a workforce that turned out the best products on earth .
the two of them shared the optimism of a nation that had triumphed over a depression and fascism .
they understood they were part of something larger ; that they were contributing to a story of success that every american had a chance to share -- the basic american promise that if you worked hard , you could do well enough to raise a family , own a home , send your kids to college , and put a little away for retirement .
the defining issue of our time is how to keep that promise alive .
no challenge is more urgent .
no debate is more important .
we can either settle for a country where a shrinking number of people do really well while a growing number of americans barely get by , or we can restore an economy where everyone gets a fair shot , and everyone does their fair share , and everyone plays by the same set of rules .
what 's at stake are n't democratic values or republican values , but american values .
and we have to reclaim them .
let 's remember how we got here .
long before the recession , jobs and manufacturing began leaving our shores .
technology made businesses more efficient , but also made some jobs obsolete .
folks at the top saw their incomes rise like never before , but most hardworking americans struggled with costs that were growing , paychecks that were n't , and personal debt that kept piling up .
in 2008 , the house of cards collapsed .
we learned that mortgages had been sold to people who could n't afford or understand them .
banks had made huge bets and bonuses with other people 's money .
regulators had looked the other way , or did n't have the authority to stop the bad behavior .
it was wrong .
it was irresponsible .
and it plunged our economy into a crisis that put millions out of work , saddled us with more debt , and left innocent , hardworking americans holding the bag .
in the six months before i took office , we lost nearly 4 million jobs .
and we lost another 4 million before our policies were in full effect .
those are the facts .
but so are these : in the last 22 months , businesses have created more than 3 million jobs .
last year , they created the most jobs since 2005 .
american manufacturers are hiring again , creating jobs for the first time since the late 1990s .
together , we 've agreed to cut the deficit by more than $ 2 trillion .
and we 've put in place new rules to hold wall street accountable , so a crisis like this never happens again .
the state of our union is getting stronger .
and we 've come too far to turn back now .
as long as i 'm president , i will work with anyone in this chamber to build on this momentum .
but i intend to fight obstruction with action , and i will oppose any effort to return to the very same policies that brought on this economic crisis in the first place .
no , we will not go back to an economy weakened by outsourcing , bad debt , and phony financial profits .
tonight , i want to speak about how we move forward , and lay out a blueprint for an economy that 's built to last - -- an economy built on american manufacturing , american energy , skills for american workers , and a renewal of american values .
now , this blueprint begins with american manufacturing .
on the day i took office , our auto industry was on the verge of collapse .
some even said we should let it die .
with a million jobs at stake , i refused to let that happen .
in exchange for help , we demanded responsibility .
we got workers and automakers to settle their differences .
we got the industry to retool and restructure .
today , general motors is back on top as the world 's number - one automaker .
chrysler has grown faster in the u. s. than any major car company .
ford is investing billions in u. s. plants and factories .
and together , the entire industry added nearly 160,000 jobs .
we bet on american workers .
we bet on american ingenuity .
and tonight , the american auto industry is back .
what 's happening in detroit can happen in other industries .
it can happen in cleveland and pittsburgh and raleigh .
we ca n't bring every job back that 's left our shore .
but right now , it 's getting more expensive to do business in places like china .
meanwhile , america is more productive .
a few weeks ago , the ceo of master lock told me that it now makes business sense for him to bring jobs back home .
today , for the first time in 15 years , master lock 's unionized plant in milwaukee is running at full capacity .
so we have a huge opportunity , at this moment , to bring manufacturing back .
but we have to seize it .
tonight , my message to business leaders is simple : ask yourselves what you can do to bring jobs back to your country , and your country will do everything we can to help you succeed .
we should start with our tax code .
right now , companies get tax breaks for moving jobs and profits overseas .
meanwhile , companies that choose to stay in america get hit with one of the highest tax rates in the world .
it makes no sense , and everyone knows it .
so let 's change it .
first , if you 're a business that wants to outsource jobs , you should n't get a tax deduction for doing it .
that money should be used to cover moving expenses for companies like master lock that decide to bring jobs home .
second , no american company should be able to avoid paying its fair share of taxes by moving jobs and profits overseas .
from now on , every multinational company should have to pay a basic minimum tax .
and every penny should go towards lowering taxes for companies that choose to stay here and hire here in america .
third , if you 're an american manufacturer , you should get a bigger tax cut .
if you 're a high - tech manufacturer , we should double the tax deduction you get for making your products here .
and if you want to relocate in a community that was hit hard when a factory left town , you should get help financing a new plant , equipment , or training for new workers .
so my message is simple .
it is time to stop rewarding businesses that ship jobs overseas , and start rewarding companies that create jobs right here in america .
send me these tax reforms , and i will sign them right away .
we 're also making it easier for american businesses to sell products all over the world .
two years ago , i set a goal of doubling u. s. exports over five years .
with the bipartisan trade agreements we signed into law , we 're on track to meet that goal ahead of schedule .
and soon , there will be millions of new customers for american goods in panama , colombia , and south korea .
soon , there will be new cars on the streets of seoul imported from detroit , and toledo , and chicago .
i will go anywhere in the world to open new markets for american products .
and i will not stand by when our competitors do n't play by the rules .
we 've brought trade cases against china at nearly twice the rate as the last administration -- - and it 's made a difference .
over a thousand americans are working today because we stopped a surge in chinese tires .
but we need to do more .
it 's not right when another country lets our movies , music , and software be pirated .
it 's not fair when foreign manufacturers have a leg up on ours only because they 're heavily subsidized .
tonight , i 'm announcing the creation of a trade enforcement unit that will be charged with investigating unfair trading practices in countries like china .
there will be more inspections to prevent counterfeit or unsafe goods from crossing our borders .
and this congress should make sure that no foreign company has an advantage over american manufacturing when it comes to accessing financing or new markets like russia .
our workers are the most productive on earth , and if the playing field is level , i promise you - -- america will always win .
i also hear from many business leaders who want to hire in the united states but ca n't find workers with the right skills .
growing industries in science and technology have twice as many openings as we have workers who can do the job .
think about that -- - openings at a time when millions of americans are looking for work .
it 's inexcusable .
and we know how to fix it .
jackie bray is a single mom from north carolina who was laid off from her job as a mechanic .
then siemens opened a gas turbine factory in charlotte , and formed a partnership with central piedmont community college .
the company helped the college design courses in laser and robotics training .
it paid jackie 's tuition , then hired her to help operate their plant .
i want every american looking for work to have the same opportunity as jackie did .
join me in a national commitment to train 2 million americans with skills that will lead directly to a job .
my administration has already lined up more companies that want to help .
model partnerships between businesses like siemens and community colleges in places like charlotte , and orlando , and louisville are up and running .
now you need to give more community colleges the resources they need to become community career centers - -- places that teach people skills that businesses are looking for right now , from data management to high - tech manufacturing .
and i want to cut through the maze of confusing training programs , so that from now on , people like jackie have one program , one website , and one place to go for all the information and help that they need .
it is time to turn our unemployment system into a reemployment system that puts people to work .
these reforms will help people get jobs that are open today .
but to prepare for the jobs of tomorrow , our commitment to skills and education has to start earlier .
for less than 1 percent of what our nation spends on education each year , we 've convinced nearly every state in the country to raise their standards for teaching and learning -- the first time that 's happened in a generation .
but challenges remain .
and we know how to solve them .
at a time when other countries are doubling down on education , tight budgets have forced states to lay off thousands of teachers .
we know a good teacher can increase the lifetime income of a classroom by over $ 250,000 .
a great teacher can offer an escape from poverty to the child who dreams beyond his circumstance .
every person in this chamber can point to a teacher who changed the trajectory of their lives .
most teachers work tirelessly , with modest pay , sometimes digging into their own pocket for school supplies -- just to make a difference .
teachers matter .
so instead of bashing them , or defending the status quo , let 's offer schools a deal .
give them the resources to keep good teachers on the job , and reward the best ones .
and in return , grant schools flexibility : to teach with creativity and passion ; to stop teaching to the test ; and to replace teachers who just are n't helping kids learn .
that 's a bargain worth making .
we also know that when students do n't walk away from their education , more of them walk the stage to get their diploma .
when students are not allowed to drop out , they do better .
so tonight , i am proposing that every state -- every state -- requires that all students stay in high school until they graduate or turn 18 .
when kids do graduate , the most daunting challenge can be the cost of college .
at a time when americans owe more in tuition debt than credit card debt , this congress needs to stop the interest rates on student loans from doubling in july .
extend the tuition tax credit we started that saves millions of middle - class families thousands of dollars , and give more young people the chance to earn their way through college by doubling the number of work - study jobs in the next five years .
of course , it 's not enough for us to increase student aid .
we ca n't just keep subsidizing skyrocketing tuition ; we 'll run out of money .
states also need to do their part , by making higher education a higher priority in their budgets .
and colleges and universities have to do their part by working to keep costs down .
recently , i spoke with a group of college presidents who 've done just that .
some schools redesign courses to help students finish more quickly .
some use better technology .
the point is , it 's possible .
so let me put colleges and universities on notice : if you ca n't stop tuition from going up , the funding you get from taxpayers will go down .
higher education ca n't be a luxury- -- it is an economic imperative that every family in america should be able to afford .
let 's also remember that hundreds of thousands of talented , hardworking students in this country face another challenge : the fact that they are n't yet american citizens .
many were brought here as small children , are american through and through , yet they live every day with the threat of deportation .
others came more recently , to study business and science and engineering , but as soon as they get their degree , we send them home to invent new products and create new jobs somewhere else .
that does n't make sense .
i believe as strongly as ever that we should take on illegal immigration .
that 's why my administration has put more boots on the border than ever before .
that 's why there are fewer illegal crossings than when i took office .
the opponents of action are out of excuses .
we should be working on comprehensive immigration reform right now .
but if election - year politics keeps congress from acting on a comprehensive plan , let 's at least agree to stop expelling responsible young people who want to staff our labs , start new businesses , defend this country .
send me a law that gives them the chance to earn their citizenship .
i will sign it right away .
you see , an economy built to last is one where we encourage the talent and ingenuity of every person in this country .
that means women should earn equal pay for equal work .
it means we should support everyone who 's willing to work , and every risk - taker and entrepreneur who aspires to become the next steve jobs .
after all , innovation is what america has always been about .
most new jobs are created in start - ups and small businesses .
so let 's pass an agenda that helps them succeed .
tear down regulations that prevent aspiring entrepreneurs from getting the financing to grow .
expand tax relief to small businesses that are raising wages and creating good jobs .
both parties agree on these ideas .
so put them in a bill , and get it on my desk this year .
innovation also demands basic research .
today , the discoveries taking place in our federally financed labs and universities could lead to new treatments that kill cancer cells but leave healthy ones untouched .
new lightweight vests for cops and soldiers that can stop any bullet .
do n't gut these investments in our budget .
do n't let other countries win the race for the future .
support the same kind of research and innovation that led to the computer chip and the internet ; to new american jobs and new american industries .
and nowhere is the promise of innovation greater than in american - made energy .
over the last three years , we 've opened millions of new acres for oil and gas exploration , and tonight , i 'm directing my administration to open more than 75 percent of our potential offshore oil and gas resources .
right now -- right now -- american oil production is the highest that it 's been in eight years .
that 's right -- eight years .
not only that -- last year , we relied less on foreign oil than in any of the past 16 years .
but with only 2 percent of the world 's oil reserves , oil is n't enough .
this country needs an all - out , all - of - the - above strategy that develops every available source of american energy .
a strategy that 's cleaner , cheaper , and full of new jobs .
we have a supply of natural gas that can last america nearly 100 years .
and my administration will take every possible action to safely develop this energy .
experts believe this will support more than 600,000 jobs by the end of the decade .
and i 'm requiring all companies that drill for gas on public lands to disclose the chemicals they use .
because america will develop this resource without putting the health and safety of our citizens at risk .
the development of natural gas will create jobs and power trucks and factories that are cleaner and cheaper , proving that we do n't have to choose between our environment and our economy .
and by the way , it was public research dollars , over the course of 30 years , that helped develop the technologies to extract all this natural gas out of shale rock -- - reminding us that government support is critical in helping businesses get new energy ideas off the ground .
now , what 's true for natural gas is just as true for clean energy .
in three years , our partnership with the private sector has already positioned america to be the world 's leading manufacturer of high - tech batteries .
because of federal investments , renewable energy use has nearly doubled , and thousands of americans have jobs because of it .
when bryan ritterby was laid off from his job making furniture , he said he worried that at 55 , no one would give him a second chance .
but he found work at energetx , a wind turbine manufacturer in michigan .
before the recession , the factory only made luxury yachts .
today , it 's hiring workers like bryan , who said , " i 'm proud to be working in the industry of the future . "
our experience with shale gas , our experience with natural gas , shows us that the payoffs on these public investments do n't always come right away .
some technologies do n't pan out ; some companies fail .
but i will not walk away from the promise of clean energy .
i will not walk away from workers like bryan .
i will not cede the wind or solar or battery industry to china or germany because we refuse to make the same commitment here .
we 've subsidized oil companies for a century .
that 's long enough .
it 's time to end the taxpayer giveaways to an industry that rarely has been more profitable , and double - down on a clean energy industry that never has been more promising .
pass clean energy tax credits .
create these jobs .
we can also spur energy innovation with new incentives .
the differences in this chamber may be too deep right now to pass a comprehensive plan to fight climate change .
but there 's no reason why congress should n't at least set a clean energy standard that creates a market for innovation .
so far , you have n't acted .
well , tonight , i will .
i 'm directing my administration to allow the development of clean energy on enough public land to power 3 million homes .
and i 'm proud to announce that the department of defense , working with us , the world 's largest consumer of energy , will make one of the largest commitments to clean energy in history - -- with the navy purchasing enough capacity to power a quarter of a million homes a year .
of course , the easiest way to save money is to waste less energy .
so here 's a proposal : help manufacturers eliminate energy waste in their factories and give businesses incentives to upgrade their buildings .
their energy bills will be $ 100 billion lower over the next decade , and america will have less pollution , more manufacturing , more jobs for construction workers who need them .
send me a bill that creates these jobs .
building this new energy future should be just one part of a broader agenda to repair america 's infrastructure .
so much of america needs to be rebuilt .
we 've got crumbling roads and bridges ; a power grid that wastes too much energy ; an incomplete high - speed broadband network that prevents a small business owner in rural america from selling her products all over the world .
during the great depression , america built the hoover dam and the golden gate bridge .
after world war ii , we connected our states with a system of highways .
democratic and republican administrations invested in great projects that benefited everybody , from the workers who built them to the businesses that still use them today .
in the next few weeks , i will sign an executive order clearing away the red tape that slows down too many construction projects .
but you need to fund these projects .
take the money we 're no longer spending at war , use half of it to pay down our debt , and use the rest to do some nation - building right here at home .
there 's never been a better time to build , especially since the construction industry was one of the hardest hit when the housing bubble burst .
of course , construction workers were n't the only ones who were hurt .
so were millions of innocent americans who 've seen their home values decline .
and while government ca n't fix the problem on its own , responsible homeowners should n't have to sit and wait for the housing market to hit bottom to get some relief .
and that 's why i 'm sending this congress a plan that gives every responsible homeowner the chance to save about $ 3,000 a year on their mortgage , by refinancing at historically low rates .
no more red tape .
no more runaround from the banks .
a small fee on the largest financial institutions will ensure that it wo n't add to the deficit and will give those banks that were rescued by taxpayers a chance to repay a deficit of trust .
let 's never forget : millions of americans who work hard and play by the rules every day deserve a government and a financial system that do the same .
it 's time to apply the same rules from top to bottom .
no bailouts , no handouts , and no copouts .
an america built to last insists on responsibility from everybody .
we 've all paid the price for lenders who sold mortgages to people who could n't afford them , and buyers who knew they could n't afford them .
that 's why we need smart regulations to prevent irresponsible behavior .
rules to prevent financial fraud or toxic dumping or faulty medical devices -- these do n't destroy the free market .
they make the free market work better .
there 's no question that some regulations are outdated , unnecessary , or too costly .
in fact , i 've approved fewer regulations in the first three years of my presidency than my republican predecessor did in his .
i 've ordered every federal agency to eliminate rules that do n't make sense .
we 've already announced over 500 reforms , and just a fraction of them will save business and citizens more than $ 10 billion over the next five years .
we got rid of one rule from 40 years ago that could have forced some dairy farmers to spend $ 10,000 a year proving that they could contain a spill -- because milk was somehow classified as an oil .
with a rule like that , i guess it was worth crying overspilled milk .
now , i 'm confident a farmer can contain a milk spill without a federal agency looking over his shoulder .
absolutely .
but i will not back down from making sure an oil company can contain the kind of oil spill we saw in the gulf two years ago .
i will not back down from protecting our kids from mercury poisoning , or making sure that our food is safe and our water is clean .
i will not go back to the days when health insurance companies had unchecked power to cancel your policy , deny your coverage , or charge women differently than men .
and i will not go back to the days when wall street was allowed to play by its own set of rules .
the new rules we passed restore what should be any financial system 's core purpose : getting funding to entrepreneurs with the best ideas , and getting loans to responsible families who want to buy a home , or start a business , or send their kids to college .
so if you are a big bank or financial institution , you 're no longer allowed to make risky bets with your customers ' deposits .
you 're required to write out a " living will " that details exactly how you 'll pay the bills if you fail -- - because the rest of us are not bailing you out ever again .
and if you 're a mortgage lender or a payday lender or a credit card company , the days of signing people up for products they ca n't afford with confusing forms and deceptive practices -- those days are over .
today , american consumers finally have a watchdog in richard cordray with one job : to look out for them .
we 'll also establish a financial crimes unit of highly trained investigators to crack down on large - scale fraud and protect people 's investments .
some financial firms violate major anti - fraud laws because there 's no real penalty for being a repeat offender .
that 's bad for consumers , and it 's bad for the vast majority of bankers and financial service professionals who do the right thing .
so pass legislation that makes the penalties for fraud count .
and tonight , i 'm asking my attorney general to create a special unit of federal prosecutors and leading state attorney general to expand our investigations into the abusive lending and packaging of risky mortgages that led to the housing crisis .
this new unit will hold accountable those who broke the law , speed assistance to homeowners , and help turn the page on an era of recklessness that hurt so many americans .
now , a return to the american values of fair play and shared responsibility will help protect our people and our economy .
but it should also guide us as we look to pay down our debt and invest in our future .
right now , our most immediate priority is stopping a tax hike on 160 million working americans while the recovery is still fragile .
people can not afford losing $ 40 out of each paycheck this year .
there are plenty of ways to get this done .
so let 's agree right here , right now : no side issues .
no drama .
pass the payroll tax cut without delay .
let 's get it done .
when it comes to the deficit , we 've already agreed to more than $ 2 trillion in cuts and savings .
but we need to do more , and that means making choices .
right now , we 're poised to spend nearly $ 1 trillion more on what was supposed to be a temporary tax break for the wealthiest 2 percent of americans .
right now , because of loopholes and shelters in the tax code , a quarter of all millionaires pay lower tax rates than millions of middle - class households .
right now , warren buffett pays a lower tax rate than his secretary .
do we want to keep these tax cuts for the wealthiest americans ?
or do we want to keep our investments in everything else -- - like education and medical research ; a strong military and care for our veterans ?
because if we 're serious about paying down our debt , we ca n't do both .
the american people know what the right choice is .
so do i. as i told the speaker this summer , i 'm prepared to make more reforms that rein in the long - term costs of medicare and medicaid , and strengthen social security , so long as those programs remain a guarantee of security for seniors .
but in return , we need to change our tax code so that people like me , and an awful lot of members of congress , pay our fair share of taxes .
tax reform should follow the buffett rule .
if you make more than $ 1 million a year , you should not pay less than 30 percent in taxes .
and my republican friend tom coburn is right : washington should stop subsidizing millionaires .
in fact , if you 're earning a million dollars a year , you should n't get special tax subsidies or deductions .
on the other hand , if you make under $ 250,000 a year , like 98 percent of american families , your taxes should n't go up .
you 're the ones struggling with rising costs and stagnant wages .
you 're the ones who need relief .
now , you can call this class warfare all you want .
but asking a billionaire to pay at least as much as his secretary in taxes ?
most americans would call that common sense .
we do n't begrudge financial success in this country .
we admire it .
when americans talk about folks like me paying my fair share of taxes , it 's not because they envy the rich .
it 's because they understand that when i get a tax break i do n't need and the country ca n't afford , it either adds to the deficit , or somebody else has to make up the difference -- like a senior on a fixed income , or a student trying to get through school , or a family trying to make ends meet .
that 's not right .
americans know that 's not right .
they know that this generation 's success is only possible because past generations felt a responsibility to each other , and to the future of their country , and they know our way of life will only endure if we feel that same sense of shared responsibility .
that 's how we 'll reduce our deficit .
that 's an america built to last .
now , i recognize that people watching tonight have differing views about taxes and debt , energy and health care .
but no matter what party they belong to , i bet most americans are thinking the same thing right about now : nothing will get done in washington this year , or next year , or maybe even the year after that , because washington is broken .
can you blame them for feeling a little cynical ?
the greatest blow to our confidence in our economy last year did n't come from events beyond our control .
it came from a debate in washington over whether the united states would pay its bills or not .
who benefited from that fiasco ?
i 've talked tonight about the deficit of trust between main street and wall street .
but the divide between this city and the rest of the country is at least as bad -- and it seems to get worse every year .
some of this has to do with the corrosive influence of money in politics .
so together , let 's take some steps to fix that .
send me a bill that bans insider trading by members of congress ; i will sign it tomorrow .
let 's limit any elected official from owning stocks in industries they impact .
let 's make sure people who bundle campaign contributions for congress ca n't lobby congress , and vice versa -- an idea that has bipartisan support , at least outside of washington .
some of what 's broken has to do with the way congress does its business these days .
a simple majority is no longer enough to get anything - -- even routine business -- - passed through the senate .
neither party has been blameless in these tactics .
now both parties should put an end to it .
for starters , i ask the senate to pass a simple rule that all judicial and public service nominations receive a simple up or down vote within 90 days .
the executive branch also needs to change .
too often , it 's inefficient , outdated and remote .
that 's why i 've asked this congress to grant me the authority to consolidate the federal bureaucracy , so that our government is leaner , quicker , and more responsive to the needs of the american people .
finally , none of this can happen unless we also lower the temperature in this town .
we need to end the notion that the two parties must be locked in a perpetual campaign of mutual destruction ; that politics is about clinging to rigid ideologies instead of building consensus around common - sense ideas .
i 'm a democrat .
but i believe what republican abraham lincoln believed : that government should do for people only what they can not do better by themselves , and no more .
that 's why my education reform offers more competition , and more control for schools and states .
that 's why we 're getting rid of regulations that do n't work .
that 's why our health care law relies on a reformed private market , not a government program .
on the other hand , even my republican friends who complain the most about government spending have supported federally financed roads , and clean energy projects , and federal offices for the folks back home .
the point is , we should all want a smarter , more effective government .
and while we may not be able to bridge our biggest philosophical differences this year , we can make real progress .
with or without this congress , i will keep taking actions that help the economy grow .
but i can do a whole lot more with your help .
because when we act together , there 's nothing the united states of america ca n't achieve .
that 's the lesson we 've learned from our actions abroad over the last few years .
ending the iraq war has allowed us to strike decisive blows against our enemies .
from pakistan to yemen , the al qaeda operatives who remain are scrambling , knowing that they ca n't escape the reach of the united states of america .
from this position of strength , we 've begun to wind down the war in afghanistan .
ten thousand of our troops have come home .
twenty - three thousand more will leave by the end of this summer .
this transition to afghan lead will continue , and we will build an enduring partnership with afghanistan , so that it is never again a source of attacks against america .
as the tide of war recedes , a wave of change has washed across the middle east and north africa , from tunis to cairo ; from sana'a to tripoli .
a year ago , qaddafi was one of the world 's longest - serving dictators - -- a murderer with american blood on his hands .
today , he is gone .
and in syria , i have no doubt that the assad regime will soon discover that the forces of change can not be reversed , and that human dignity can not be denied .
how this incredible transformation will end remains uncertain .
but we have a huge stake in the outcome .
and while it 's ultimately up to the people of the region to decide their fate , we will advocate for those values that have served our own country so well .
we will stand against violence and intimidation .
we will stand for the rights and dignity of all human beings -- - men and women ; christians , muslims and jews .
we will support policies that lead to strong and stable democracies and open markets , because tyranny is no match for liberty .
and we will safeguard america 's own security against those who threaten our citizens , our friends , and our interests .
look at iran .
through the power of our diplomacy , a world that was once divided about how to deal with iran 's nuclear program now stands as one .
the regime is more isolated than ever before ; its leaders are faced with crippling sanctions , and as long as they shirk their responsibilities , this pressure will not relent .
let there be no doubt : america is determined to prevent iran from getting a nuclear weapon , and i will take no options off the table to achieve that goal .
but a peaceful resolution of this issue is still possible , and far better , and if iran changes course and meets its obligations , it can rejoin the community of nations .
the renewal of american leadership can be felt across the globe .
our oldest alliances in europe and asia are stronger than ever .
our ties to the americas are deeper .
our ironclad commitment -- and i mean ironclad -- to israel 's security has meant the closest military cooperation between our two countries in history .
we 've made it clear that america is a pacific power , and a new beginning in burma has lit a new hope .
from the coalitions we 've built to secure nuclear materials , to the missions we 've led against hunger and disease ; from the blows we 've dealt to our enemies , to the enduring power of our moral example , america is back .
anyone who tells you otherwise , anyone who tells you that america is in decline or that our influence has waned , does n't know what they 're talking about .
that 's not the message we get from leaders around the world who are eager to work with us .
that 's not how people feel from tokyo to berlin , from cape town to rio , where opinions of america are higher than they 've been in years .
yes , the world is changing .
no , we ca n't control every event .
but america remains the one indispensable nation in world affairs -- - and as long as i 'm president , i intend to keep it that way .
that 's why , working with our military leaders , i 've proposed a new defense strategy that ensures we maintain the finest military in the world , while saving nearly half a trillion dollars in our budget .
to stay one step ahead of our adversaries , i 've already sent this congress legislation that will secure our country from the growing dangers of cyber - threats .
above all , our freedom endures because of the men and women in uniform who defend it .
as they come home , we must serve them as well as they 've served us .
that includes giving them the care and the benefits they have earned -- - which is why we 've increased annual va spending every year i 've been president .
and it means enlisting our veterans in the work of rebuilding our nation .
with the bipartisan support of this congress , we 're providing new tax credits to companies that hire vets .
michelle and jill biden have worked with american businesses to secure a pledge of135,000 jobs for veterans and their families .
and tonight , i 'm proposing a veterans jobs corps that will help our communities hire veterans as cops and firefighters , so that america is as strong as those who defend her .
which brings me back to where i began .
those of us who 've been sent here to serve can learn a thing or two from the service of our troops .
when you put on that uniform , it does n't matter if you 're black or white ; asian , latino , native american ; conservative , liberal ; rich , poor ; gay , straight .
when you 're marching into battle , you look out for the person next to you , or the mission fails .
when you 're in the thick of the fight , you rise or fall as one unit , serving one nation , leaving no one behind .
one of my proudest possessions is the flag that the seal team took with them on the mission to get bin laden .
on it are each of their names .
some may be democrats .
some may be republicans .
but that does n't matter .
just like it did n't matter that day in the situation room , when i sat next to bob gates -- a man who was george bush 's defense secretary -- and hillary clinton -- a woman who ran against me for president .
all that mattered that day was the mission .
no one thought about politics .
no one thought about themselves .
one of the young men involved in the raid later told me that he did n't deserve credit for the mission .
it only succeeded , he said , because every single member of that unit did their job -- the pilot who landed the helicopter that spun out of control ; the translator who kept others from entering the compound ; the troops who separated the women and children from the fight ; the seals who charged up the stairs .
more than that , the mission only succeeded because every member of that unit trusted each other -- because you ca n't charge up those stairs , into darkness and danger , unless you know that there 's somebody behind you , watching your back .
so it is with america .
each time i look at that flag , i 'm reminded that our destiny is stitched together like those 50 stars and those 13 stripes .
no one built this country on their own .
this nation is great because we built it together .
this nation is great because we worked as a team .
this nation is great because we get each other 's backs .
and if we hold fast to that truth , in this moment of trial , there is no challenge too great ; no mission too hard .
as long as we are joined in common purpose , as long as we maintain our common resolve , our journey moves forward , and our future is hopeful , and the state of our union will always be strong .
thank you , god bless you , and god bless the united states of america .

good afternoon , everybody .
as a candidate for president , i pledged to bring the war in iraq to a responsible end -- for the sake of our national security and to strengthen american leadership around the world .
after taking office , i announced a new strategy that would end our combat mission in iraq and remove all of our troops by the end of 2011 .
as commander - in - chief , ensuring the success of this strategy has been one of my highest national security priorities .
last year , i announced the end to our combat mission in iraq .
and to date , we 've removed more than 100,000 troops .
iraqis have taken full responsibility for their country 's security .
a few hours ago i spoke with iraqi prime minister maliki .
i reaffirmed that the united states keeps its commitments .
he spoke of the determination of the iraqi people to forge their own future .
we are in full agreement about how to move forward .
so today , i can report that , as promised , the rest of our troops in iraq will come home by the end of the year .
after nearly nine years , america 's war in iraq will be over .
over the next two months , our troops in iraq -- tens of thousands of them -- will pack up their gear and board convoys for the journey home .
the last american soldier will cross the border out of iraq with their heads held high , proud of their success , and knowing that the american people stand united in our support for our troops .
that is how america 's military efforts in iraq will end .
but even as we mark this important milestone , we 're also moving into a new phase in the relationship between the united states and iraq .
as of january 1st , and in keeping with our strategic framework agreement with iraq , it will be a normal relationship between sovereign nations , an equal partnership based on mutual interests and mutual respect .
in today 's conversation , prime minister maliki and i agreed that a meeting of the higher coordinating committee of the strategic framework agreement will convene in the coming weeks .
and i invited the prime minister to come to the white house in december , as we plan for all the important work that we have to do together .
this will be a strong and enduring partnership .
with our diplomats and civilian advisors in the lead , we 'll help iraqis strengthen institutions that are just , representative and accountable .
we 'll build new ties of trade and of commerce , culture and education , that unleash the potential of the iraqi people .
we 'll partner with an iraq that contributes to regional security and peace , just as we insist that other nations respect iraq 's sovereignty .
as i told prime minister maliki , we will continue discussions on how we might help iraq train and equip its forces -- again , just as we offer training and assistance to countries around the world .
after all , there will be some difficult days ahead for iraq , and the united states will continue to have an interest in an iraq that is stable , secure and self - reliant .
just as iraqis have persevered through war , i 'm confident that they can build a future worthy of their history as a cradle of civilization .
here at home , the coming months will be another season of homecomings .
across america , our servicemen and women will be reunited with their families .
today , i can say that our troops in iraq will definitely be home for the holidays .
this december will be a time to reflect on all that we 've been though in this war .
i 'll join the american people in paying tribute to the more than 1 million americans who have served in iraq .
we 'll honor our many wounded warriors and the nearly 4,500 american patriots -- and their iraqi and coalition partners -- who gave their lives to this effort .
and finally , i would note that the end of war in iraq reflects a larger transition .
the tide of war is receding .
the drawdown in iraq allowed us to refocus our fight against al qaeda and achieve major victories against its leadership -- including osama bin laden .
now , even as we remove our last troops from iraq , we 're beginning to bring our troops home from afghanistan , where we 've begun a transition to afghan security and leadership .
when i took office , roughly 180,000 troops were deployed in both these wars .
and by the end of this year that number will be cut in half , and make no mistake : it will continue to go down .
meanwhile , yesterday marked the definitive end of the qaddafi regime in libya .
and there , too , our military played a critical role in shaping a situation on the ground in which the libyan people can build their own future .
today , nato is working to bring this successful mission to a close .
so to sum up , the united states is moving forward from a position of strength .
the long war in iraq will come to an end by the end of this year .
the transition in afghanistan is moving forward , and our troops are finally coming home .
as they do , fewer deployments and more time training will help keep our military the very best in the world .
and as we welcome home our newest veterans , we 'll never stop working to give them and their families the care , the benefits and the opportunities that they have earned .
this includes enlisting our veterans in the greatest challenge that we now face as a nation -- creating opportunity and jobs in this country .
because after a decade of war , the nation that we need to build -- and the nation that we will build -- is our own ; an america that sees its economic strength restored just as we 've restored our leadership around the globe .
thank you very much .

my fellow americans , tonight , i 'd like to talk with you about immigration .
for more than 200 years , our tradition of welcoming immigrants from around the world has given us a tremendous advantage over other nations .
it 's kept us youthful , dynamic , and entrepreneurial .
it has shaped our character as a people with limitless possibilities -- - people not trapped by our past , but able to remake ourselves as we choose .
but today , our immigration system is broken -- and everybody knows it .
families who enter our country the right way and play by the rules watch others flout the rules .
business owners who offer their workers good wages and benefits see the competition exploit undocumented immigrants by paying them far less .
all of us take offense to anyone who reaps the rewards of living in america without taking on the responsibilities of living in america .
and undocumented immigrants who desperately want to embrace those responsibilities see little option but to remain in the shadows , or risk their families being torn apart .
it 's been this way for decades .
and for decades , we have n't done much about it .
when i took office , i committed to fixing this broken immigration system .
and i began by doing what i could to secure our borders .
today , we have more agents and technology deployed to secure our southern border than at any time in our history .
and over the past six years , illegal border crossings have been cut by more than half .
although this summer , there was a brief spike in unaccompanied children being apprehended at our border , the number of such children is now actually lower than it 's been in nearly two years .
overall , the number of people trying to cross our border illegally is at its lowest level since the 1970s .
those are the facts .
meanwhile , i worked with congress on a comprehensive fix , and last year , 68 democrats , republicans , and independents came together to pass a bipartisan bill in the senate .
it was n't perfect .
it was a compromise .
but it reflected common sense .
it would have doubled the number of border patrol agents while giving undocumented immigrants a pathway to citizenship if they paid a fine , started paying their taxes , and went to the back of the line .
and independent experts said that it would help grow our economy and shrink our deficits .
had the house of representatives allowed that kind of bill a simple yes - or - no vote , it would have passed with support from both parties , and today it would be the law .
but for a year and a half now , republican leaders in the house have refused to allow that simple vote .
now , i continue to believe that the best way to solve this problem is by working together to pass that kind of common sense law .
but until that happens , there are actions i have the legal authority to take as president -- - the same kinds of actions taken by democratic and republican presidents before me - -- that will help make our immigration system more fair and more just .
tonight , i am announcing those actions .
first , we 'll build on our progress at the border with additional resources for our law enforcement personnel so that they can stem the flow of illegal crossings , and speed the return of those who do cross over .
second , i 'll make it easier and faster for high - skilled immigrants , graduates , and entrepreneurs to stay and contribute to our economy , as so many business leaders have proposed .
third , we 'll take steps to deal responsibly with the millions of undocumented immigrants who already live in our country .
i want to say more about this third issue , because it generates the most passion and controversy .
even as we are a nation of immigrants , we 're also a nation of laws .
undocumented workers broke our immigration laws , and i believe that they must be held accountable - -- especially those who may be dangerous .
that 's why , over the past six years , deportations of criminals are up 80 percent .
and that 's why we 're going to keep focusing enforcement resources on actual threats to our security .
felons , not families .
criminals , not children .
gang members , not a mom who 's working hard to provide for her kids .
we 'll prioritize , just like law enforcement does every day .
but even as we focus on deporting criminals , the fact is , millions of immigrants in every state , of every race and nationality still live here illegally .
and let 's be honest - -- tracking down , rounding up , and deporting millions of people is n't realistic .
anyone who suggests otherwise is n't being straight with you .
it 's also not who we are as americans .
after all , most of these immigrants have been here a long time .
they work hard , often in tough , low - paying jobs .
they support their families .
they worship at our churches .
many of their kids are american - born or spent most of their lives here , and their hopes , dreams , and patriotism are just like ours .
as my predecessor , president bush , once put it : " they are a part of american life . "
now here 's the thing : we expect people who live in this country to play by the rules .
we expect that those who cut the line will not be unfairly rewarded .
so we 're going to offer the following deal : if you 've been in america for more than five years ; if you have children who are american citizens or legal residents ; if you register , pass a criminal background check , and you 're willing to pay your fair share of taxes -- you 'll be able to apply to stay in this country temporarily without fear of deportation .
you can come out of the shadows and get right with the law .
that 's what this deal is .
now , let 's be clear about what it is n't .
this deal does not apply to anyone who has come to this country recently .
it does not apply to anyone who might come to america illegally in the future .
it does not grant citizenship , or the right to stay here permanently , or offer the same benefits that citizens receive - -- only congress can do that .
all we 're saying is we 're not going to deport you .
i know some of the critics of this action call it amnesty .
well , it 's not .
amnesty is the immigration system we have today - -- millions of people who live here without paying their taxes or playing by the rules while politicians use the issue to scare people and whip up votes at election time .
that 's the real amnesty -- - leaving this broken system the way it is .
mass amnesty would be unfair .
mass deportation would be both impossible and contrary to our character .
what i 'm describing is accountability -- - a common - sense , middle - ground approach : if you meet the criteria , you can come out of the shadows and get right with the law .
if you 're a criminal , you 'll be deported .
if you plan to enter the u. s. illegally , your chances of getting caught and sent back just went up .
the actions i 'm taking are not only lawful , they 're the kinds of actions taken by every single republican president and every single democratic president for the past half century .
and to those members of congress who question my authority to make our immigration system work better , or question the wisdom of me acting where congress has failed , i have one answer : pass a bill .
i want to work with both parties to pass a more permanent legislative solution .
and the day i sign that bill into law , the actions i take will no longer be necessary .
meanwhile , do n't let a disagreement over a single issue be a dealbreaker on every issue .
that 's not how our democracy works , and congress certainly should n't shut down our government again just because we disagree on this .
americans are tired of gridlock .
what our country needs from us right now is a common purpose -- - a higher purpose .
most americans support the types of reforms i 've talked about tonight .
but i understand the disagreements held by many of you at home .
millions of us , myself included , go back generations in this country , with ancestors who put in the painstaking work to become citizens .
so we do n't like the notion that anyone might get a free pass to american citizenship .
i know some worry immigration will change the very fabric of who we are , or take our jobs , or stick it to middle - class families at a time when they already feel like they 've gotten the raw deal for over a decade .
i hear these concerns .
but that 's not what these steps would do .
our history and the facts show that immigrants are a net plus for our economy and our society .
and i believe it 's important that all of us have this debate without impugning each other 's character .
because for all the back and forth of washington , we have to remember that this debate is about something bigger .
it 's about who we are as a country , and who we want to be for future generations .
are we a nation that tolerates the hypocrisy of a system where workers who pick our fruit and make our beds never have a chance to get right with the law ?
or are we a nation that gives them a chance to make amends , take responsibility , and give their kids a better future ?
are we a nation that accepts the cruelty of ripping children from their parents ' arms ?
or are we a nation that values families , and works together to keep them together ?
are we a nation that educates the world 's best and brightest in our universities , only to send them home to create businesses in countries that compete against us ?
or are we a nation that encourages them to stay and create jobs here , create businesses here , create industries right here in america ?
that 's what this debate is all about .
we need more than politics as usual when it comes to immigration .
we need reasoned , thoughtful , compassionate debate that focuses on our hopes , not our fears .
i know the politics of this issue are tough .
but let me tell you why i have come to feel so strongly about it .
over the past few years , i have seen the determination of immigrant fathers who worked two or three jobs without taking a dime from the government , and at risk any moment of losing it all , just to build a better life for their kids .
i 've seen the heartbreak and anxiety of children whose mothers might be taken away from them just because they did n't have the right papers .
i 've seen the courage of students who , except for the circumstances of their birth , are as american as malia or sasha ; students who bravely come out as undocumented in hopes they could make a difference in the country they love .
these people -- - our neighbors , our classmates , our friends -- - they did not come here in search of a free ride or an easy life .
they came to work , and study , and serve in our military , and above all , contribute to america 's success .
tomorrow , i 'll travel to las vegas and meet with some of these students , including a young woman named astrid silva .
astrid was brought to america when she was four years old .
her only possessions were a cross , her doll , and the frilly dress she had on .
when she started school , she did n't speak any english .
she caught up to other kids by reading newspapers and watching pbs , and she became a good student .
her father worked in landscaping .
her mom cleaned other people 's homes .
they would n't let astrid apply to a technology magnet school , not because they did n't love her , but because they were afraid the paperwork would out her as an undocumented immigrant -- - so she applied behind their back and got in .
still , she mostly lived in the shadows -- - until her grandmother , who visited every year from mexico , passed away , and she could n't travel to the funeral without risk of being found out and deported .
it was around that time she decided to begin advocating for herself and others like her , and today , astrid silva is a college student working on her third degree .
are we a nation that kicks out a striving , hopeful immigrant like astrid , or are we a nation that finds a way to welcome her in ?
scripture tells us that we shall not oppress a stranger , for we know the heart of a stranger -- - we were strangers once , too .
my fellow americans , we are and always will be a nation of immigrants .
we were strangers once , too .
and whether our forebears were strangers who crossed the atlantic , or the pacific , or the rio grande , we are here only because this country welcomed them in , and taught them that to be an american is about something more than what we look like , or what our last names are , or how we worship .
what makes us americans is our shared commitment to an ideal - -- that all of us are created equal , and all of us have the chance to make of our lives what we will .
that 's the country our parents and grandparents and generations before them built for us .
that 's the tradition we must uphold .
that 's the legacy we must leave for those who are yet to come .
thank you .
god bless you .
and god bless this country we love .

madam speaker , vice president biden , members of congress , and the american people : 
 when i spoke here last winter , this nation was facing the worst economic crisis since the great depression .
we were losing an average of 700,000 jobs per month , credit was frozen , and our financial system was on the verge of collapse .
now , as any american who is still looking for work or a way to pay their bills will tell you , we are by no means out of the woods .
a full and vibrant recovery is still many months away .
and i will not let up until those americans who seek jobs can find them , until those businesses that seek capital and credit can thrive , until all responsible homeowners can stay in their homes .
that is our ultimate goal .
but thanks to the bold and decisive action we 've taken since january , i can stand here with confidence and say that we have pulled this economy back from the brink .
i want to thank the members of this body for your efforts and your support in these last several months , and especially those who 've taken the difficult votes that have put us on a path to recovery .
i also want to thank the american people for their patience and resolve during this trying time for our nation .
but we did not come here just to clean up crises .
we came here to build a future .
so tonight , i return to speak to all of you about an issue that is central to that future , and that is the issue of health care .
i am not the first president to take up this cause , but i am determined to be the last .
it has now been nearly a century since theodore roosevelt first called for health care reform , and ever since , nearly every president and congress , whether democrat or republican , has attempted to meet this challenge in some way .
a bill for comprehensive health reform was first introduced by john dingell , sr . ,
in 1943 .
sixty - five years later , his son continues to introduce that same bill at the beginning of each session .
our collective failure to meet this challenge , year after year , decade after decade , has led us to the breaking point .
everyone understands the extraordinary hardships that are placed on the uninsured who live every day just one accident or illness away from bankruptcy .
these are not primarily people on welfare ; these are middle class americans .
some ca n't get insurance on the job .
others are self - employed and ca n't afford it since buying insurance on your own costs you three times as much as the coverage you get from your employer .
many other americans who are willing and able to pay are still denied insurance due to previous illnesses or conditions that insurance companies decide are too risky or too expensive to cover .
we are the only democracy -- the only advanced democracy on earth -- the only wealthy nation that allows such hardship for millions of its people .
there are now more than 30 million american citizens who can not get coverage .
in just a 2-year period , one in every three americans goes without health care coverage at some point .
and every day , 14,000 americans lose their coverage .
in other words , it can happen to anyone .
but the problem that plagues the health care system is not just a problem for the uninsured .
those who do have insurance have never had less security and stability than they do today .
more and more americans worry that if you move , lose your job , or change your job , you 'll lose your health insurance too .
more and more americans pay their premiums only to discover that their insurance company has dropped their coverage when they get sick or wo n't pay the full cost of care .
it happens every day .
one man from illinois lost his coverage in the middle of chemotherapy because his insurer found that he had n't reported gallstones that he did n't even know about .
they delayed his treatment , and he died because of it .
another woman from texas was about to get a double mastectomy when her insurance company canceled her policy because she forgot to declare a case of acne .
by the time she had her insurance reinstated , her breast cancer had more than doubled in size .
that is heart - breaking , it is wrong , and no one should be treated that way in the united states of america .
then there 's the problem of rising cost .
we spend one and a half times more per person on health care than any other country , but we are n't any healthier for it .
this is one of the reasons that insurance premiums have gone up three times faster than wages .
it 's why so many employers , especially small businesses , are forcing their employers -- employees to pay more for insurance or are dropping their coverage entirely .
it 's why so many aspiring entrepreneurs can not afford to open a business in the first place and why american businesses that compete internationally , like our automakers , are at a huge disadvantage .
and it 's why those of us with health insurance are also paying a hidden and growing tax for those without it , about $ 1,000 per year that pays for somebody else 's emergency room and charitable care .
finally , our health care system is placing an unsustainable burden on taxpayers .
when health care costs grow at the rate they have , it puts greater pressure on programs like medicare and medicaid .
if we do nothing to slow these skyrocketing costs , we will eventually be spending more on medicare and medicaid than every other government program combined .
put simply , our health care problem is our deficit problem .
nothing else even comes close .
nothing else .
now , these are the facts .
nobody disputes them .
we know we must reform this system .
the question is how .
now , there are those on the left who believe that the only way to fix the system is through a single - payer system like canada 's , where we would severely restrict the private insurance market and have the government provide coverage for everybody .
on the right , there are those who argue that we should end employer - based systems and leave individuals to buy health insurance on their own .
i 've said -- i have to say that there are arguments to be made for both these approaches .
but either one would represent a radical shift that would disrupt the health care most people currently have .
since health care represents one - sixth of our economy , i believe it makes more sense to build on what works and fix what does n't , rather than try to build an entirely new system from scratch .
and that is precisely what those of you in congress have tried to do over the several -- past several months .
during that time , we 've seen washington at its best and at its worst .
we 've seen many in this chamber work tirelessly for the better part of this year to offer thoughtful ideas about how to achieve reform .
of the five committees asked to develop bills , four have completed their work , and the senate finance committee announced today that it will move forward next week .
that has never happened before .
our overall efforts have been supported by an unprecedented coalition of doctors and nurses , hospitals , seniors ' groups , and even drug companies , many of whom opposed reform in the past .
and there is agreement in this chamber on about 80 percent of what needs to be done , putting us closer to the goal of reform than we have ever been .
but what we 've also seen in these last months is the same partisan spectacle that only hardens the disdain many americans have towards their own government .
instead of honest debate , we 've seen scare tactics .
some have dug into unyielding ideological camps that offer no hope of compromise .
too many have used this as an opportunity to score short - term political points , even if it robs the country of our opportunity to solve a long - term challenge .
and out of this blizzard of charges and countercharges , confusion has reigned .
well , the time for bickering is over .
the time for games has passed .
now is the season for action .
now is when we must bring the best ideas of both parties together and show the american people that we can still do what we were sent here to do .
now is the time to deliver on health care .
now is the time to deliver on health care .
the plan i 'm announcing tonight would meet three basic goals : it will provide more security and stability to those who have health insurance ; it will provide insurance for those who do n't ; and it will slow the growth of health care costs for our families , our businesses , and our government .
it 's a plan that asks everyone to take responsibility for meeting this challenge , not just government , not just insurance companies , but everybody , including employers and individuals .
and it 's a plan that incorporates ideas from senators and congressmen , from democrats and republicans , and yes , from some of my opponents in both the primary and general election .
here are the details that every american needs to know about this plan .
first , if you are among the hundreds of millions of americans who already have health insurance through your job or medicare or medicaid or the va , nothing in this plan will require you or your employer to change the coverage or the doctor you have .
let me repeat this : nothing in our plan requires you to change what you have .
what this plan will do is make the insurance you have work better for you .
under this plan , it will be against the law for insurance companies to deny you coverage because of a preexisting condition .
as soon as i sign this bill , it will be against the law for insurance companies to drop your coverage when you get sick or water it down when you need it the most .
they will no longer be able to place some arbitrary cap on the amount of coverage you can receive in a given year or in a lifetime .
we will place a limit on how much you can be charged for out - of - pocket expenses , because in the united states of america , no one should go broke because they get sick .
and insurance companies will be required to cover , with no extra charge , routine checkups and preventive care , like mammograms and colonoscopies , because there 's no reason we should n't be catching diseases like breast cancer and colon cancer before they get worse .
that makes sense , it saves money , and it saves lives .
now , that 's what americans who have health insurance can expect from this plan , more security and more stability .
now , if you 're one of the tens of millions of americans who do n't currently have health insurance , the second part of this plan will finally offer you quality , affordable choices .
if you lose your job or you change your job , you 'll be able to get coverage .
if you strike out on your own and start a small business , you 'll be able to get coverage .
we 'll do this by creating a new insurance exchange , a marketplace where individuals and small businesses will be able to shop for health insurance at competitive prices .
insurance companies will have an incentive to participate in this exchange because it lets them compete for millions of new customers .
as one big group , these customers will have greater leverage to bargain with the insurance companies for better prices and quality coverage .
this is how large companies and government employees get affordable insurance , it 's how everyone in this congress gets affordable insurance , and it 's time to give every american the same opportunity that we give ourselves .
now , for those individuals and small businesses who still ca n't afford the lower priced insurance available in the exchange , we 'll provide tax credits , the size of which will be based on your need .
and all insurance companies that want access to this new marketplace will have to abide by the consumer protections i already mentioned .
this exchange will take effect in 4 years , which will give us time to do it right .
in the meantime , for those americans who ca n't get insurance today because they have preexisting medical conditions , we will immediately offer low - cost coverage that will protect you against financial ruin if you become seriously ill .
this was a good idea when senator john mccain proposed it in the campaign , it 's a good idea now , and we should all embrace it .
now , even if we provide these affordable options , there may be those , especially the young and the healthy , who still want to take the risk and go without coverage .
there may still be companies that refuse to do right by their workers by giving them coverage .
the problem is , such irresponsible behavior costs all the rest of us money .
if there are affordable options and people still do n't sign up for health insurance , it means we pay for these people 's expensive emergency room visits .
if some businesses do n't provide workers health care , it forces the rest of us to pick up the tab when their workers get sick and gives those businesses an unfair advantage over their competitors .
and unless everybody does their part , many of the insurance reforms we seek , especially requiring insurance companies to cover preexisting conditions , just ca n't be achieved .
and that 's why under my plan , individuals will be required to carry basic health insurance , just as most states require you to carry auto insurance .
likewise , businesses will be required to either offer their workers health care or chip in to help cover the cost of their workers .
there will be a hardship waiver for those individuals who still ca n't afford coverage , and 95 percent of all small businesses , because of their size and narrow profit margin , would be exempt from these requirements .
but we ca n't have large businesses and individuals who can afford coverage game the system by avoiding responsibility to themselves or their employees .
improving our health care system only works if everybody does their part .
and while there remain some significant details to be ironed out , i believe a broad consensus exists for the aspects of the plan i just outlined : consumer protections for those with insurance , an exchange that allows individuals and small businesses to purchase affordable coverage , and a requirement that people who can afford insurance get insurance .
and i have no doubt that these reforms would greatly benefit americans from all walks of life as well as the economy as a whole .
still , given all the misinformation that 's been spread over the past few months , i realize that many americans have grown nervous about reform .
so tonight i want to address some of the key controversies that are still out there .
some of people 's concerns have grown out of bogus claims spread by those whose only agenda is to kill reform at any cost .
the best example is the claim made not just by radio and cable talk show hosts , but by prominent politicians , that we plan to set up panels of bureaucrats with the power to kill off senior citizens .
now , such a charge would be laughable if it were n't so cynical and irresponsible .
it is a lie , plain and simple .
now , there are also those who claim that our reform efforts would insure illegal immigrants .
this too is false .
the reforms i 'm proposing would not apply to those who are here illegally .
representative joe wilson .
you lie !
the president .
it 's not true .
and one more misunderstanding i want to clear up , under our plan , no federal dollars will be used to fund abortions , and federal conscience laws will remain in place .
now , my health care proposal has also been attacked by some who oppose reform as a government takeover of the entire health care system .
as proof , critics point to a provision in our plan that allows the uninsured and small businesses to choose a publicly sponsored insurance option , administered by the government just like medicaid or medicare .
so let me set the record straight here .
my guiding principle is , and always has been , that consumers do better when there is choice and competition .
that 's how the market works .
unfortunately , in 34 states , 75 percent of the insurance market is controlled by five or fewer companies .
in alabama , almost 90 percent is controlled by just one company .
and without competition , the price of insurance goes up and quality goes down .
and it makes it easier for insurance companies to treat their customers badly by cherry - picking the healthiest individuals and trying to drop the sickest , by overcharging small businesses who have no leverage , and by jacking up rates .
insurance executives do n't do this because they 're bad people ; they do it because it 's profitable .
as one former insurance executive testified before congress , insurance companies are not only encouraged to find reasons to drop the seriously ill , they are rewarded for it .
all of this is in service of meeting what this former executive called " wall street 's relentless profit expectations . "
now , i have no interest in putting insurance companies out of business .
they provide a legitimate service and employ a lot of our friends and neighbors .
i just want to hold them accountable .
and the insurance reforms that i 've already mentioned would do just that .
but an additional step we can take to keep insurance companies honest is by making a not - for - profit public option available in the insurance exchange .
now , let me be clear .
let me be clear .
it would only be an option for those who do n't have insurance .
no one would be forced to choose it , and it would not impact those of you who already have insurance .
in fact , based on congressional budget office estimates , we believe that less than 5 percent of americans would sign up .
despite all this , the insurance companies and their allies do n't like this idea .
they argue that these private companies ca n't fairly compete with the government .
and they 'd be right if taxpayers were subsidizing this public insurance option .
but they wo n't be .
i 've insisted that like any private insurance company , the public insurance option would have to be self - sufficient and rely on the premiums it collects .
but by avoiding some of the overhead that gets eaten up at private companies by profits and excessive administrative costs and executive salaries , it could provide a good deal for consumers and would also keep pressure on private insurers to keep their policies affordable and treat their customers better , the same way public colleges and universities provide additional choice and competition to students without in any way inhibiting a vibrant system of private colleges and universities .
now , it 's worth noting that a strong majority of americans still favor a public insurance option of the sort i 've proposed tonight .
but its impact should n't be exaggerated by the left or the right or the media .
it is only one part of my plan and should n't be used as a handy excuse for the usual washington ideological battles .
to my progressive friends , i would remind you that for decades , the driving idea behind reform has been to end insurance company abuses and make coverage available for those without it .
the public option is only a means to that end , and we should remain open to other ideas that accomplish our ultimate goal .
and to my republican friends , i say that rather than making wild claims about a government takeover of health care , we should work together to address any legitimate concerns you may have .
now , for example , some have suggested that the public option go into effect only in those markets where insurance companies are not providing affordable policies .
others have proposed a co - op or another nonprofit entity to administer the plan .
these are all constructive ideas worth exploring .
but i will not back down on the basic principle that if americans ca n't find affordable coverage , we will provide you with a choice .
and i will make sure that no government bureaucrat or insurance company bureaucrat gets between you and the care that you need .
finally , let me discuss an issue that is a great concern to me , to members of this chamber , and to the public , and that 's how we pay for this plan .
and here 's what you need to know .
first , i will not sign a plan that adds one dime to our deficits , either now or in the future .
i will not sign it if it adds one dime to the deficit , now or in the future , period .
and to prove that i 'm serious , there will be a provision in this plan that requires us to come forward with more spending cuts if the savings we 've promised do n't materialize .
now , part of the reason i faced a trillion - dollar deficit when i walked in the door of the white house is because too many initiatives over the last decade were not paid for , from the iraq war to tax breaks for the wealthy .
i will not make that same mistake with health care .
second , we 've estimated that most of this plan can be paid for by finding savings within the existing health care system , a system that is currently full of waste and abuse .
right now , too much of the hard - earned savings and tax dollars we spend on health care do n't make us any healthier .
that 's not my judgment ; it 's the judgment of medical professionals across this country .
and this is also true when it comes to medicare and medicaid .
in fact , i want to speak directly to seniors for a moment , because medicare is another issue that 's been subjected to demagoguery and distortion during the course of this debate .
more than four decades ago , this nation stood up for the principle that after a lifetime of hard work , our seniors should not be left to struggle with a pile of medical bills in their later years .
that 's how medicare was born , and it remains a sacred trust that must be passed down from one generation to the next .
and that is why not a dollar of the medicare trust fund will be used to pay for this plan .
the only thing this plan would eliminate is the hundreds of billions of dollars in waste and fraud as well as unwarranted subsidies in medicare that go to insurance companies , subsidies that do everything to pad their profits but do n't improve the care of seniors .
and we will also create an independent commission of doctors and medical experts charged with identifying more waste in the years ahead .
now , these steps will ensure that you , america 's seniors , get the benefits you 've been promised .
they will ensure that medicare is there for future generations .
and we can use some of the savings to fill the gap in coverage that forces too many seniors to pay thousands of dollars a year out of their own pockets for prescription drugs .
that 's what this plan will do for you .
so do n't pay attention to those scary stories about how your benefits will be cut , especially since some of the same folks who are spreading these tall tales have fought against medicare in the past and just this year supported a budget that would essentially have turned medicare into a privatized voucher program .
that will not happen on my watch .
i will protect medicare .
now , because medicare is such a big part of the health care system , making the program more efficient can help usher in changes in the way we deliver health care that can reduce costs for everybody .
we have long known that some places , like the intermountain healthcare in utah or the geisinger health system in rural pennsylvania , offer high - quality care at costs below average .
so the commission can help encourage the adoption of these commonsense best practices by doctors and medical professionals throughout the system , everything from reducing hospital infection rates to encouraging better coordination between teams of doctors .
reducing the waste and inefficiency in medicare and medicaid will pay for most of this plan .
now , much of the rest would be paid for with revenues from the very same drug and insurance companies that stand to benefit from tens of millions of new customers .
and this reform will charge insurance companies a fee for their most expensive policies , which will encourage them to provide greater value for the money , an idea which has the support of democratic and republican experts .
and according to these same experts , this modest change could help hold down the costs of health care for all of us in the long run .
now , finally , many in this chamber , particularly on the republican side of the aisle , have long insisted that reforming our medical malpractice laws can help bring down the cost of health care .
now there you go .
there you go .
now , i do n't believe malpractice reform is a silver bullet , but i 've talked to enough doctors to know that defensive medicine may be contributing to unnecessary costs .
so i 'm proposing that we move forward on a range of ideas about how to put patient safety first and let doctors focus on practicing medicine .
i know that the bush administration considered authorizing demonstration projects in individual states to test these ideas .
i think it 's a good idea , and i 'm directing my secretary of health and human services to move forward on this initiative today .
now , add it all up , and the plan i 'm proposing will cost around $ 900 billion over 10 years , less than we have spent on the iraq and afghanistan wars and less than the tax cuts for the wealthiest few americans that congress passed at the beginning of the previous administration .
now , most of these costs will be paid for with money already being spent , but spent badly , in the existing health care system .
the plan will not add to our deficit .
the middle class will realize greater security , not higher taxes .
and if we are able to slow the growth of health care costs by just one - tenth of 1 percent each year -- one - tenth of 1 percent -- it will actually reduce the deficit by $ 4 trillion over the long term .
now , this is the plan i 'm proposing .
it 's a plan that incorporates ideas from many of the people in this room tonight , democrats and republicans .
and i will continue to seek common ground in the weeks ahead .
if you come to me with a serious set of proposals , i will be there to listen .
my door is always open .
but know this : i will not waste time with those who have made the calculation that it 's better politics to kill this plan than to improve it .
i wo n't stand by while the special interests use the same old tactics to keep things exactly the way they are .
if you misrepresent what 's in this plan , we will call you out .
and i will not accept the status quo as a solution .
not this time .
not now .
everyone in this room knows what will happen if we do nothing .
our deficit will grow , more families will go bankrupt , more businesses will close , more americans will lose their coverage when they are sick and need it the most , and more will die as a result .
we know these things to be true .
that is why we can not fail , because there are too many americans counting on us to succeed , the ones who suffer silently and the ones who share their stories with us at town halls , in e - mails , and in letters .
i received one of those letters a few days ago .
it was from our beloved friend and colleague ted kennedy .
he had written it back in may , shortly after he was told that his illness was terminal .
he asked that it be delivered upon his death .
in it he spoke about what a happy time his last months were , thanks to the love and support of family and friends , his wife vicki , his amazing children , who are all here tonight .
and he expressed confidence that this would be the year that health care reform , " that great unfinished business of our society , " he called it , would finally pass .
he repeated the truth that health care is decisive for our future prosperity , but he also reminded me that " it concerns more than material things . " "
what we face , " he wrote , " is above all a moral issue ; at stake are not just the details of policy , but fundamental principles of social justice and the character of our country . "
i 've thought about that phrase quite a bit in recent days -- the character of our country .
one of the unique and wonderful things about america has always been our self - reliance , our rugged individualism , our fierce defense of freedom , and our healthy skepticism of government .
and figuring out the appropriate size and role of government has always been a source of rigorous and , yes , sometimes angry , debate .
that 's our history .
for some of ted kennedy 's critics , his brand of liberalism represented an affront to american liberty .
in their minds , his passion for universal health care was nothing more than a passion for big government .
but those of us who knew teddy and worked with him here , people of both parties , know that what drove him was something more .
his friend orrin hatch , he knows that .
they worked together to provide children with health insurance .
his friend john mccain knows that .
they worked together on a patient 's bill of rights .
his friend chuck grassley knows that .
they worked together to provide health care to children with disabilities .
on issues like these , ted kennedy 's passion was born not of some rigid ideology , but of his own experience .
it was the experience of having two children stricken with cancer .
he never forgot the sheer terror and helplessness that any parent feels when a child is badly sick .
and he was able to imagine what it must be like for those without insurance , what it would be like to have to say to a wife or a child or an aging parent , there is something that could make you better , but i just ca n't afford it .
that large - heartedness , that concern and regard for the plight of others , is not a partisan feeling ; it 's not a republican or a democratic feeling .
it too is part of the american character , our ability to stand in other people 's shoes , a recognition that we are all in this together , and when fortune turns against one of us , others are there to lend a helping hand , a belief that in this country , hard work and responsibility should be rewarded by some measure of security and fair play , and an acknowledgment that sometimes government has to step in to help deliver on that promise .
this has always been the history of our progress .
in 1935 , when over half of our seniors could not support themselves and millions had seen their savings wiped away , there were those who argued that social security would lead to socialism , but the men and women of congress stood fast , and we are all the better for it .
in 1965 , when some argued that medicare represented a government takeover of health care , members of congress , democrats and republicans , did not back down .
they joined together so that all of us could enter our golden years with some basic peace of mind .
you see , our predecessors understood that government could not , and should not , solve every problem .
they understood that there are instances when the gains in security from government action are not worth the added constraints on our freedom .
but they also understood that the danger of too much government is matched by the perils of too little , that without the leavening hand of wise policy , markets can crash , monopolies can stifle competition , the vulnerable can be exploited .
and they knew that when any government measure , no matter how carefully crafted or beneficial , is subject to scorn ; when any efforts to help people in need are attacked as un - american , when facts and reason are thrown overboard and only timidity passes for wisdom , and we can no longer even engage in a civil conversation with each other over the things that truly matter , that at that point we do n't merely lose our capacity to solve big challenges , we lose something essential about ourselves .
that was true then ; it remains true today .
i understand how difficult this health care debate has been .
i know that many in this country are deeply skeptical that government is looking out for them .
i understand that the politically safe move would be to kick the can further down the road , to defer reform one more year or one more election or one more term .
but that is not what the moment calls for .
that 's not what we came here to do .
we did not come to fear the future .
we came here to shape it .
i still believe we can act even when it 's hard .
i still believe .
i still believe that we can act when it 's hard .
i still believe we can replace acrimony with civility and gridlock with progress .
i still believe we can do great things and that here and now we will meet history 's test , because that 's who we are .
that is our calling .
that is our character .
thank you , god bless you , and may god bless the united states of america .

hello , warrensburg !
hello , mules !
hello , jennies !
well , i know it 's hot .
that 's why i took off my jacket .
if you 've still got yours on feel free to take it off .
it is great to be back in missouri .
it 's great to be back in the midwest .
it 's great to be here at ucm .
i want to thank your outstanding president , dr. chuck ambrose , for having me here today .
give brian a big round of applause for the introduction .
you 've got your outstanding governor , jay nixon , in the house .
your mayor , charlie rutt , is here .
and i brought a special guest with me who is celebrating her birthday today -- your senator , claire mccaskill .
i figured the least i could do is give her a ride on air force one for her birthday .
so we 've got mules in the house .
we 've got jennies in the house .
we 've got governors , we 've got senators , and now we 've probably got some very confused people watching at home , because who is jennie ?
i want to thank all the students who came out on a summer afternoon .
i know that summer is -- especially a day as pretty as today , it 's tempting to be outside .
i know classes do n't start for a few more weeks .
you could be over on pine street beating the heat .
now that i think about it , it may be good that you 're here instead of getting into trouble .
i 've just come from knox college in galesburg , illinois , where i gave a pretty long speech on the economy .
i will not repeat the whole thing here .
but what i did want to talk about today is what i 've talked about when i gave my first big speech as a senator eight years ago , and that 's where we as a country need to go to give every american a chance to get ahead in the 21st century .
and ucm understands how important that is .
just a little context here -- in the period after world war ii , you had a growing middle class that was the engine of our prosperity .
the economy did well in part because everybody was participating .
and whether you owned a company , or you swept the floors of that company , or you worked anywhere in between , america offered a basic bargain : if you work hard , then you will be rewarded with fair wages and benefits .
you 'll have the chance to buy your own home .
you 'll have the chance to save for retirement .
you 'll have the protection of decent health insurance .
but most of all , you 'll have the chance to pass on a better life to your kids .
and then what happened was that engine began to stall .
the bargain began to fray .
so technology made some jobs obsolete -- nobody goes to a bank teller anymore .
you want to schedule a trip somewhere , you get online .
global competition sent some jobs overseas .
when i was in galesburg , we talked about the maytag plant that used to make household brands there and people -- thousands of people used to work in the plant and it went down to mexico .
then washington doled out bigger tax cuts to folks at the top income brackets , smaller minimum wage increases for people who were struggling .
you combine all this and the income of the top 1 percent quadrupled from 1979 to 2007 , but the typical family 's incomes barely budged .
so a lot of middle - class families began to feel that the odds were stacked against them -- and they were right .
and then for a while , this was kind of papered over because we had a housing bubble going on , and everybody was maxing out on their credit cards , everybody was highly leveraged , there were a lot of financial deals going around .
and so it looked like the economy was going to be doing okay , but then by the time i took office , the bottom had fallen out .
and it cost , as we know , millions of americans their jobs or their homes or their savings .
and that long - term erosion of middle - class security was evident for everybody to see .
now , the good news is , five years later , five years after the crisis first hit , america has fought its way back .
so together , we saved an auto industry .
we took on a broken health care system .
we invested in new american technologies to reverse our addiction to foreign oil .
we doubled the production of clean energy .
natural gas took off .
we put in place tough new rules on big banks and mortgage lenders and credit card companies .
we changed the tax code so it was fair for middle - class folks and did n't just benefit folks at the very top like me .
no , it 's true , because things were skewed too much towards folks who were already blessed , already lucky .
and you take all that together and now you add it all up .
what we 've seen is over the past 40 months , our businesses have created more than 7.2 million new jobs .
this year , we 're off to our strongest private sector job growth since 1999 .
our exports have surged , so we sell more products made in america to the rest of the world than ever before .
we produce more natural gas than any country on earth .
we 're about to produce more of our own oil than we buy from overseas , and that 's the first time that 's happened in nearly 20 years .
the cost of health care is growing at its slowest rate in 50 years , so we 're slowing the growth of health care costs .
and our deficits are falling at the fastest rate in 60 years .
deficits have been cut by almost half from the time i took office .
so we did this together , because americans are gritty and resilient and work hard .
we 've been able to clear away the rubble of the financial crisis .
we 're starting to lay a new foundation for more durable economic growth .
and with the new revolutions in energy and technology and manufacturing and health care , we 're actually poised -- we 're in a position to reverse all those forces that battered middle - class families for too long .
we can start building now an economy where everybody who works hard can get ahead .
that 's all good .
that 's the good news .
but , missouri , i 'm here to tell you what you already know , which is we 're not there yet .
in some ways , the trends that have been building for decades -- this winner - take - all economy where a few do better and better , but everybody else just treads water -- all those trends were made worse by the recession .
and reversing these trends has to be washington 's number one priority .
it has to be washington 's number one priority .
putting people back to work , making sure the economy is working for everybody , building the middle class , making sure they 're secure -- that 's my highest priority .
that 's what i 'm interested in .
because when the economy is working for middle - class families , it solves an awful lot of other problems .
now the poor start having ladders of opportunity they can climb into if they work hard .
a lot of the social tensions are reduced , because everybody is feeling pretty good .
now , unfortunately , over the past couple of years in particular , washington has n't just ignored this problem -- they 've actually made it worse .
and i am interested in working with everybody , and there are a bunch of not just democrats , but also republicans who recognize that washington is not working .
but we 've also seen a group of folks , particularly in the house , a group of republicans in congress that -- they suggested they would n't vote to pay the bills that congress had already run up .
and that fiasco harmed a fragile recovery back in 2011 .
we 've got a growing number of republican senators who are trying to get things done with their democratic counterparts -- just passed an immigration bill that economists say is going to boost our economy by more than a trillion dollars .
but so far , at least , there 's a faction of house republicans who wo n't let the bill go to the floor for a vote .
and if you ask them , well , okay , what 's your economic agenda for the middle class , how are we going to grow our economy so everybody prospers , they 'll start talking about out - of - control government spending -- although , as i said , government spending has actually gone down and deficits are going down -- or they 'll talk about obamacare , the whole idea that somehow if we do n't provide health insurance to 50 million americans that 's going to improve the economy .
never mind the fact that our jobs growth is a lot faster now than it was during the last recovery when obamacare was n't around .
so we 've got some basic challenges that we 're just going to have to meet .
we 've cut our deficit .
we 're creating jobs at nearly twice the pace .
we are providing health care for americans that need it .
but we now have to get back and focus on what 's important .
an endless parade of distractions and political posturing and phony scandals ca n't get in the way of what we need to do .
and i 'm here to say it 's got to stop .
we 've got to focus on jobs and the economy , and helping middle - class families get ahead .
and if we do that , we 're going to solve a whole lot of problems .
and as we 're thinking about these issues , we ca n't get involved in short - term thinking .
we ca n't have all the same old debates .
that 's not what the moment requires .
we 've got to focus on the core economic issues that matter to you .
and as washington is now preparing for another debate about the budget , the stakes could not be higher .
if we do n't make the investments america needs to make this country a magnet for good jobs , if we do n't make investments in education and manufacturing and science and research and transportation and information networks , we will be waving the white flag while other countries forge ahead in a global economy .
if we just stand by and do nothing , we 're saying it 's okay for middle - class folks to keep taking it on the chin .
and i do n't think it 's okay .
and that 's why i came here to warrensburg today .
i need you involved in this debate to remind washington what 's at stake .
and over the next several weeks , in towns just like this one , i 'm going to lay out my ideas for how we build on the cornerstones of what it means to be middle class , what it takes to work your way into the middle class -- a good job with good wages in durable , growing industries ; a good education for our kids and our workers ; a home to call your own ; affordable health care that 's there for you when you or your family members get sick --   -- a secure retirement even if you 're not rich --   -- more ladders of opportunity for people who want to earn their way into the middle class as long as they 're willing to work for it .
and what we need what we need is not a three - month plan , or even a three - year plan -- we need a long - term plan based on steady , persistent effort to reverse the forces that have conspired against middle - class families for decades .
and i am confident -- i know -- there are members of both parties who understand what 's at stake .
so i welcome ideas from anybody across the political spectrum .
but i 'm not going to allow gridlock or inaction or willful indifference to get in this country 's way .
we 've got to get moving .
so where i can act on my own , i 'm going to .
i 'm not going to wait for congress .
because the choices that we make now are n't just going to determine what happens to the young people here at this school , it 's going to determine what happens to your kids and your grandkids .
so one thing i really want to focus on here , because ucm is doing some extraordinary things , i want to focus on just briefly that second cornerstone -- an education that prepares our kids and our workers for the global competition that you 'll face .
that is why i wanted to highlight what 's happening here at the university of central missouri , because you guys are doing some things right .
in an age where business knows no borders , jobs are going to seek out the countries that have the most talented , skilled citizens , and those are the folks who are going to make a good living .
the days when the wages for a worker with a high - school degree could keep pace with the earnings of somebody with a college degree -- those days are over .
you can see it all throughout the midwest , where you 've got folks who a generation ago could just walk into a factory or a plant , did n't have a lot of skills , get trained on the job , make a good living , live out a middle - class life .
that 's not going to happen anymore .
technology , global competition -- those things are not going away .
so we can either throw up our hands and resign ourselves to lower living standards , or we can do what america has always done -- we can adapt , we can pull together , we can fight back , we can win .
and if we do n't invest in american education , then we 're going to put our kids , our workers , our countries , our businesses at a competitive disadvantage .
because if you think it 's -- if you think education is expensive , you should see how much ignorance is going to cost in the 21st century .
it 's going to be expensive .
so what do we need to do on education ?
number one , it 's got to start in the earliest years .
and that means working with states to make high - quality preschool available for every four - year - old in america .
every study shows this is a smart investment , encourages healthy behaviors , increases our kids ' success in the classroom , increases their earning power as they grow up , reduces rates of teen pregnancy , reduces criminal behavior .
it 's really important .
and any working parent will tell you that knowing your kid is in a safe place to learn is a big relief , so it 's also important for the parents .
this idea of early childhood education , it should n't be partisan .
states with republican governors are doing it just like a lot of democratic governors are doing it .
our kids do n't care about politics .
we should prove that we care about them and make this thing happen .
and i am going to keep on pushing , as long as i am president , until we have a situation where every kid is getting a good , healthy start in life and are prepared when they go to school .
we 're going to take action on proven ideas to upgrade our schools that do n't require congress .
so for example , last month , i announced a goal of connecting 99 percent of america 's students to high - speed internet within five years .
we 're going ahead and taking steps for that to happen right now .
now , some of you may have gone to schools where you had internet in every classroom , but a lot of schools right now , they 've got maybe a computer lab , but if you go in the classroom , kids , they do n't have it .
in america , in this country , every child at every desk should have access to the entire world 's information , and every teacher should have the cutting - edge technology to help their kids succeed and learn .
we 're going to make that happen .
we 've got to rethink our high schools so that our kids graduate with the real - world skills that this new age demands .
we 've got to reward the schools that forge partnerships with local colleges and businesses , and that focus on the fields of the future like science and technology and math and engineering .
and i 'm going to use the power of my office over the next few months to highlight a topic that affects probably everybody here , and that is the soaring cost of higher education .
now , three years ago , i worked with democrats to reform the student loan system so that taxpayer dollars were n't going to pad the pockets of big banks , and instead were going to help students get a college education .
so millions of students were helped by that .
we took action to cap loan repayments at 10 percent of monthly incomes for responsible borrowers .
a lot of young people do n't know this , but if you 've taken out federal loans , then if you choose a job , let 's say , that does n't pay as much as you 'd like or you deserve , if you 're a teacher or some other profession , you only have to pay 10 percent of your income , which means that you can afford to go to college and know that you 're not going to be broke when you graduate -- which is important .
and not enough young people are using this .
as we speak -- and then , as we speak , we 're working with both parties to reverse the doubling of student loan rates that happened a few weeks ago because congress did n't get its act together .
we 've got to get student loan rates -- interest rates back down .
so these are all good steps , but here 's the problem -- and this is where what 's happening at university of central missouri is so important .
we can put more and more money into student loans , we can put more and more money into grants , but if college costs keep on going up , then there 's never going to be enough money .
i can keep student loan rates low , but if you 're borrowing $ 80,000 for college , or $ 100,000 and you get out , it does n't matter whether interest rate is 3.5 or 8.5 , you 're still going to have trouble repaying it .
it 'll take you longer to buy a house .
if you 've got an idea for a business , it 's going to take you longer to invest in starting your business .
so we 've got to do something about college costs .
families and taxpayers ca n't just keep paying more and more into an undisciplined system .
we 've got to get a better bang for our buck .
so states have to do their part by prioritizing higher education in their budgets --   -- because part of the reason tuition has been skyrocketing is colleges are n't -- state - funded colleges are n't getting as much funding , and so then tuition is going up on the backs of students and families .
but we 've also got to test new ways of funding based not just on how many students enroll , but how well they do .
and colleges have to do their part by keeping costs from going up .
so here at central missouri , you are a laboratory for this kind of innovation .
i had a great discussion with not only the president of this university but also the superintendent of schools here , the head of the community colleges .
what 's happened at ucm is you 've partnered with the lee 's summit school district , with the metropolitan community college , with local health care , engineering , energy , and infrastructure firms -- all industries that are going to drive job growth in the future -- and everybody is now working together to equip students with better skills , allow them to graduate faster with less debt , and with the certainty of being able to get a job at the other end .
that 's a recipe for success over the long term .
so we 've got students at summit technology academy --   -- there we go .
those students , they 're beginning to accrue credits towards an associate 's degree while they 're still in high school , which means they can come here to earn a bachelor 's degree in two years and graduate debt free .
debt free , on a fast track .
and because the community colleges and industries are involved , students are making quicker decisions about the industries that are going to create jobs , and the businesses are helping to design the programs to make sure that they have the skills for those jobs so that not only are you graduating debt free , but you also know that you 've got a job waiting for you on the other end .
now , that is exactly the kind of innovation we need when it comes to college costs .
that 's what 's happening right here in warrensburg .
and i want the entire country to notice it , and i want other colleges to take a look at what 's being done here .
and i 've asked my team to shake the trees all across the country for some of the best ideas out there for keeping college costs down , so that as students prepare to go back to school , i 'm in a position to lay out what 's going to be an aggressive strategy to shake up the system to make sure that middle - class students , working - class students , poor kids who have the drive and the wherewithal and want to get a good college education , they can get it without basically mortgaging their entire future .
we can make this happen but this is an example of the kind of thing we 've got to focus on instead of a bunch of distractions in washington .
tackling college costs , creating more good jobs , establishing a better bargain for middle - class families and everybody trying to work to join into it , an economy that grows not from the top down but from the middle out -- that 's not just what i 'm going to focus on for the next few months , that 's what i 'm going to be focused on for the remainder of my presidency .
and i 'm going to take these plans all across the country , and i 'm going to ask folks for help because , frankly , sometimes i just ca n't wait for congress .
it just takes them a long time to decide on stuff .
so we 're going to reach out to ceos and we 're going to reach out to workers , and we 're going to reach out to college presidents and we 're going to reach out to students .
we 'll talk to democrats and independents -- and , yes , i will be asking republicans to get involved because this has to be our core project for the next decade .
i want to lay out my ideas to give the middle class a better shot in the 21st century .
and look , i want republicans to lay out their ideas .
if they 've got a better idea to bring down college costs that we have n't thought of , let 's hear them .
i 'm ready to go .
if they 've got a better plan to make sure that every american knows the security of affordable health care , then please share it with the class .
raise your hand .
but what you ca n't do is just manufacture another crisis because you think it might be good politics , just as our economy is getting some traction .
what you ca n't do is shut down our government just because i 'm for opening the government .
you ca n't threaten not to pay the bills this country racked up or to cut investments in education and science and basic research that are going to help us grow .
if we 're going to manage deficits and debt , let 's do it in a sensible way .
we can do this if we work together .
and it may seem hard right now , but if we 're willing to take a few bold steps -- if washington will just shake off its complacency , set aside the kind of slash - and - burn partisanship that we 've seen over the past few years -- i promise you , our economy will be stronger a year from now , just like it 's stronger now than it was last year .
and then it will be stronger five years from now , and then it will be stronger 10 years from now .
and more americans will have the pride of a first paycheck .
and more americans will have the satisfaction of starting their own business and flipping that sign that says " open " .
more folks will have the thrill of marching across the stage to earn a diploma from a university like this , and then know that they 've got a job waiting for them when they graduate .
what makes us special -- a lot of times we talk about american exceptionalism and how much we love this country , and there are so many wonderful things about our country .
but what makes us the envy of the world has not just been our ability to generate incredible wealth for a few people ; it 's the fact that we 've given everybody a chance to pursue their own true measure of happiness .
that 's who we are .
we have n't just wanted success for ourselves ; we want it for our neighbors .
we want it for our neighborhoods .
that 's why we do n't call it bob 's dream or barbara 's dream or barack 's dream -- we call it the american dream .
it 's one that we share .
that 's who we are -- the idea that no matter who you are , what you look like , where you come from , who you love , you can make it here in america if you 're trying hard .
that 's what a college education can be all about .
that 's what inspires your president , that 's what inspires the faculty .
that 's why when we see young people like you , we 're inspired -- because you 're an expression of that idea .
and we 've got to make sure that that continues -- not just for this generation , but for the next generation .
and i 've got a hundred -- i 've got 1,267 days left in my presidency .
and i 'm going to spend every minute , every second , as long as i have the privilege of being in this office , making sure that i am doing every single thing that i can so that middle - class families , working families , people who are out there struggling every single day -- that they know that that work can lead them to a better place .
and we 're going to make sure that that american dream is available for everybody , not just now , but in the future .
so thank you , missouri .
thank you , ucm .
thank you , mules .
thank you , jennies .
god bless you .
god bless the united states of america .
let 's get to work .

mr. speaker , mr. vice president , members of congress , fellow citizens : 
 fifty - one years ago , john f. kennedy declared to this chamber that " the constitution makes us not rivals for power but partners for progress . "
" it is my task , " he said , " to report the state of the union -- to improve it is the task of us all . "
tonight , thanks to the grit and determination of the american people , there is much progress to report .
after a decade of grinding war , our brave men and women in uniform are coming home .
after years of grueling recession , our businesses have created over six million new jobs .
we buy more american cars than we have in five years , and less foreign oil than we have in 20 .
our housing market is healing , our stock market is rebounding , and consumers , patients , and homeowners enjoy stronger protections than ever before .
so , together , we have cleared away the rubble of crisis , and we can say with renewed confidence that the state of our union is stronger .
but we gather here knowing that there are millions of americans whose hard work and dedication have not yet been rewarded .
our economy is adding jobs -- but too many people still ca n't find full - time employment .
corporate profits have skyrocketed to all - time highs -- but for more than a decade , wages and incomes have barely budged .
it is our generation 's task , then , to reignite the true engine of america 's economic growth -- a rising , thriving middle class .
it is our unfinished task to restore the basic bargain that built this country -- the idea that if you work hard and meet your responsibilities , you can get ahead , no matter where you come from , no matter what you look like , or who you love .
it is our unfinished task to make sure that this government works on behalf of the many , and not just the few ; that it encourages free enterprise , rewards individual initiative , and opens the doors of opportunity to every child across this great nation .
the american people do n't expect government to solve every problem .
they do n't expect those of us in this chamber to agree on every issue .
but they do expect us to put the nation 's interests before party .
they do expect us to forge reasonable compromise where we can .
for they know that america moves forward only when we do so together , and that the responsibility of improving this union remains the task of us all .
our work must begin by making some basic decisions about our budget -- decisions that will have a huge impact on the strength of our recovery .
over the last few years , both parties have worked together to reduce the deficit by more than $ 2.5 trillion -- mostly through spending cuts , but also by raising tax rates on the wealthiest 1 percent of americans .
as a result , we are more than halfway towards the goal of $ 4 trillion in deficit reduction that economists say we need to stabilize our finances .
now we need to finish the job .
and the question is , how ?
in 2011 , congress passed a law saying that if both parties could n't agree on a plan to reach our deficit goal , about a trillion dollars ' worth of budget cuts would automatically go into effect this year .
these sudden , harsh , arbitrary cuts would jeopardize our military readiness .
they 'd devastate priorities like education , and energy , and medical research .
they would certainly slow our recovery , and cost us hundreds of thousands of jobs .
that 's why democrats , republicans , business leaders , and economists have already said that these cuts , known here in washington as the sequester , are a really bad idea .
now , some in congress have proposed preventing only the defense cuts by making even bigger cuts to things like education and job training , medicare and social security benefits .
that idea is even worse .
yes , the biggest driver of our long - term debt is the rising cost of health care for an aging population .
and those of us who care deeply about programs like medicare must embrace the need for modest reforms -- otherwise , our retirement programs will crowd out the investments we need for our children , and jeopardize the promise of a secure retirement for future generations .
but we ca n't ask senior citizens and working families to shoulder the entire burden of deficit reduction while asking nothing more from the wealthiest and the most powerful .
we wo n't grow the middle class simply by shifting the cost of health care or college onto families that are already struggling , or by forcing communities to lay off more teachers and more cops and more firefighters .
most americans -- democrats , republicans , and independents -- understand that we ca n't just cut our way to prosperity .
they know that broad - based economic growth requires a balanced approach to deficit reduction , with spending cuts and revenue , and with everybody doing their fair share .
and that 's the approach i offer tonight .
on medicare , i 'm prepared to enact reforms that will achieve the same amount of health care savings by the beginning of the next decade as the reforms proposed by the bipartisan simpson - bowles commission .
already , the affordable care act is helping to slow the growth of health care costs .
and the reforms i 'm proposing go even further .
we 'll reduce taxpayer subsidies to prescription drug companies and ask more from the wealthiest seniors .
we 'll bring down costs by changing the way our government pays for medicare , because our medical bills should n't be based on the number of tests ordered or days spent in the hospital ; they should be based on the quality of care that our seniors receive .
and i am open to additional reforms from both parties , so long as they do n't violate the guarantee of a secure retirement .
our government should n't make promises we can not keep -- but we must keep the promises we 've already made .
to hit the rest of our deficit reduction target , we should do what leaders in both parties have already suggested , and save hundreds of billions of dollars by getting rid of tax loopholes and deductions for the well - off and the well - connected .
after all , why would we choose to make deeper cuts to education and medicare just to protect special interest tax breaks ?
how is that fair ?
why is it that deficit reduction is a big emergency justifying making cuts in social security benefits but not closing some loopholes ?
how does that promote growth ?
now is our best chance for bipartisan , comprehensive tax reform that encourages job creation and helps bring down the deficit .
we can get this done .
the american people deserve a tax code that helps small businesses spend less time filling out complicated forms , and more time expanding and hiring -- a tax code that ensures billionaires with high - powered accountants ca n't work the system and pay a lower rate than their hardworking secretaries ; a tax code that lowers incentives to move jobs overseas , and lowers tax rates for businesses and manufacturers that are creating jobs right here in the united states of america .
that 's what tax reform can deliver .
that 's what we can do together .
i realize that tax reform and entitlement reform will not be easy .
the politics will be hard for both sides .
none of us will get 100 percent of what we want .
but the alternative will cost us jobs , hurt our economy , visit hardship on millions of hardworking americans .
so let 's set party interests aside and work to pass a budget that replaces reckless cuts with smart savings and wise investments in our future .
and let 's do it without the brinksmanship that stresses consumers and scares off investors .
the greatest nation on earth can not keep conducting its business by drifting from one manufactured crisis to the next .
we ca n't do it .
let 's agree right here , right now to keep the people 's government open , and pay our bills on time , and always uphold the full faith and credit of the united states of america .
the american people have worked too hard , for too long , rebuilding from one crisis to see their elected officials cause another .
now , most of us agree that a plan to reduce the deficit must be part of our agenda .
but let 's be clear , deficit reduction alone is not an economic plan .
a growing economy that creates good , middle - class jobs -- that must be the north star that guides our efforts .
every day , we should ask ourselves three questions as a nation : how do we attract more jobs to our shores ?
how do we equip our people with the skills they need to get those jobs ?
and how do we make sure that hard work leads to a decent living ?
a year and a half ago , i put forward an american jobs act that independent economists said would create more than 1 million new jobs .
and i thank the last congress for passing some of that agenda .
i urge this congress to pass the rest .
but tonight , i 'll lay out additional proposals that are fully paid for and fully consistent with the budget framework both parties agreed to just 18 months ago .
let me repeat -- nothing i 'm proposing tonight should increase our deficit by a single dime .
it is not a bigger government we need , but a smarter government that sets priorities and invests in broad - based growth .
that 's what we should be looking for .
our first priority is making america a magnet for new jobs and manufacturing .
after shedding jobs for more than 10 years , our manufacturers have added about 500,000 jobs over the past three .
caterpillar is bringing jobs back from japan .
ford is bringing jobs back from mexico .
and this year , apple will start making macs in america again .
there are things we can do , right now , to accelerate this trend .
last year , we created our first manufacturing innovation institute in youngstown , ohio .
a once - shuttered warehouse is now a state - of - the art lab where new workers are mastering the 3d printing that has the potential to revolutionize the way we make almost everything .
there 's no reason this ca n't happen in other towns .
so tonight , i 'm announcing the launch of three more of these manufacturing hubs , where businesses will partner with the department of defense and energy to turn regions left behind by globalization into global centers of high - tech jobs .
and i ask this congress to help create a network of 15 of these hubs and guarantee that the next revolution in manufacturing is made right here in america .
we can get that done .
now , if we want to make the best products , we also have to invest in the best ideas .
every dollar we invested to map the human genome returned $ 140 to our economy -- every dollar .
today , our scientists are mapping the human brain to unlock the answers to alzheimer 's .
they 're developing drugs to regenerate damaged organs ; devising new material to make batteries 10 times more powerful .
now is not the time to gut these job - creating investments in science and innovation .
now is the time to reach a level of research and development not seen since the height of the space race .
we need to make those investments .
today , no area holds more promise than our investments in american energy .
after years of talking about it , we 're finally poised to control our own energy future .
we produce more oil at home than we have in 15 years .
we have doubled the distance our cars will go on a gallon of gas , and the amount of renewable energy we generate from sources like wind and solar -- with tens of thousands of good american jobs to show for it .
we produce more natural gas than ever before -- and nearly everyone 's energy bill is lower because of it .
and over the last four years , our emissions of the dangerous carbon pollution that threatens our planet have actually fallen .
but for the sake of our children and our future , we must do more to combat climate change .
now , it 's true that no single event makes a trend .
but the fact is the 12 hottest years on record have all come in the last 15 .
heat waves , droughts , wildfires , floods -- all are now more frequent and more intense .
we can choose to believe that superstorm sandy , and the most severe drought in decades , and the worst wildfires some states have ever seen were all just a freak coincidence .
or we can choose to believe in the overwhelming judgment of science -- and act before it 's too late .
now , the good news is we can make meaningful progress on this issue while driving strong economic growth .
i urge this congress to get together , pursue a bipartisan , market - based solution to climate change , like the one john mccain and joe lieberman worked on together a few years ago .
but if congress wo n't act soon to protect future generations , i will .
i will direct my cabinet to come up with executive actions we can take , now and in the future , to reduce pollution , prepare our communities for the consequences of climate change , and speed the transition to more sustainable sources of energy .
four years ago , other countries dominated the clean energy market and the jobs that came with it .
and we 've begun to change that .
last year , wind energy added nearly half of all new power capacity in america .
so let 's generate even more .
solar energy gets cheaper by the year -- let 's drive down costs even further .
as long as countries like china keep going all in on clean energy , so must we .
now , in the meantime , the natural gas boom has led to cleaner power and greater energy independence .
we need to encourage that .
and that 's why my administration will keep cutting red tape and speeding up new oil and gas permits .
that 's got to be part of an all - of - the - above plan .
but i also want to work with this congress to encourage the research and technology that helps natural gas burn even cleaner and protects our air and our water .
in fact , much of our new - found energy is drawn from lands and waters that we , the public , own together .
so tonight , i propose we use some of our oil and gas revenues to fund an energy security trust that will drive new research and technology to shift our cars and trucks off oil for good .
if a nonpartisan coalition of ceos and retired generals and admirals can get behind this idea , then so can we .
let 's take their advice and free our families and businesses from the painful spikes in gas prices we 've put up with for far too long .
i 'm also issuing a new goal for america : let 's cut in half the energy wasted by our homes and businesses over the next 20 years .
we 'll work with the states to do it .
those states with the best ideas to create jobs and lower energy bills by constructing more efficient buildings will receive federal support to help make that happen .
america 's energy sector is just one part of an aging infrastructure badly in need of repair .
ask any ceo where they 'd rather locate and hire -- a country with deteriorating roads and bridges , or one with high - speed rail and internet ; high - tech schools , self - healing power grids .
the ceo of siemens america -- a company that brought hundreds of new jobs to north carolina -- said that if we upgrade our infrastructure , they 'll bring even more jobs .
and that 's the attitude of a lot of companies all around the world .
and i know you want these job - creating projects in your district .
i 've seen all those ribbon - cuttings .
so tonight , i propose a " fix - it - first " program to put people to work as soon as possible on our most urgent repairs , like the nearly 70,000 structurally deficient bridges across the country .
and to make sure taxpayers do n't shoulder the whole burden , i 'm also proposing a partnership to rebuild america that attracts private capital to upgrade what our businesses need most : modern ports to move our goods , modern pipelines to withstand a storm , modern schools worthy of our children .
let 's prove that there 's no better place to do business than here in the united states of america , and let 's start right away .
we can get this done .
and part of our rebuilding effort must also involve our housing sector .
the good news is our housing market is finally healing from the collapse of 2007 .
home prices are rising at the fastest pace in six years .
home purchases are up nearly 50 percent , and construction is expanding again .
but even with mortgage rates near a 50-year low , too many families with solid credit who want to buy a home are being rejected .
too many families who never missed a payment and want to refinance are being told no .
that 's holding our entire economy back .
we need to fix it .
right now , there 's a bill in this congress that would give every responsible homeowner in america the chance to save $ 3,000 a year by refinancing at today 's rates .
democrats and republicans have supported it before , so what are we waiting for ?
take a vote , and send me that bill .
why would we be against that ?
why would that be a partisan issue , helping folks refinance ?
right now , overlapping regulations keep responsible young families from buying their first home .
what 's holding us back ?
let 's streamline the process , and help our economy grow .
these initiatives in manufacturing , energy , infrastructure , housing -- all these things will help entrepreneurs and small business owners expand and create new jobs .
but none of it will matter unless we also equip our citizens with the skills and training to fill those jobs .
and that has to start at the earliest possible age .
study after study shows that the sooner a child begins learning , the better he or she does down the road .
but today , fewer than 3 in 10 four year - olds are enrolled in a high - quality preschool program .
most middle - class parents ca n't afford a few hundred bucks a week for a private preschool .
and for poor kids who need help the most , this lack of access to preschool education can shadow them for the rest of their lives .
so tonight , i propose working with states to make high - quality preschool available to every single child in america .
that 's something we should be able to do .
every dollar we invest in high - quality early childhood education can save more than seven dollars later on -- by boosting graduation rates , reducing teen pregnancy , even reducing violent crime .
in states that make it a priority to educate our youngest children , like georgia or oklahoma , studies show students grow up more likely to read and do math at grade level , graduate high school , hold a job , form more stable families of their own .
we know this works .
so let 's do what works and make sure none of our children start the race of life already behind .
let 's give our kids that chance .
let 's also make sure that a high school diploma puts our kids on a path to a good job .
right now , countries like germany focus on graduating their high school students with the equivalent of a technical degree from one of our community colleges .
so those german kids , they 're ready for a job when they graduate high school .
they 've been trained for the jobs that are there .
now at schools like p - tech in brooklyn , a collaboration between new york public schools and city university of new york and ibm , students will graduate with a high school diploma and an associate 's degree in computers or engineering .
we need to give every american student opportunities like this .
and four years ago , we started race to the top -- a competition that convinced almost every state to develop smarter curricula and higher standards , all for about 1 percent of what we spend on education each year .
tonight , i 'm announcing a new challenge to redesign america 's high schools so they better equip graduates for the demands of a high - tech economy .
and we 'll reward schools that develop new partnerships with colleges and employers , and create classes that focus on science , technology , engineering and math -- the skills today 's employers are looking for to fill the jobs that are there right now and will be there in the future .
now , even with better high schools , most young people will need some higher education .
it 's a simple fact the more education you 've got , the more likely you are to have a good job and work your way into the middle class .
but today , skyrocketing costs price too many young people out of a higher education , or saddle them with unsustainable debt .
through tax credits , grants and better loans , we 've made college more affordable for millions of students and families over the last few years .
but taxpayers ca n't keep on subsidizing higher and higher and higher costs for higher education .
colleges must do their part to keep costs down , and it 's our job to make sure that they do .
so tonight , i ask congress to change the higher education act so that affordability and value are included in determining which colleges receive certain types of federal aid .
and tomorrow , my administration will release a new " college scorecard " that parents and students can use to compare schools based on a simple criteria -- where you can get the most bang for your educational buck .
now , to grow our middle class , our citizens have to have access to the education and training that today 's jobs require .
but we also have to make sure that america remains a place where everyone who 's willing to work -- everybody who 's willing to work hard has the chance to get ahead .
our economy is stronger when we harness the talents and ingenuity of striving , hopeful immigrants .
and right now , leaders from the business , labor , law enforcement , faith communities -- they all agree that the time has come to pass comprehensive immigration reform .
now is the time to do it .
now is the time to get it done .
now is the time to get it done .
real reform means strong border security , and we can build on the progress my administration has already made -- putting more boots on the southern border than at any time in our history and reducing illegal crossings to their lowest levels in 40 years .
real reform means establishing a responsible pathway to earned citizenship -- a path that includes passing a background check , paying taxes and a meaningful penalty , learning english , and going to the back of the line behind the folks trying to come here legally .
and real reform means fixing the legal immigration system to cut waiting periods and attract the highly - skilled entrepreneurs and engineers that will help create jobs and grow our economy .
in other words , we know what needs to be done .
and as we speak , bipartisan groups in both chambers are working diligently to draft a bill , and i applaud their efforts .
so let 's get this done .
send me a comprehensive immigration reform bill in the next few months , and i will sign it right away .
and america will be better for it .
let 's get it done .
let 's get it done .
but we ca n't stop there .
we know our economy is stronger when our wives , our mothers , our daughters can live their lives free from discrimination in the workplace , and free from the fear of domestic violence .
today , the senate passed the violence against women act that joe biden originally wrote almost 20 years ago .
and i now urge the house to do the same .
good job , joe .
and i ask this congress to declare that women should earn a living equal to their efforts , and finally pass the paycheck fairness act this year .
we know our economy is stronger when we reward an honest day 's work with honest wages .
but today , a full - time worker making the minimum wage earns $ 14,500 a year .
even with the tax relief we put in place , a family with two kids that earns the minimum wage still lives below the poverty line .
that 's wrong .
that 's why , since the last time this congress raised the minimum wage , 19 states have chosen to bump theirs even higher .
tonight , let 's declare that in the wealthiest nation on earth , no one who works full - time should have to live in poverty , and raise the federal minimum wage to $ 9.00 an hour .
we should be able to get that done .
this single step would raise the incomes of millions of working families .
it could mean the difference between groceries or the food bank ; rent or eviction ; scraping by or finally getting ahead .
for businesses across the country , it would mean customers with more money in their pockets .
and a whole lot of folks out there would probably need less help from government .
in fact , working folks should n't have to wait year after year for the minimum wage to go up while ceo pay has never been higher .
so here 's an idea that governor romney and i actually agreed on last year -- let 's tie the minimum wage to the cost of living , so that it finally becomes a wage you can live on .
tonight , let 's also recognize that there are communities in this country where no matter how hard you work , it is virtually impossible to get ahead .
factory towns decimated from years of plants packing up .
inescapable pockets of poverty , urban and rural , where young adults are still fighting for their first job .
america is not a place where the chance of birth or circumstance should decide our destiny .
and that 's why we need to build new ladders of opportunity into the middle class for all who are willing to climb them .
let 's offer incentives to companies that hire americans who 've got what it takes to fill that job opening , but have been out of work so long that no one will give them a chance anymore .
let 's put people back to work rebuilding vacant homes in run - down neighborhoods .
and this year , my administration will begin to partner with 20 of the hardest - hit towns in america to get these communities back on their feet .
we 'll work with local leaders to target resources at public safety , and education , and housing .
we 'll give new tax credits to businesses that hire and invest .
and we 'll work to strengthen families by removing the financial deterrents to marriage for low - income couples , and do more to encourage fatherhood -- because what makes you a man is n't the ability to conceive a child ; it 's having the courage to raise one .
and we want to encourage that .
we want to help that .
stronger families .
stronger communities .
a stronger america .
it is this kind of prosperity -- broad , shared , built on a thriving middle class -- that has always been the source of our progress at home .
it 's also the foundation of our power and influence throughout the world .
tonight , we stand united in saluting the troops and civilians who sacrifice every day to protect us .
because of them , we can say with confidence that america will complete its mission in afghanistan and achieve our objective of defeating the core of al qaeda .
already , we have brought home 33,000 of our brave servicemen and women .
this spring , our forces will move into a support role , while afghan security forces take the lead .
tonight , i can announce that over the next year , another 34,000 american troops will come home from afghanistan .
this drawdown will continue and by the end of next year , our war in afghanistan will be over .
beyond 2014 , america 's commitment to a unified and sovereign afghanistan will endure , but the nature of our commitment will change .
we 're negotiating an agreement with the afghan government that focuses on two missions -- training and equipping afghan forces so that the country does not again slip into chaos , and counterterrorism efforts that allow us to pursue the remnants of al qaeda and their affiliates .
today , the organization that attacked us on 9/11 is a shadow of its former self .
it 's true , different al qaeda affiliates and extremist groups have emerged -- from the arabian peninsula to africa .
the threat these groups pose is evolving .
but to meet this threat , we do n't need to send tens of thousands of our sons and daughters abroad or occupy other nations .
instead , we 'll need to help countries like yemen , and libya , and somalia provide for their own security , and help allies who take the fight to terrorists , as we have in mali .
and where necessary , through a range of capabilities , we will continue to take direct action against those terrorists who pose the gravest threat to americans .
now , as we do , we must enlist our values in the fight .
that 's why my administration has worked tirelessly to forge a durable legal and policy framework to guide our counterterrorism efforts .
throughout , we have kept congress fully informed of our efforts .
i recognize that in our democracy , no one should just take my word for it that we 're doing things the right way .
so in the months ahead , i will continue to engage congress to ensure not only that our targeting , detention and prosecution of terrorists remains consistent with our laws and system of checks and balances , but that our efforts are even more transparent to the american people and to the world .
of course , our challenges do n't end with al qaeda .
america will continue to lead the effort to prevent the spread of the world 's most dangerous weapons .
the regime in north korea must know they will only achieve security and prosperity by meeting their international obligations .
provocations of the sort we saw last night will only further isolate them , as we stand by our allies , strengthen our own missile defense and lead the world in taking firm action in response to these threats .
likewise , the leaders of iran must recognize that now is the time for a diplomatic solution , because a coalition stands united in demanding that they meet their obligations , and we will do what is necessary to prevent them from getting a nuclear weapon .
at the same time , we 'll engage russia to seek further reductions in our nuclear arsenals , and continue leading the global effort to secure nuclear materials that could fall into the wrong hands -- because our ability to influence others depends on our willingness to lead and meet our obligations .
america must also face the rapidly growing threat from cyber - attacks .
now , we know hackers steal people 's identities and infiltrate private emails .
we know foreign countries and companies swipe our corporate secrets .
now our enemies are also seeking the ability to sabotage our power grid , our financial institutions , our air traffic control systems .
we can not look back years from now and wonder why we did nothing in the face of real threats to our security and our economy .
and that 's why , earlier today , i signed a new executive order that will strengthen our cyber defenses by increasing information sharing , and developing standards to protect our national security , our jobs , and our privacy .
but now congress must act as well , by passing legislation to give our government a greater capacity to secure our networks and deter attacks .
this is something we should be able to get done on a bipartisan basis .
now , even as we protect our people , we should remember that today 's world presents not just dangers , not just threats , it presents opportunities .
to boost american exports , support american jobs and level the playing field in the growing markets of asia , we intend to complete negotiations on a trans - pacific partnership .
and tonight , i 'm announcing that we will launch talks on a comprehensive transatlantic trade and investment partnership with the european union -- because trade that is fair and free across the atlantic supports millions of good - paying american jobs .
we also know that progress in the most impoverished parts of our world enriches us all -- not only because it creates new markets , more stable order in certain regions of the world , but also because it 's the right thing to do .
in many places , people live on little more than a dollar a day .
so the united states will join with our allies to eradicate such extreme poverty in the next two decades by connecting more people to the global economy ; by empowering women ; by giving our young and brightest minds new opportunities to serve , and helping communities to feed , and power , and educate themselves ; by saving the world 's children from preventable deaths ; and by realizing the promise of an aids - free generation , which is within our reach .
you see , america must remain a beacon to all who seek freedom during this period of historic change .
i saw the power of hope last year in rangoon , in burma , when aung san suu kyi welcomed an american president into the home where she had been imprisoned for years ; when thousands of burmese lined the streets , waving american flags , including a man who said , " there is justice and law in the united states .
i want our country to be like that . "
in defense of freedom , we 'll remain the anchor of strong alliances from the americas to africa ; from europe to asia .
in the middle east , we will stand with citizens as they demand their universal rights , and support stable transitions to democracy .
we know the process will be messy , and we can not presume to dictate the course of change in countries like egypt , but we can -- and will -- insist on respect for the fundamental rights of all people .
we 'll keep the pressure on a syrian regime that has murdered its own people , and support opposition leaders that respect the rights of every syrian .
and we will stand steadfast with israel in pursuit of security and a lasting peace .
these are the messages i 'll deliver when i travel to the middle east next month .
and all this work depends on the courage and sacrifice of those who serve in dangerous places at great personal risk -- - our diplomats , our intelligence officers , and the men and women of the united states armed forces .
as long as i 'm commander - in - chief , we will do whatever we must to protect those who serve their country abroad , and we will maintain the best military the world has ever known .
we 'll invest in new capabilities , even as we reduce waste and wartime spending .
we will ensure equal treatment for all servicemembers , and equal benefits for their families -- gay and straight .
we will draw upon the courage and skills of our sisters and daughters and moms , because women have proven under fire that they are ready for combat .
we will keep faith with our veterans , investing in world - class care , including mental health care , for our wounded warriors --   -- supporting our military families ; giving our veterans the benefits and education and job opportunities that they have earned .
and i want to thank my wife , michelle , and dr. jill biden for their continued dedication to serving our military families as well as they have served us .
thank you , honey .
thank you , jill .
defending our freedom , though , is not just the job of our military alone .
we must all do our part to make sure our god - given rights are protected here at home .
that includes one of the most fundamental right of a democracy : the right to vote .
when any american , no matter where they live or what their party , are denied that right because they ca n't afford to wait for five or six or seven hours just to cast their ballot , we are betraying our ideals .
so tonight , i 'm announcing a nonpartisan commission to improve the voting experience in america .
and it definitely needs improvement .
i 'm asking two long - time experts in the field -- who , by the way , recently served as the top attorneys for my campaign and for governor romney 's campaign -- to lead it .
we can fix this , and we will .
the american people demand it , and so does our democracy .
of course , what i 've said tonight matters little if we do n't come together to protect our most precious resource : our children .
it has been two months since newtown .
i know this is not the first time this country has debated how to reduce gun violence .
but this time is different .
overwhelming majorities of americans -- americans who believe in the second amendment -- have come together around common - sense reform , like background checks that will make it harder for criminals to get their hands on a gun .
senators of both parties are working together on tough new laws to prevent anyone from buying guns for resale to criminals .
police chiefs are asking our help to get weapons of war and massive ammunition magazines off our streets , because these police chiefs , they 're tired of seeing their guys and gals being outgunned .
each of these proposals deserves a vote in congress .
now , if you want to vote no , that 's your choice .
but these proposals deserve a vote .
because in the two months since newtown , more than a thousand birthdays , graduations , anniversaries have been stolen from our lives by a bullet from a gun -- more than a thousand .
one of those we lost was a young girl named hadiya pendleton .
she was 15 years old .
she loved fig newtons and lip gloss .
she was a majorette .
she was so good to her friends they all thought they were her best friend .
just three weeks ago , she was here , in washington , with her classmates , performing for her country at my inauguration .
and a week later , she was shot and killed in a chicago park after school , just a mile away from my house .
hadiya 's parents , nate and cleo , are in this chamber tonight , along with more than two dozen americans whose lives have been torn apart by gun violence .
they deserve a vote .
they deserve a vote .
gabby giffords deserves a vote .
the families of newtown deserve a vote .
the families of aurora deserve a vote .
the families of oak creek and tucson and blacksburg , and the countless other communities ripped open by gun violence -- - they deserve a simple vote .
they deserve a simple vote .
our actions will not prevent every senseless act of violence in this country .
in fact , no laws , no initiatives , no administrative acts will perfectly solve all the challenges i 've outlined tonight .
but we were never sent here to be perfect .
we were sent here to make what difference we can , to secure this nation , expand opportunity , uphold our ideals through the hard , often frustrating , but absolutely necessary work of self - government .
we were sent here to look out for our fellow americans the same way they look out for one another , every single day , usually without fanfare , all across this country .
we should follow their example .
we should follow the example of a new york city nurse named menchu sanchez .
when hurricane sandy plunged her hospital into darkness , she was n't thinking about how her own home was faring .
her mind was on the 20 precious newborns in her care and the rescue plan she devised that kept them all safe .
we should follow the example of a north miami woman named desiline victor .
when desiline arrived at her polling place , she was told the wait to vote might be six hours .
and as time ticked by , her concern was not with her tired body or aching feet , but whether folks like her would get to have their say .
and hour after hour , a throng of people stayed in line to support her -- because desiline is 102 years old .
and they erupted in cheers when she finally put on a sticker that read , " i voted . "
we should follow the example of a police officer named brian murphy .
when a gunman opened fire on a sikh temple in wisconsin and brian was the first to arrive , he did not consider his own safety .
he fought back until help arrived and ordered his fellow officers to protect the safety of the americans worshiping inside , even as he lay bleeding from 12 bullet wounds .
and when asked how he did that , brian said , " that 's just the way we 're made . "
that 's just the way we 're made .
we may do different jobs and wear different uniforms , and hold different views than the person beside us .
but as americans , we all share the same proud title -- we are citizens .
it 's a word that does n't just describe our nationality or legal status .
it describes the way we 're made .
it describes what we believe .
it captures the enduring idea that this country only works when we accept certain obligations to one another and to future generations , that our rights are wrapped up in the rights of others ; and that well into our third century as a nation , it remains the task of us all , as citizens of these united states , to be the authors of the next great chapter of our american story .
thank you .
god bless you , and god bless these united states of america .

mr. president , mr. secretary - general , my fellow delegates , ladies and gentlemen .
it is a great honor to address this assembly for the second time , nearly two years after my election as president of the united states .
we know this is no ordinary time for our people .
each of us comes here with our own problems and priorities .
but there are also challenges that we share in common as leaders and as nations .
we meet within an institution built from the rubble of war , designed to unite the world in pursuit of peace .
and we meet within a city that for centuries has welcomed people from across the globe , demonstrating that individuals of every color , faith and station can come together to pursue opportunity , build a community , and live with the blessing of human liberty .
outside the doors of this hall , the blocks and neighborhoods of this great city tell the story of a difficult decade .
nine years ago , the destruction of the world trade center signaled a threat that respected no boundary of dignity or decency .
two years ago this month , a financial crisis on wall street devastated american families on main street .
these separate challenges have affected people around the globe .
men and women and children have been murdered by extremists from casablanca to london ; from jalalabad to jakarta .
the global economy suffered an enormous blow during the financial crisis , crippling markets and deferring the dreams of millions on every continent .
underneath these challenges to our security and prosperity lie deeper fears : that ancient hatreds and religious divides are once again ascendant ; that a world which has grown more interconnected has somehow slipped beyond our control .
these are some of the challenges that my administration has confronted since we came into office .
and today , i 'd like to talk to you about what we 've done over the last 20 months to meet these challenges ; what our responsibility is to pursue peace in the middle east ; and what kind of world we are trying to build in this 21st century .
let me begin with what we have done .
i have had no greater focus as president than rescuing our economy from potential catastrophe .
and in an age when prosperity is shared , we could not do this alone .
so america has joined with nations around the world to spur growth , and the renewed demand that could restart job creation .
we are reforming our system of global finance , beginning with wall street reform here at home , so that a crisis like this never happens again .
and we made the g20 the focal point for international coordination , because in a world where prosperity is more diffuse , we must broaden our circle of cooperation to include emerging economies -- economies from every corner of the globe .
there is much to show for our efforts , even as there is much work to be done .
the global economy has been pulled back from the brink of a depression , and is growing once more .
we have resisted protectionism , and are exploring ways to expand trade and commerce among nations .
but we can not -- and will not -- rest until these seeds of progress grow into a broader prosperity , not only for all americans , but for peoples around the globe .
as for our common security , america is waging a more effective fight against al qaeda , while winding down the war in iraq .
since i took office , the united states has removed nearly 100,000 troops from iraq .
we have done so responsibly , as iraqis have transitioned to lead responsibility for the security of their country .
we are now focused on building a lasting partnership with the iraqi people , while keeping our commitment to remove the rest of our troops by the end of next year .
while drawing down in iraq , we have refocused on defeating al qaeda and denying its affiliates a safe haven .
in afghanistan , the united states and our allies are pursuing a strategy to break the taliban 's momentum and build the capacity of afghanistan 's government and security forces , so that a transition to afghan responsibility can begin next july .
and from south asia to the horn of africa , we are moving toward a more targeted approach -- one that strengthens our partners and dismantles terrorist networks without deploying large american armies .
as we pursue the world 's most dangerous extremists , we 're also denying them the world 's most dangerous weapons , and pursuing the peace and security of a world without nuclear weapons .
earlier this year , 47 nations embraced a work - plan to secure all vulnerable nuclear materials within four years .
we have joined with russia to sign the most comprehensive arms control treaty in decades .
we have reduced the role of nuclear weapons in our security strategy .
and here , at the united nations , we came together to strengthen the nuclear non - proliferation treaty .
as part of our effort on non - proliferation , i offered the islamic republic of iran an extended hand last year , and underscored that it has both rights and responsibilities as a member of the international community .
i also said -- in this hall -- that iran must be held accountable if it failed to meet those responsibilities .
and that is what we have done .
iran is the only party to the npt that can not demonstrate the peaceful intentions of its nuclear program , and those actions have consequences .
through u. n. security council resolution 1929 , we made it clear that international law is not an empty promise .
now let me be clear once more : the united states and the international community seek a resolution to our differences with iran , and the door remains open to diplomacy should iran choose to walk through it .
but the iranian government must demonstrate a clear and credible commitment and confirm to the world the peaceful intent of its nuclear program .
as we combat the spread of deadly weapons , we 're also confronting the specter of climate change .
after making historic investments in clean energy and efficiency at home , we helped forge an accord in copenhagen that -- for the first time -- commits all major economies to reduce their emissions .
we are keenly aware this is just a first step .
and going forward , we will support a process in which all major economies meet our responsibilities to protect the planet while unleashing the power of clean energy to serve as an engine of growth and development .
america has also embraced unique responsibilities with come -- that come with our power .
since the rains came and the floodwaters rose in pakistan , we have pledged our assistance , and we should all support the pakistani people as they recover and rebuild .
and when the earth shook and haiti was devastated by loss , we joined a coalition of nations in response .
today , we honor those from the u. n. family who lost their lives in the earthquake , and commit ourselves to stand with the people of haiti until they can stand on their own two feet .
amidst this upheaval , we have also been persistent in our pursuit of peace .
last year , i pledged my best efforts to support the goal of two states , israel and palestine , living side by side in peace and security , as part of a comprehensive peace between israel and all of its neighbors .
we have travelled a winding road over the last 12 months , with few peaks and many valleys .
but this month , i am pleased that we have pursued direct negotiations between israelis and palestinians in washington , sharm el sheikh and jerusalem .
now i recognize many are pessimistic about this process .
the cynics say that israelis and palestinians are too distrustful of each other , and too divided internally , to forge lasting peace .
rejectionists on both sides will try to disrupt the process , with bitter words and with bombs and with gunfire .
some say that the gaps between the parties are too big ; the potential for talks to break down is too great ; and that after decades of failure , peace is simply not possible .
i hear those voices of skepticism .
but i ask you to consider the alternative .
if an agreement is not reached , palestinians will never know the pride and dignity that comes with their own state .
israelis will never know the certainty and security that comes with sovereign and stable neighbors who are committed to coexistence .
the hard realities of demography will take hold .
more blood will be shed .
this holy land will remain a symbol of our differences , instead of our common humanity .
i refuse to accept that future .
and we all have a choice to make .
each of us must choose the path of peace .
of course , that responsibility begins with the parties themselves , who must answer the call of history .
earlier this month at the white house , i was struck by the words of both the israeli and palestinian leaders .
prime minister netanyahu said , " i came here today to find a historic compromise that will enable both people to live in peace , security , and dignity . "
and president abbas said , " we will spare no effort and we will work diligently and tirelessly to ensure these negotiations achieve their cause . "
these words must now be followed by action and i believe that both leaders have the courage to do so .
but the road that they have to travel is exceedingly difficult , which is why i call upon israelis and palestinians -- and the world -- to rally behind the goal that these leaders now share .
we know that there will be tests along the way and that one test is fast approaching .
israel 's settlement moratorium has made a difference on the ground and improved the atmosphere for talks .
and our position on this issue is well known .
we believe that the moratorium should be extended .
we also believe that talks should press on until completed .
now is the time for the parties to help each other overcome this obstacle .
now is the time to build the trust -- and provide the time -- for substantial progress to be made .
now is the time for this opportunity to be seized , so that it does not slip away .
now , peace must be made by israelis and palestinians , but each of us has a responsibility to do our part as well .
those of us who are friends of israel must understand that true security for the jewish state requires an independent palestine -- one that allows the palestinian people to live with dignity and opportunity .
and those of us who are friends of the palestinians must understand that the rights of the palestinian people will be won only through peaceful means -- including genuine reconciliation with a secure israel .
i know many in this hall count themselves as friends of the palestinians .
but these pledges of friendship must now be supported by deeds .
those who have signed on to the arab peace initiative should seize this opportunity to make it real by taking tangible steps towards the normalization that it promises israel .
and those who speak on behalf of palestinian self - government should help the palestinian authority politically and financially , and in doing so help the palestinians build the institutions of their state .
those who long to see an independent palestine must also stop trying to tear down israel .
after thousands of years , jews and arabs are not strangers in a strange land .
after 60 years in the community of nations , israel 's existence must not be a subject for debate .
israel is a sovereign state , and the historic homeland of the jewish people .
it should be clear to all that efforts to chip away at israel 's legitimacy will only be met by the unshakeable opposition of the united states .
and efforts to threaten or kill israelis will do nothing to help the palestinian people .
the slaughter of innocent israelis is not resistance -- it 's injustice .
and make no mistake : the courage of a man like president abbas , who stands up for his people in front of the world under very difficult circumstances , is far greater than those who fire rockets at innocent women and children .
the conflict between israelis and arabs is as old as this institution .
and we can come back here next year , as we have for the last 60 years , and make long speeches about it .
we can read familiar lists of grievances .
we can table the same resolutions .
we can further empower the forces of rejectionism and hate .
and we can waste more time by carrying forward an argument that will not help a single israeli or palestinian child achieve a better life .
we can do that .
or , we can say that this time will be different -- that this time we will not let terror , or turbulence , or posturing , or petty politics stand in the way .
this time , we will think not of ourselves , but of the young girl in gaza who wants to have no ceiling on her dreams , or the young boy in sderot who wants to sleep without the nightmare of rocket fire .
this time , we should draw upon the teachings of tolerance that lie at the heart of three great religions that see jerusalem 's soil as sacred .
this time we should reach for what 's best within ourselves .
if we do , when we come back here next year , we can have an agreement that will lead to a new member of the united nations -- an independent , sovereign state of palestine , living in peace with israel .
it is our destiny to bear the burdens of the challenges that i 've addressed -- recession and war and conflict .
and there is always a sense of urgency -- even emergency -- that drives most of our foreign policies .
indeed , after millennia marked by wars , this very institution reflects the desire of human beings to create a forum to deal with emergencies that will inevitably come .
but even as we confront immediate challenges , we must also summon the foresight to look beyond them , and consider what we are trying to build over the long term ?
what is the world that awaits us when today 's battles are brought to an end ?
and that is what i would like to talk about with the remainder of my time today .
one of the first actions of this general assembly was to adopt a universal declaration of human rights in 1948 .
that declaration begins by stating that , " recognition of the inherent dignity and of the equal and inalienable rights of all members of the human family is the foundation of freedom , justice , and peace in the world . "
the idea is a simple one -- that freedom , justice and peace for the world must begin with freedom , justice , and peace in the lives of individual human beings .
and for the united states , this is a matter of moral and pragmatic necessity .
as robert kennedy said , " the individual man , the child of god , is the touchstone of value , and all society , groups , the state , exist for his benefit . "
so we stand up for universal values because it 's the right thing to do .
but we also know from experience that those who defend these values for their people have been our closest friends and allies , while those who have denied those rights -- whether terrorist groups or tyrannical governments -- have chosen to be our adversaries .
human rights have never gone unchallenged -- not in any of our nations , and not in our world .
tyranny is still with us -- whether it manifests itself in the taliban killing girls who try to go to school , a north korean regime that enslaves its own people , or an armed group in congo - kinshasa that use rape as a weapon of war .
in times of economic unease , there can also be an anxiety about human rights .
today , as in past times of economic downturn , some put human rights aside for the promise of short term stability or the false notion that economic growth can come at the expense of freedom .
we see leaders abolishing term limits .
we see crackdowns on civil society .
we see corruption smothering entrepreneurship and good governance .
we see democratic reforms deferred indefinitely .
as i said last year , each country will pursue a path rooted in the culture of its own people .
yet experience shows us that history is on the side of liberty ; that the strongest foundation for human progress lies in open economies , open societies , and open governments .
to put it simply , democracy , more than any other form of government , delivers for our citizens .
and i believe that truth will only grow stronger in a world where the borders between nations are blurred .
america is working to shape a world that fosters this openness , for the rot of a closed or corrupt economy must never eclipse the energy and innovation of human beings .
all of us want the right to educate our children , to make a decent wage , to care for the sick , and to be carried as far as our dreams and our deeds will take us .
but that depends upon economies that tap the power of our people , including the potential of women and girls .
that means letting entrepreneurs start a business without paying a bribe and governments that support opportunity instead of stealing from their people .
and that means rewarding hard work , instead of reckless risk - taking .
yesterday , i put forward a new development policy that will pursue these goals , recognizing that dignity is a human right and global development is in our common interest .
america will partner with nations that offer their people a path out of poverty .
and together , we must unleash growth that powers by individuals and emerging markets in all parts of the globe .
there is no reason why africa should not be an exporter of agriculture , which is why our food security initiative is empowering farmers .
there is no reason why entrepreneurs should n't be able to build new markets in every society , which is why i hosted a summit on entrepreneurship earlier this spring , because the obligation of government is to empower individuals , not to impede them .
the same holds true for civil society .
the arc of human progress has been shaped by individuals with the freedom to assemble and by organizations outside of government that insisted upon democratic change and by free media that held the powerful accountable .
we have seen that from the south africans who stood up to apartheid , to the poles of solidarity , to the mothers of the disappeared who spoke out against the dirty war , to americans who marched for the rights of all races , including my own .
civil society is the conscience of our communities and america will always extend our engagement abroad with citizens beyond the halls of government .
and we will call out those who suppress ideas and serve as a voice for those who are voiceless .
we will promote new tools of communication so people are empowered to connect with one another and , in repressive societies , to do so with security .
we will support a free and open internet , so individuals have the information to make up their own minds .
and it is time to embrace and effectively monitor norms that advance the rights of civil society and guarantee its expansion within and across borders .
open society supports open government , but it can not substitute for it .
there is no right more fundamental than the ability to choose your leaders and determine your destiny .
now , make no mistake : the ultimate success of democracy in the world wo n't come because the united states dictates it ; it will come because individual citizens demand a say in how they are governed .
there is no soil where this notion can not take root , just as every democracy reflects the uniqueness of a nation .
later this fall , i will travel to asia .
and i will visit india , which peacefully threw off colonialism and established a thriving democracy of over a billion people .
i 'll continue to indonesia , the world 's largest muslim - majority country , which binds together thousands of islands through the glue of representative government and civil society .
i 'll join the g20 meeting on the korean peninsula , which provides the world 's clearest contrast between a society that is dynamic and open and free , and one that is imprisoned and closed .
and i will conclude my trip in japan , an ancient culture that found peace and extraordinary development through democracy .
each of these countries gives life to democratic principles in their own way .
and even as some governments roll back reform , we also celebrate the courage of a president in colombia who willingly stepped aside , or the promise of a new constitution in kenya .
the common thread of progress is the principle that government is accountable to its citizens .
and the diversity in this room makes clear -- no one country has all the answers , but all of us must answer to our own people .
in all parts of the world , we see the promise of innovation to make government more open and accountable .
and now , we must build on that progress .
and when we gather back here next year , we should bring specific commitments to promote transparency ; to fight corruption ; to energize civic engagement ; to leverage new technologies so that we strengthen the foundations of freedom in our own countries , while living up to the ideals that can light the world .
this institution can still play an indispensable role in the advance of human rights .
it 's time to welcome the efforts of u. n. women to protect the rights of women around the globe .
it 's time for every member state to open its elections to international monitors and increase the u. n. democracy fund .
it 's time to reinvigorate u. n. peacekeeping , so that missions have the resources necessary to succeed , and so atrocities like sexual violence are prevented and justice is enforced -- because neither dignity nor democracy can thrive without basic security .
and it 's time to make this institution more accountable as well , because the challenges of a new century demand new ways of serving our common interests .
the world that america seeks is not one we can build on our own .
for human rights to reach those who suffer the boot of oppression , we need your voices to speak out .
in particular , i appeal to those nations who emerged from tyranny and inspired the world in the second half of the last century -- from south africa to south asia ; from eastern europe to south america .
do n't stand idly by , do n't be silent , when dissidents elsewhere are imprisoned and protesters are beaten .
recall your own history .
because part of the price of our own freedom is standing up for the freedom of others .
that belief will guide america 's leadership in this 21st century .
it is a belief that has seen us through more than two centuries of trial , and it will see us through the challenges we face today -- be it war or recession ; conflict or division .
so even as we have come through a difficult decade , i stand here before you confident in the future -- a future where iraq is governed by neither tyrant nor a foreign power , and afghanistan is freed from the turmoil of war ; a future where the children of israel and palestine can build the peace that was not possible for their parents ; a world where the promise of development reaches into the prisons of poverty and disease ; a future where the cloud of recession gives way to the light of renewal and the dream of opportunity is available to all .
this future will not be easy to reach .
it will not come without setbacks , nor will it be quickly claimed .
but the founding of the united nations itself is a testament to human progress .
remember , in times that were far more trying than our own , our predecessors chose the hope of unity over the ease of division and made a promise to future generations that the dignity and equality of human beings would be our common cause .
it falls to us to fulfill that promise .
and though we will be met by dark forces that will test our resolve , americans have always had cause to believe that we can choose a better history ; that we need only to look outside the walls around us .
for through the citizens of every conceivable ancestry who make this city their own , we see living proof that opportunity can be accessed by all , that what unites us as human beings is far greater than what divides us , and that people from every part of this world can live together in peace .
thank you very much .

madam speaker , mr. vice president , members of congress , the first lady of the united states -- she 's around here somewhere : 
 i have come here tonight not only to address the distinguished men and women in this great chamber , but to speak frankly and directly to the men and women who sent us here .
i know that for many americans watching right now , the state of our economy is a concern that rises above all others , and rightly so .
if you have n't been personally affected by this recession , you probably know someone who has : a friend , a neighbor , a member of your family .
you do n't need to hear another list of statistics to know that our economy is in crisis , because you live it every day .
it 's the worry you wake up with and the source of sleepless nights .
it 's the job you thought you 'd retire from but now have lost , the business you built your dreams upon that 's now hanging by a thread , the college acceptance letter your child had to put back in the envelope .
the impact of this recession is real , and it is everywhere .
but while our economy may be weakened and our confidence shaken , though we are living through difficult and uncertain times , tonight i want every american to know this : we will rebuild , we will recover , and the united states of america will emerge stronger than before .
the weight of this crisis will not determine the destiny of this nation .
the answers to our problems do n't lie beyond our reach .
they exist in our laboratories and our universities , in our fields and our factories , in the imaginations of our entrepreneurs and the pride of the hardest working people on earth .
those qualities that have made america the greatest force of progress and prosperity in human history , we still possess in ample measure .
what is required now is for this country to pull together , confront boldly the challenges we face , and take responsibility for our future once more .
now , if we 're honest with ourselves , we 'll admit that for too long , we have not always met these responsibilities as a government or as a people .
i say this not to lay blame or to look backwards , but because it is only by understanding how we arrived at this moment that we 'll be able to lift ourselves out of this predicament .
the fact is , our economy did not fall into decline overnight , nor did all of our problems begin when the housing market collapsed or the stock market sank .
we have known for decades that our survival depends on finding new sources of energy , yet we import more oil today than ever before .
the cost of health care eats up more and more of our savings each year , yet we keep delaying reform .
our children will compete for jobs in a global economy that too many of our schools do not prepare them for .
and though all these challenges went unsolved , we still managed to spend more money and pile up more debt , both as individuals and through our government , than ever before .
in other words , we have lived through an era where too often short - term gains were prized over long - term prosperity , where we failed to look beyond the next payment , the next quarter , or the next election .
a surplus became an excuse to transfer wealth to the wealthy instead of an opportunity to invest in our future .
regulations were gutted for the sake of a quick profit at the expense of a healthy market .
people bought homes they knew they could n't afford from banks and lenders who pushed those bad loans anyway .
and all the while , critical debates and difficult decisions were put off for some other time , on some other day .
well , that day of reckoning has arrived , and the time to take charge of our future is here .
now is the time to act boldly and wisely to not only revive this economy , but to build a new foundation for lasting prosperity .
now is the time to jumpstart job creation , restart lending , and invest in areas like energy , health care , and education that will grow our economy , even as we make hard choices to bring our deficit down .
that is what my economic agenda is designed to do , and that is what i 'd like to talk to you about tonight .
it 's an agenda that begins with jobs .
as soon as i took office , i asked this congress to send me a recovery plan by president 's day that would put people back to work and put money in their pockets , not because i believe in bigger government -- i do n't -- not because i 'm not mindful of the massive debt we 've inherited -- i am .
i called for action because the failure to do so would have cost more jobs and caused more hardship .
in fact , a failure to act would have worsened our long - term deficit by assuring weak economic growth for years .
and that 's why i pushed for quick action .
and tonight i am grateful that this congress delivered and pleased to say that the american recovery and reinvestment act is now law .
over the next 2 years , this plan will save or create 3.5 million jobs .
more than 90 percent of these jobs will be in the private sector : jobs rebuilding our roads and bridges , constructing wind turbines and solar panels , laying broadband and expanding mass transit .
because of this plan , there are teachers who can now keep their jobs and educate our kids , health care professionals can continue caring for our sick .
there are 57 police officers who are still on the streets of minneapolis tonight because this plan prevented the layoffs their department was about to make .
because of this plan , 95 percent of working households in america will receive a tax cut ; a tax cut that you will see in your paychecks beginning on april 1st .
because of this plan , families who are struggling to pay tuition costs will receive a $ 2,500 tax credit for all 4 years of college , and americans who have lost their jobs in this recession will be able to receive extended unemployment benefits and continued health care coverage to help them weather this storm .
now , i know there are some in this chamber and watching at home who are skeptical of whether this plan will work , and i understand that skepticism .
here in washington , we 've all seen how quickly good intentions can turn into broken promises and wasteful spending .
and with a plan of this scale comes enormous responsibility to get it right .
and that 's why i 've asked vice president biden to lead a tough , unprecedented oversight effort ; because nobody messes with joe .
i -- am i right ?
they do n't mess with him .
i have told each of my cabinet , as well as mayors and governors across the country , that they will be held accountable by me and the american people for every dollar they spend .
i 've appointed a proven and aggressive inspector general to ferret out any and all cases of waste and fraud .
and we have created a new web site called recovery .
gov , so that every american can find out how and where their money is being spent .
so the recovery plan we passed is the first step in getting our economy back on track .
but it is just the first step .
because even if we manage this plan flawlessly , there will be no real recovery unless we clean up the credit crisis that has severely weakened our financial system .
i want to speak plainly and candidly about this issue tonight , because every american should know that it directly affects you and your family 's well - being .
you should also know that the money you 've deposited in banks across the country is safe , your insurance is secure , you can rely on the continued operation of our financial system .
that 's not the source of concern .
the concern is that if we do not restart lending in this country , our recovery will be choked off before it even begins .
you see , the flow of credit is the lifeblood of our economy .
the ability to get a loan is how you finance the purchase of everything from a home to a car to a college education , how stores stock their shelves , farms buy equipment , and businesses make payroll .
but credit has stopped flowing the way it should .
too many bad loans from the housing crisis have made their way onto the books of too many banks .
and with so much debt and so little confidence , these banks are now fearful of lending out any more money to households , to businesses , or even to each other .
and when there is no lending , families ca n't afford to buy homes or cars , so businesses are forced to make layoffs .
our economy suffers even more , and credit dries up even further .
that is why this administration is moving swiftly and aggressively to break this destructive cycle , to restore confidence , and restart lending .
and we will do so in several ways .
first , we are creating a new lending fund that represents the largest effort ever to help provide auto loans , college loans , and small - business loans to the consumers and entrepreneurs who keep this economy running .
second , we have launched a housing plan that will help responsible families facing the threat of foreclosure lower their monthly payments and refinance their mortgages .
it 's a plan that wo n't help speculators or that neighbor down the street who bought a house he could never hope to afford , but it will help millions of americans who are struggling with declining home values ; americans who will now be able to take advantage of the lower interest rates that this plan has already helped to bring about .
in fact , the average family who refinances today can save nearly $ 2,000 per year on their mortgage .
third , we will act with the full force of the federal government to ensure that the major banks that americans depend on have enough confidence and enough money to lend even in more difficult times .
and when we learn that a major bank has serious problems , we will hold accountable those responsible , force the necessary adjustments , provide the support to clean up their balance sheets , and assure the continuity of a strong , viable institution that can serve our people and our economy .
now , i understand that on any given day , wall street may be more comforted by an approach that gives bank bailouts with no strings attached and that holds nobody accountable for their reckless decisions .
but such an approach wo n't solve the problem , and our goal is to quicken the day when we restart lending to the american people and american business and end this crisis once and for all .
and i intend to hold these banks fully accountable for the assistance they receive , and this time , they will have to clearly demonstrate how taxpayer dollars result in more lending for the american taxpayer .
this time , ceos wo n't be able to use taxpayer money to pad their paychecks or buy fancy drapes or disappear on a private jet .
those days are over .
still , this plan will require significant resources from the federal government -- and , yes , probably more than we 've already set aside .
but while the cost of action will be great , i can assure you that the cost of inaction will be far greater , for it could result in an economy that sputters along for not months or years , but perhaps a decade .
that would be worse for our deficit , worse for business , worse for you , and worse for the next generation .
and i refuse to let that happen .
now , i understand that when the last administration asked this congress to provide assistance for struggling banks , democrats and republicans alike were infuriated by the mismanagement and the results that followed .
so were the american taxpayers ; so was i. so i know how unpopular it is to be seen as helping banks right now , especially when everyone is suffering in part from their bad decisions .
i promise you , i get it .
but i also know that in a time of crisis , we can not afford to govern out of anger or yield to the politics of the moment .
my job -- our job is to solve the problem .
our job is to govern with a sense of responsibility .
i will not send -- i will not spend a single penny for the purpose of rewarding a single wall street executive , but i will do whatever it takes to help the small business that ca n't pay its workers or the family that has saved and still ca n't get a mortgage .
that 's what this is about .
it 's not about helping banks ; it 's about helping people -- .
it 's not about helping banks ; it 's about helping people .
because when credit is available again , that young family can finally buy a new home .
and then some company will hire workers to build it .
and then those workers will have money to spend .
and if they can get a loan too , maybe they 'll finally buy that car or open their own business .
investors will return to the market , and american families will see their retirement secured once more .
slowly but surely , confidence will return and our economy will recover .
so i ask this congress to join me in doing whatever proves necessary , because we can not consign our nation to an open - ended recession .
and to ensure that a crisis of this magnitude never happens again , i ask congress to move quickly on legislation that will finally reform our outdated regulatory system .
it is time to put in place tough , new , commonsense rules of the road so that our financial market rewards drive and innovation , and punishes shortcuts and abuse .
the recovery plan and the financial stability plan are the immediate steps we 're taking to revive our economy in the short term .
but the only way to fully restore america 's economic strength is to make the long - term investments that will lead to new jobs , new industries , and a renewed ability to compete with the rest of the world .
the only way this century will be another american century is if we confront at last the price of our dependence on oil and the high cost of health care , the schools that are n't preparing our children and the mountain of debt they stand to inherit .
that is our responsibility .
in the next few days , i will submit a budget to congress .
so often , we 've come to view these documents as simply numbers on a page or a laundry list of programs .
i see this document differently .
i see it as a vision for america , as a blueprint for our future .
my budget does not attempt to solve every problem or address every issue .
it reflects the stark reality of what we 've inherited , a trillion - dollar deficit , a financial crisis , and a costly recession .
given these realities , everyone in this chamber , democrats and republicans , will have to sacrifice some worthy priorities for which there are no dollars .
and that includes me .
but that does not mean we can afford to ignore our long - term challenges .
i reject the view that says our problems will simply take care of themselves , that says government has no role in laying the foundation for our common prosperity .
for history tells a different story .
history reminds us that at every moment of economic upheaval and transformation , this nation has responded with bold action and big ideas .
in the midst of civil war , we laid railroad tracks from one coast to another that spurred commerce and industry .
from the turmoil of the industrial revolution came a system of public high schools that prepared our citizens for a new age .
in the wake of war and depression , the gi bill sent a generation to college and created the largest middle class in history .
and a twilight struggle for freedom led to a nation of highways , an american on the moon , and an explosion of technology that still shapes our world .
in each case , government did n't supplant private enterprise ; it catalyzed private enterprise .
it created the conditions for thousands of entrepreneurs and new businesses to adapt and to thrive .
we are a nation that has seen promise amid peril and claimed opportunity from ordeal .
now we must be that nation again , and that is why , even as it cuts back on programs we do n't need , the budget i submit will invest in the three areas that are absolutely critical to our economic future : energy , health care , and education .
it begins with energy .
we know the country that harnesses the power of clean , renewable energy will lead the 21st century .
and yet , it is china that has launched the largest effort in history to make their economy energy - efficient .
we invented solar technology , but we 've fallen behind countries like germany and japan in producing it .
new plug - in hybrids roll off our assembly lines , but they will run on batteries made in korea .
well , i do not accept a future where the jobs and industries of tomorrow take root beyond our borders , and i know you do n't either .
it is time for america to lead again .
thanks to our recovery plan , we will double this nation 's supply of renewable energy in the next 3 years .
we 've also made the largest investment in basic research funding in american history , an investment that will spur not only new discoveries in energy but breakthroughs in medicine and science and technology .
we will soon lay down thousands of miles of power lines that can carry new energy to cities and towns across this country .
and we will put americans to work making our homes and buildings more efficient so that we can save billions of dollars on our energy bills .
but to truly transform our economy , to protect our security , and save our planet from the ravages of climate change , we need to ultimately make clean , renewable energy the profitable kind of energy .
so i ask this congress to send me legislation that places a market - based cap on carbon pollution and drives the production of more renewable energy in america .
that 's what we need .
and to support that innovation , we will invest $ 15 billion a year to develop technologies like wind power and solar power , advanced biofuels , clean coal , and more efficient cars and trucks built right here in america .
speaking of our auto industry , everyone recognizes that years of bad decisionmaking and a global recession have pushed our automakers to the brink .
we should not , and will not , protect them from their own bad practices .
but we are committed to the goal of a retooled , reimagined auto industry that can compete and win .
millions of jobs depend on it ; scores of communities depend on it .
and i believe the nation that invented the automobile can not walk away from it .
now , none of this will come without cost , nor will it be easy .
but this is america .
we do n't do what 's easy .
we do what 's necessary to move this country forward .
and for that same reason , we must also address the crushing cost of health care .
this is a cost that now causes a bankruptcy in america every 30 seconds .
by the end of the year , it could cause 1.5 million americans to lose their homes .
in the last 8 years , premiums have grown four times faster than wages .
and in each of these years , 1 million more americans have lost their health insurance .
it is one of the major reasons why small businesses close their doors and corporations ship jobs overseas .
and it 's one of the largest and fastest growing parts of our budget .
given these facts , we can no longer afford to put health care reform on hold .
we ca n't afford to do it .
it 's time .
already , we 've done more to advance the cause of health care reform in the last 30 days than we 've done in the last decade .
when it was days old , this congress passed a law to provide and protect health insurance for 11 million american children whose parents work full time .
our recovery plan will invest in electronic health records , a new technology that will reduce errors , bring down costs , ensure privacy , and save lives .
it will launch a new effort to conquer a disease that has touched the life of nearly every american , including me , by seeking a cure for cancer in our time .
and it makes the largest investment ever in preventive care , because that 's one of the best ways to keep our people healthy and our costs under control .
this budget builds on these reforms .
it includes a historic commitment to comprehensive health care reform , a down payment on the principle that we must have quality , affordable health care for every american .
it 's a commitment that 's paid for in part by efficiencies in our system that are long overdue .
and it 's a step we must take if we hope to bring down our deficit in the years to come .
now , there will be many different opinions and ideas about how to achieve reform , and that 's why i 'm bringing together businesses and workers , doctors and health care providers , democrats and republicans to begin work on this issue next week .
i suffer no illusions that this will be an easy process .
once again , it will be hard .
but i also know that nearly a century after teddy roosevelt first called for reform , the cost of our health care has weighed down our economy and our conscience long enough .
so let there be no doubt : health care reform can not wait , it must not wait , and it will not wait another year .
the third challenge we must address is the urgent need to expand the promise of education in america .
in a global economy where the most valuable skill you can sell is your knowledge , a good education is no longer just a pathway to opportunity , it is a prerequisite .
right now , three - quarters of the fastest growing occupations require more than a high school diploma .
and yet , just over half of our citizens have that level of education .
we have one of the highest high school dropout rates of any industrialized nation , and half of the students who begin college never finish .
this is a prescription for economic decline , because we know the countries that out - teach us today will out - compete us tomorrow .
that is why it will be the goal of this administration to ensure that every child has access to a complete and competitive education , from the day they are born to the day they begin a career .
that is a promise we have to make to the children of america .
already , we 've made historic investment in education through the economic recovery plan .
we 've dramatically expanded early childhood education and will continue to improve its quality , because we know that the most formative learning comes in those first years of life .
we 've made college affordable for nearly 7 million more students -- 7 million .
and we have provided the resources necessary to prevent painful cuts and teacher layoffs that would set back our children 's progress .
but we know that our schools do n't just need more resources , they need more reform .
and that is why this budget creates new teachers -- new incentives for teacher performance , pathways for advancement , and rewards for success .
we 'll invest in innovative programs that are already helping schools meet high standards and close achievement gaps , and we will expand our commitment to charter schools .
it is our responsibility as lawmakers and as educators to make this system work .
but it is the responsibility of every citizen to participate in it .
so tonight i ask every american to commit to at least 1 year or more of higher education or career training .
this can be community college or a 4-year school , vocational training or an apprenticeship .
but whatever the training may be , every american will need to get more than a high school diploma .
and dropping out of high school is no longer an option .
it 's not just quitting on yourself , it 's quitting on your country , and this country needs and values the talents of every american .
that 's why we will support -- we will provide the support necessary for all young americans to complete college and meet a new goal .
by 2020 , america will once again have the highest proportion of college graduates in the world .
that is a goal we can meet .
that 's a goal we can meet .
now , i know that the price of tuition is higher than ever , which is why if you are willing to volunteer in your neighborhood or give back to your community or serve your country , we will make sure that you can afford a higher education .
and to encourage a renewed spirit of national service for this and future generations , i ask congress to send me the bipartisan legislation that bears the name of senator orrin hatch , as well as an american who has never stopped asking what he can do for his country , senator edward kennedy .
these education policies will open the doors of opportunity for our children , but it is up to us to ensure they walk through them .
in the end , there is no program or policy that can substitute for a parent , for a mother or father who will attend those parent / teacher conferences or help with homework or turn off the tv , put away the video games , read to their child .
i speak to you not just as a president , but as a father , when i say that responsibility for our children 's education must begin at home .
that is not a democratic issue or a republican issue ; that 's an american issue .
there is , of course , another responsibility we have to our children .
and that 's the responsibility to ensure that we do not pass on to them a debt they can not pay .
that is critical .
i agree , absolutely .
see , i know we can get some consensus in here .
with the deficit we inherited , the cost of the crisis we face , and the long - term challenges we must meet , it has never been more important to ensure that as our economy recovers , we do what it takes to bring this deficit down .
that is critical .
now , i 'm proud that we passed a recovery plan free of earmarks , and i want to pass a budget next year that ensures that each dollar we spend reflects only our most important national priorities .
and yesterday i held a fiscal summit where i pledged to cut the deficit in half by the end of my first term in office .
my administration has also begun to go line by line through the federal budget in order to eliminate wasteful and ineffective programs .
as you can imagine , this is a process that will take some time .
but we have already identified $ 2 trillion in savings over the next decade .
in this budget , we will end education programs that do n't work and end direct payments to large agribusiness that do n't need them .
we 'll eliminate the no - bid contracts that have wasted billions in iraq and reform our defense budget so that we 're not paying for cold war - era weapons systems we do n't use .
we will root out the waste and fraud and abuse in our medicare program that does n't make our seniors any healthier .
we will restore a sense of fairness and balance to our tax code by finally ending the tax breaks for corporations that ship our jobs overseas .
in order to save our children from a future of debt , we will also end the tax breaks for the wealthiest 2 percent of americans .
now , let me be clear -- let me be absolutely clear , because i know you 'll end up hearing some of the same claims that rolling back these tax breaks means a massive tax increase on the american people : if your family earns less than $ 250,000 a year , a quarter million dollars a year , you will not see your taxes increased a single dime .
i repeat : not one single dime .
in fact -- not a dime -- in fact , the recovery plan provides a tax cut -- that 's right , a tax cut -- for 95 percent of working families .
and by the way , these checks are on the way .
now , to preserve our long - term fiscal health , we must also address the growing costs in medicare and social security .
comprehensive health care reform is the best way to strengthen medicare for years to come .
and we must also begin a conversation on how to do the same for social security , while creating tax - free universal savings accounts for all americans .
finally , because we 're also suffering from a deficit of trust , i am committed to restoring a sense of honesty and accountability to our budget .
that is why this budget looks ahead 10 years and accounts for spending that was left out under the old rules .
and for the first time , that includes the full cost of fighting in iraq and afghanistan .
for 7 years , we have been a nation at war .
no longer will we hide its price .
along with our outstanding national security team , i 'm now carefully reviewing our policies in both wars , and i will soon announce a way forward in iraq that leaves iraq to its people and responsibly ends this war .
and with our friends and allies , we will forge a new and comprehensive strategy for afghanistan and pakistan to defeat al qaida and combat extremism , because i will not allow terrorists to plot against the american people from safe havens halfway around the world .
we will not allow it .
as we meet here tonight , our men and women in uniform stand watch abroad and more are readying to deploy .
to each and every one of them and to the families who bear the quiet burden of their absence , americans are united in sending one message : we honor your service ; we are inspired by your sacrifice ; and you have our unyielding support .
to relieve the strain on our forces , my budget increases the number of our soldiers and marines .
and to keep our sacred trust with those who serve , we will raise their pay and give our veterans the expanded health care and benefits that they have earned .
to overcome extremism , we must also be vigilant in upholding the values our troops defend , because there is no force in the world more powerful than the example of america .
and that is why i have ordered the closing of the detention center at guantanamo bay and will seek swift and certain justice for captured terrorists .
because living our values does n't make us weaker , it makes us safer and it makes us stronger .
and that is why i can stand here tonight and say without exception or equivocation that the united states of america does not torture .
we can make that commitment here tonight .
in words and deeds , we are showing the world that a new era of engagement has begun .
for we know that america can not meet the threats of this century alone , but the world can not meet them without america .
we can not shun the negotiating table , nor ignore the foes or forces that could do us harm .
we are instead called to move forward with the sense of confidence and candor that serious times demand .
to seek progress towards a secure and lasting peace between israel and her neighbors , we have appointed an envoy to sustain our effort .
to meet the challenges of the 21st century -- from terrorism to nuclear proliferation , from pandemic disease to cyber threats to crushing poverty -- we will strengthen old alliances , forge new ones , and use all elements of our national power .
and to respond to an economic crisis that is global in scope , we are working with the nations of the g-20 to restore confidence in our financial system , avoid the possibility of escalating protectionism , and spur demand for american goods in markets across the globe .
for the world depends on us having a strong economy , just as our economy depends on the strength of the world 's .
as we stand at this crossroads of history , the eyes of all people in all nations are once again upon us , watching to see what we do with this moment , waiting for us to lead .
those of us gathered here tonight have been called to govern in extraordinary times .
it is a tremendous burden , but also a great privilege , one that has been entrusted to few generations of americans .
for in our hands lies the ability to shape our world for good or for ill .
i know that it 's easy to lose sight of this truth , to become cynical and doubtful , consumed with the petty and the trivial .
but in my life , i have also learned that hope is found in unlikely places , that inspiration often comes not from those with the most power or celebrity , but from the dreams and aspirations of ordinary americans who are anything but ordinary .
i think of leonard abess , a bank president from miami who reportedly cashed out of his company , took a $ 60 million bonus , and gave it out to all 399 people who worked for him , plus another 72 who used to work for him .
he did n't tell anyone , but when the local newspaper found out , he simply said , " i knew some of these people since i was 7 years old .
it did n't feel right getting the money myself . "
i think about greensburg , kansas , a town that was completely destroyed by a tornado , but is being rebuilt by its residents as a global example of how clean energy can power an entire community , how it can bring jobs and businesses to a place where piles of bricks and rubble once lay . "
the tragedy was terrible , " said one of the men who helped them rebuild . "
but the folks here know that it also provided an incredible opportunity . "
i think about ty'sheoma bethea , the young girl from that school i visited in dillon , south carolina , a place where the ceilings leak , the paint peels off the walls , and they have to stop teaching six times a day because the train barrels by their classroom .
she had been told that her school is hopeless , but the other day after class she went to the public library and typed up a letter to the people sitting in this chamber .
she even asked her principal for the money to buy a stamp .
the letter asks us for help and says : " we are just students trying to become lawyers , doctors , congressmen like yourself , and one day president , so we can make a change to not just the state of south carolina but also the world .
we are not quitters . "
that 's what she said : " we are not quitters . "
these words and these stories tell us something about the spirit of the people who sent us here .
they tell us that even in the most trying times , amid the most difficult circumstances , there is a generosity , a resilience , a decency , and a determination that perseveres , a willingness to take responsibility for our future and for posterity .
their resolve must be our inspiration .
their concerns must be our cause .
and we must show them and all our people that we are equal to the task before us .
i know -- look , i know that we have n't agreed on every issue thus far .
there are surely times in the future where we will part ways .
but i also know that every american who is sitting here tonight loves this country and wants it to succeed .
i know that .
that must be the starting point for every debate we have in the coming months and where we return after those debates are done .
that is the foundation on which the american people expect us to build common ground .
and if we do , if we come together and lift this nation from the depths of this crisis , if we put our people back to work and restart the engine of our prosperity , if we confront without fear the challenges of our time and summon that enduring spirit of an america that does not quit , then someday years from now our children can tell their children that this was the time when we performed , in the words that are carved into this very chamber , " something worthy to be remembered . "
thank you .
god bless you , and may god bless the united states of america .
thank you .

hello rutgers !
r - u rah - rah !
thank you so much .
thank you .
everybody , please have a seat .
thank you , president barchi , for that introduction .
let me congratulate my extraordinarily worthy fellow honorary scarlet knights , dr. burnell and bill moyers .
matthew , good job .
if you are interested , we can talk after this .
one of the perks of my job is honorary degrees .
but i have to tell you , it impresses nobody in my house .
now malia and sasha just say , " okay , dr. dad , we 'll see you later .
can we have some money ? "
to the board of governors ; to chairman brown ; to lieutenant governor guadagno ; mayor cahill ; mayor wahler , members of congress , rutgers administrators , faculty , staff , friends , and family -- thank you for the honor of joining you for the 250th anniversary of this remarkable institution .
but most of all , congratulations to the class of 2016 !
i come here for a simple reason -- to finally settle this pork roll vs. taylor ham question .
i 'm just kidding .
there 's not much i 'm afraid to take on in my final year of office , but i know better than to get in the middle of that debate .
the truth is , rutgers , i came here because you asked .
now , it 's true that a lot of schools invite me to their commencement every year .
but you are the first to launch a three - year campaign .
emails , letters , tweets , youtube videos .
i even got three notes from the grandmother of your student body president .
and i have to say that really sealed the deal .
that was smart , because i have a soft spot for grandmas .
so i 'm here , off exit 9 , on the banks of the old raritan --   -- at the site of one of the original nine colonial colleges .
winners of the first - ever college football game .
one of the newest members of the big ten .
home of what i understand to be a grease truck for a fat sandwich .
mozzarella sticks and chicken fingers on your cheesesteaks --   i 'm sure michelle would approve .
but somehow , you have survived such death - defying acts .
you also survived the daily jockeying for buses , from livingston to busch , to cook , to douglass , and back again .
i suspect that a few of you are trying to survive this afternoon , after a late night at olde queens .
you know who you are .
but , however you got here , you made it .
you made it .
today , you join a long line of scarlet knights whose energy and intellect have lifted this university to heights its founders could not have imagined .
two hundred and fifty years ago , when america was still just an idea , a charter from the royal governor -- ben franklin 's son -- established queen 's college .
a few years later , a handful of students gathered in a converted tavern for the first class .
and from that first class in a pub , rutgers has evolved into one of the finest research institutions in america .
this is a place where you 3d - print prosthetic hands for children , and devise rooftop wind arrays that can power entire office buildings with clean , renewable energy .
every day , tens of thousands of students come here , to this intellectual melting pot , where ideas and cultures flow together among what might just be america 's most diverse student body .
here in new brunswick , you can debate philosophy with a classmate from south asia in one class , and then strike up a conversation on the ee bus with a first - generation latina student from jersey city , before sitting down for your psych group project with a veteran who 's going to school on the post-9/11 gi bill .
america converges here .
and in so many ways , the history of rutgers mirrors the evolution of america -- the course by which we became bigger , stronger , and richer and more dynamic , and a more inclusive nation .
but america 's progress has never been smooth or steady .
progress does n't travel in a straight line .
it zigs and zags in fits and starts .
progress in america has been hard and contentious , and sometimes bloody .
it remains uneven and at times , for every two steps forward , it feels like we take one step back .
now , for some of you , this may sound like your college career .
it sounds like mine , anyway .
which makes sense , because measured against the whole of human history , america remains a very young nation -- younger , even , than this university .
but progress is bumpy .
it always has been .
but because of dreamers and innovators and strivers and activists , progress has been this nation 's hallmark .
i 'm fond of quoting dr. martin luther king , jr. , who said , " the arc of the moral universe is long , but it bends towards justice . "
it bends towards justice .
i believe that .
but i also believe that the arc of our nation , the arc of the world does not bend towards justice , or freedom , or equality , or prosperity on its own .
it depends on us , on the choices we make , particularly at certain inflection points in history ; particularly when big changes are happening and everything seems up for grabs .
and , class of 2016 , you are graduating at such an inflection point .
since the start of this new millennium , you 've already witnessed horrific terrorist attacks , and war , and a great recession .
you 've seen economic and technological and cultural shifts that are profoundly altering how we work and how we communicate , how we live , how we form families .
the pace of change is not subsiding ; it is accelerating .
and these changes offer not only great opportunity , but also great peril .
fortunately , your generation has everything it takes to lead this country toward a brighter future .
i 'm confident that you can make the right choices -- away from fear and division and paralysis , and toward cooperation and innovation and hope .
now , partly , i 'm confident because , on average , you 're smarter and better educated than my generation -- although we probably had better penmanship --   -- and were certainly better spellers .
we did not have spell - check back in my day .
you 're not only better educated , you 've been more exposed to the world , more exposed to other cultures .
you 're more diverse .
you 're more environmentally conscious .
you have a healthy skepticism for conventional wisdom .
so you 've got the tools to lead us .
and precisely because i have so much confidence in you , i 'm not going to spend the remainder of my time telling you exactly how you 're going to make the world better .
you 'll figure it out .
you 'll look at things with fresher eyes , unencumbered by the biases and blind spots and inertia and general crankiness of your parents and grandparents and old heads like me .
but i do have a couple of suggestions that you may find useful as you go out there and conquer the world .
point number one : when you hear someone longing for the " good old days , " take it with a grain of salt .
take it with a grain of salt .
we live in a great nation and we are rightly proud of our history .
we are beneficiaries of the labor and the grit and the courage of generations who came before .
but i guess it 's part of human nature , especially in times of change and uncertainty , to want to look backwards and long for some imaginary past when everything worked , and the economy hummed , and all politicians were wise , and every kid was well - mannered , and america pretty much did whatever it wanted around the world .
guess what .
it ai n't so .
the " good old days " were n't that great .
yes , there have been some stretches in our history where the economy grew much faster , or when government ran more smoothly .
there were moments when , immediately after world war ii , for example , or the end of the cold war , when the world bent more easily to our will .
but those are sporadic , those moments , those episodes .
in fact , by almost every measure , america is better , and the world is better , than it was 50 years ago , or 30 years ago , or even eight years ago .
and by the way , i 'm not -- set aside 150 years ago , pre - civil war -- there 's a whole bunch of stuff there we could talk about .
set aside life in the ' 50s , when women and people of color were systematically excluded from big chunks of american life .
since i graduated , in 1983 -- which is n't that long ago --   -- i 'm just saying .
since i graduated , crime rates , teenage pregnancy , the share of americans living in poverty -- they 're all down .
the share of americans with college educations have gone way up .
our life expectancy has , as well .
blacks and latinos have risen up the ranks in business and politics .
more women are in the workforce .
they 're earning more money -- although it 's long past time that we passed laws to make sure that women are getting the same pay for the same work as men .
meanwhile , in the eight years since most of you started high school , we 're also better off .
you and your fellow graduates are entering the job market with better prospects than any time since 2007 .
twenty million more americans know the financial security of health insurance .
we 're less dependent on foreign oil .
we 've doubled the production of clean energy .
we have cut the high school dropout rate .
we 've cut the deficit by two - thirds .
marriage equality is the law of the land .
and just as america is better , the world is better than when i graduated .
since i graduated , an iron curtain fell , apartheid ended .
there 's more democracy .
we virtually eliminated certain diseases like polio .
we 've cut extreme poverty drastically .
we 've cut infant mortality by an enormous amount .
now , i say all these things not to make you complacent .
we 've got a bunch of big problems to solve .
but i say it to point out that change has been a constant in our history .
and the reason america is better is because we did n't look backwards we did n't fear the future .
we seized the future and made it our own .
and that 's exactly why it 's always been young people like you that have brought about big change -- because you do n't fear the future .
that leads me to my second point : the world is more interconnected than ever before , and it 's becoming more connected every day .
building walls wo n't change that .
look , as president , my first responsibility is always the security and prosperity of the united states .
and as citizens , we all rightly put our country first .
but if the past two decades have taught us anything , it 's that the biggest challenges we face can not be solved in isolation .
when overseas states start falling apart , they become breeding grounds for terrorists and ideologies of nihilism and despair that ultimately can reach our shores .
when developing countries do n't have functioning health systems , epidemics like zika or ebola can spread and threaten americans , too .
and a wall wo n't stop that .
if we want to close loopholes that allow large corporations and wealthy individuals to avoid paying their fair share of taxes , we 've got to have the cooperation of other countries in a global financial system to help enforce financial laws .
the point is , to help ourselves we 've got to help others --   -- not pull up the drawbridge and try to keep the world out .
and engagement does not just mean deploying our military .
there are times where we must take military action to protect ourselves and our allies , and we are in awe of and we are grateful for the men and women who make up the finest fighting force the world has ever known .
but i worry if we think that the entire burden of our engagement with the world is up to the 1 percent who serve in our military , and the rest of us can just sit back and do nothing .
they ca n't shoulder the entire burden .
and engagement means using all the levers of our national power , and rallying the world to take on our shared challenges .
you look at something like trade , for example .
we live in an age of global supply chains , and cargo ships that crisscross oceans , and online commerce that can render borders obsolete .
and a lot of folks have legitimate concerns with the way globalization has progressed -- that 's one of the changes that 's been taking place -- jobs shipped overseas , trade deals that sometimes put workers and businesses at a disadvantage .
but the answer is n't to stop trading with other countries .
in this global economy , that 's not even possible .
the answer is to do trade the right way , by negotiating with other countries so that they raise their labor standards and their environmental standards ; and we make sure they do n't impose unfair tariffs on american goods or steal american intellectual property .
that 's how we make sure that international rules are consistent with our values -- including human rights .
and ultimately , that 's how we help raise wages here in america .
that 's how we help our workers compete on a level playing field .
building walls wo n't do that .
it wo n't boost our economy , and it wo n't enhance our security either .
isolating or disparaging muslims , suggesting that they should be treated differently when it comes to entering this country --   -- that is not just a betrayal of our values --   -- that 's not just a betrayal of who we are , it would alienate the very communities at home and abroad who are our most important partners in the fight against violent extremism .
suggesting that we can build an endless wall along our borders , and blame our challenges on immigrants -- that does n't just run counter to our history as the world 's melting pot ; it contradicts the evidence that our growth and our innovation and our dynamism has always been spurred by our ability to attract strivers from every corner of the globe .
that 's how we became america .
why would we want to stop it now ?
ca n't do it .
which brings me to my third point : facts , evidence , reason , logic , an understanding of science -- these are good things .
these are qualities you want in people making policy .
these are qualities you want to continue to cultivate in yourselves as citizens .
that might seem obvious .
that 's why we honor bill moyers or dr. burnell .
we traditionally have valued those things .
but if you were listening to today 's political debate , you might wonder where this strain of anti - intellectualism came from .
so , class of 2016 , let me be as clear as i can be .
in politics and in life , ignorance is not a virtue .
it 's not cool to not know what you 're talking about .
that 's not keeping it real , or telling it like it is .
that 's not challenging political correctness .
that 's just not knowing what you 're talking about .
and yet , we 've become confused about this .
look , our nation 's founders -- franklin , madison , hamilton , jefferson -- they were born of the enlightenment .
they sought to escape superstition , and sectarianism , and tribalism , and no - nothingness .
they believed in rational thought and experimentation , and the capacity of informed citizens to master our own fates .
that is embedded in our constitutional design .
that spirit informed our inventors and our explorers , the edisons and the wright brothers , and the george washington carvers and the grace hoppers , and the norman borlaugs and the steve jobses .
that 's what built this country .
and today , in every phone in one of your pockets --   -- we have access to more information than at any time in human history , at a touch of a button .
but , ironically , the flood of information has n't made us more discerning of the truth .
in some ways , it 's just made us more confident in our ignorance .
we assume whatever is on the web must be true .
we search for sites that just reinforce our own predispositions .
opinions masquerade as facts .
the wildest conspiracy theories are taken for gospel .
now , understand , i am sure you 've learned during your years of college -- and if not , you will learn soon -- that there are a whole lot of folks who are book smart and have no common sense .
that 's the truth .
you 'll meet them if you have n't already .
so the fact that they 've got a fancy degree -- you got to talk to them to see whether they know what they 're talking about .
qualities like kindness and compassion , honesty , hard work -- they often matter more than technical skills or know - how .
but when our leaders express a disdain for facts , when they 're not held accountable for repeating falsehoods and just making stuff up , while actual experts are dismissed as elitists , then we 've got a problem .
you know , it 's interesting that if we get sick , we actually want to make sure the doctors have gone to medical school , they know what they 're talking about .
if we get on a plane , we say we really want a pilot to be able to pilot the plane .
and yet , in our public lives , we certainly think , " i do n't want somebody who 's done it before . "
the rejection of facts , the rejection of reason and science -- that is the path to decline .
it calls to mind the words of carl sagan , who graduated high school here in new jersey --   -- he said : " we can judge our progress by the courage of our questions and the depths of our answers , our willingness to embrace what is true rather than what feels good . "
the debate around climate change is a perfect example of this .
now , i recognize it does n't feel like the planet is warmer right now .
i understand .
there was hail when i landed in newark .
but think about the climate change issue .
every day , there are officials in high office with responsibilities who mock the overwhelming consensus of the world 's scientists that human activities and the release of carbon dioxide and methane and other substances are altering our climate in profound and dangerous ways .
a while back , you may have seen a united states senator trotted out a snowball during a floor speech in the middle of winter as " proof " that the world was not warming .
i mean , listen , climate change is not something subject to political spin .
there is evidence .
there are facts .
we can see it happening right now .
if we do n't act , if we do n't follow through on the progress we made in paris , the progress we 've been making here at home , your generation will feel the brunt of this catastrophe .
so it 's up to you to insist upon and shape an informed debate .
imagine if benjamin franklin had seen that senator with the snowball , what he would think .
imagine if your 5th grade science teacher had seen that .
he 'd get a d.   and he 's a senator !
look , i 'm not suggesting that cold analysis and hard data are ultimately more important in life than passion , or faith , or love , or loyalty .
i am suggesting that those highest expressions of our humanity can only flourish when our economy functions well , and proposed budgets add up , and our environment is protected .
and to accomplish those things , to make collective decisions on behalf of a common good , we have to use our heads .
we have to agree that facts and evidence matter .
and we got to hold our leaders and ourselves accountable to know what the heck they 're talking about .
all right .
i only have two more points .
i know it 's getting cold and you guys have to graduate .
point four : have faith in democracy .
look , i know it 's not always pretty .
really , i know .
i 've been living it .
but it 's how , bit by bit , generation by generation , we have made progress in this nation .
that 's how we banned child labor .
that 's how we cleaned up our air and our water .
that 's how we passed programs like social security and medicare that lifted millions of seniors out of poverty .
none of these changes happened overnight .
they did n't happen because some charismatic leader got everybody suddenly to agree on everything .
it did n't happen because some massive political revolution occurred .
it actually happened over the course of years of advocacy , and organizing , and alliance - building , and deal - making , and the changing of public opinion .
it happened because ordinary americans who cared participated in the political process .
well , that 's nice .
i mean , i helped , but -- 
 look , if you want to change this country for the better , you better start participating .
i 'll give you an example on a lot of people 's minds right now -- and that 's the growing inequality in our economy .
over much of the last century , we 've unleashed the strongest economic engine the world has ever seen , but over the past few decades , our economy has become more and more unequal .
the top 10 percent of earners now take in half of all income in the u. s. in the past , it used to be a top ceo made 20 or 30 times the income of the average worker .
today , it 's 300 times more .
and wages are n't rising fast enough for millions of hardworking families .
now , if we want to reverse those trends , there are a bunch of policies that would make a real difference .
we can raise the minimum wage .
we can modernize our infrastructure .
we can invest in early childhood education .
we can make college more affordable .
we can close tax loopholes on hedge fund managers and take that money and give tax breaks to help families with child care or retirement .
and if we did these things , then we 'd help to restore the sense that hard work is rewarded and we could build an economy that truly works for everybody .
now , the reason some of these things have not happened , even though the majority of people approve of them , is really simple .
it 's not because i was n't proposing them .
it was n't because the facts and the evidence showed they would n't work .
it was because a huge chunk of americans , especially young people , do not vote .
in 2014 , voter turnout was the lowest since world war ii .
fewer than one in five young people showed up to vote -- 2014 .
and the four who stayed home determined the course of this country just as much as the single one who voted .
because apathy has consequences .
it determines who our congress is .
it determines what policies they prioritize .
it even , for example , determines whether a really highly qualified supreme court nominee receives the courtesy of a hearing and a vote in the united states senate .
and , yes , big money in politics is a huge problem .
we 've got to reduce its influence .
yes , special interests and lobbyists have disproportionate access to the corridors of power .
but , contrary to what we hear sometimes from both the left as well as the right , the system is n't as rigged as you think , and it certainly is not as hopeless as you think .
politicians care about being elected , and they especially care about being reelected .
and if you vote and you elect a majority that represents your views , you will get what you want .
and if you opt out , or stop paying attention , you wo n't .
it 's that simple .
it 's not that complicated .
now , one of the reasons that people do n't vote is because they do n't see the changes they were looking for right away .
well , guess what -- none of the great strides in our history happened right away .
it took thurgood marshall and the naacp decades to win brown v. board of education ; and then another decade after that to secure the civil rights act and the voting rights act .
and it took more time after that for it to start working .
it took a proud daughter of new jersey , alice paul , years of organizing marches and hunger strikes and protests , and drafting hundreds of pieces of legislation , and writing letters and giving speeches , and working with congressional leaders before she and other suffragettes finally helped win women the right to vote .
each stage along the way required compromise .
sometimes you took half a loaf .
you forged allies .
sometimes you lost on an issue , and then you came back to fight another day .
that 's how democracy works .
so you 've got to be committed to participating not just if you get immediate gratification , but you got to be a citizen full - time , all the time .
and if participation means voting , and it means compromise , and organizing and advocacy , it also means listening to those who do n't agree with you .
i know a couple years ago , folks on this campus got upset that condoleezza rice was supposed to speak at a commencement .
now , i do n't think it 's a secret that i disagree with many of the foreign policies of dr. rice and the previous administration .
but the notion that this community or the country would be better served by not hearing from a former secretary of state , or shutting out what she had to say -- i believe that 's misguided .
i do n't think that 's how democracy works best , when we 're not even willing to listen to each other .
i believe that 's misguided .
if you disagree with somebody , bring them in -- -- and ask them tough questions .
hold their feet to the fire .
make them defend their positions .
if somebody has got a bad or offensive idea , prove it wrong .
engage it .
debate it .
stand up for what you believe in .
do n't be scared to take somebody on .
do n't feel like you got to shut your ears off because you 're too fragile and somebody might offend your sensibilities .
go at them if they 're not making any sense .
use your logic and reason and words .
and by doing so , you 'll strengthen your own position , and you 'll hone your arguments .
and maybe you 'll learn something and realize you do n't know everything .
and you may have a new understanding not only about what your opponents believe but maybe what you believe .
either way , you win .
and more importantly , our democracy wins .
so , anyway , all right .
that 's it , class of 2016 --   -- a few suggestions on how you can change the world .
except maybe i 've got one last suggestion .
just one .
and that is , gear yourself for the long haul .
whatever path you choose -- business , nonprofits , government , education , health care , the arts -- whatever it is , you 're going to have some setbacks .
you will deal occasionally with foolish people .
you will be frustrated .
you 'll have a boss that 's not great .
you wo n't always get everything you want -- at least not as fast as you want it .
so you have to stick with it .
you have to be persistent .
and success , however small , however incomplete , success is still success .
i always tell my daughters , you know , better is good .
it may not be perfect , it may not be great , but it 's good .
that 's how progress happens -- in societies and in our own lives .
so do n't lose hope if sometimes you hit a roadblock .
do n't lose hope in the face of naysayers .
and certainly do n't let resistance make you cynical .
cynicism is so easy , and cynics do n't accomplish much .
as a friend of mine who happens to be from new jersey , a guy named bruce springsteen , once sang --   -- " they spend their lives waiting for a moment that just do n't come . "
do n't let that be you .
do n't waste your time waiting .
if you doubt you can make a difference , look at the impact some of your fellow graduates are already making .
look at what matthew is doing .
look at somebody like yasmin ramadan , who began organizing anti - bullying assemblies when she was 10 years old to help kids handle bias and discrimination , and here at rutgers , helped found the muslim public relations council to work with administrators and police to promote inclusion .
look at somebody like madison little , who grew up dealing with some health issues , and started wondering what his care would have been like if he lived someplace else , and so , here at rutgers , he took charge of a student nonprofit and worked with folks in australia and cambodia and uganda to address the aids epidemic . "
our generation has so much energy to adapt and impact the world , " he said . "
my peers give me a lot of hope that we 'll overcome the obstacles we face in society . "
that 's you !
is it any wonder that i am optimistic ?
throughout our history , a new generation of americans has reached up and bent the arc of history in the direction of more freedom , and more opportunity , and more justice .
and , class of 2016 , it is your turn now --   -- to shape our nation 's destiny , as well as your own .
so get to work .
make sure the next 250 years are better than the last .
good luck .
god bless you .
god bless this country we love .
thank you .

thank you .
thank you .
thank you .
thank you so much .
thank you so much .
thank you .
thank you very much , everybody .
thank you .
michelle , i love you so much .
a few nights ago , everybody was reminded just what a lucky man i am .
malia and sasha , we are so proud of you .
and , yes , you do have to go to school in the morning .
and , joe biden , thank you for being the very best vice president i could have ever hoped for , and being a strong and loyal friend .
madam chairwoman , delegates , i accept your nomination for president of the united states .
now , the first time i addressed this convention in 2004 , i was a younger man , a senate candidate from illinois , who spoke about hope -- not blind optimism , not wishful thinking , but hope in the face of difficulty ; hope in the face of uncertainty ; that dogged faith in the future which has pushed this nation forward , even when the odds are great , even when the road is long .
eight years later , that hope has been tested by the cost of war , by one of the worst economic crises in history , and by political gridlock that 's left us wondering whether it 's still even possible to tackle the challenges of our time .
i know campaigns can seem small , even silly sometimes .
trivial things become big distractions .
serious issues become sound bites .
the truth gets buried under an avalanche of money and advertising .
if you 're sick of hearing me approve this message , believe me , so am i. 
 but when all is said and done -- when you pick up that ballot to vote -- you will face the clearest choice of any time in a generation .
over the next few years , big decisions will be made in washington on jobs , the economy , taxes and deficits , energy , education , war and peace -- decisions that will have a huge impact on our lives and on our children 's lives for decades to come .
and on every issue , the choice you face wo n't just be between two candidates or two parties .
it will be a choice between two different paths for america , a choice between two fundamentally different visions for the future .
ours is a fight to restore the values that built the largest middle class and the strongest economy the world has ever known --   -- the values my grandfather defended as a soldier in patton 's army , the values that drove my grandmother to work on a bomber assembly line while he was gone .
they knew they were part of something larger -- a nation that triumphed over fascism and depression ; a nation where the most innovative businesses turned out the world 's best products .
and everyone shared in that pride and success , from the corner office to the factory floor .
my grandparents were given the chance to go to college , buy their own home , and fulfill the basic bargain at the heart of america 's story -- the promise that hard work will pay off , that responsibility will be rewarded , that everyone gets a fair shot and everyone does their fair share and everyone plays by the same rules from main street to wall street to washington , d. c. 
 and i ran for president because i saw that basic bargain slipping away .
i began my career helping people in the shadow of a shuttered steel mill at a time when too many good jobs were starting to move overseas .
and by 2008 , we had seen nearly a decade in which families struggled with costs that kept rising but paychecks that didn'the ; folks racking up more and more debt just to make the mortgage or pay tuition , put gas in the car or food on the table .
and when the house of cards collapsed in the great recession , millions of innocent americans lost their jobs , their homes , their life savings -- a tragedy from which we 're still fighting to recover .
now , our friends down in tampa at the republican convention were more than happy to talk about everything they think is wrong with america .
but they did n't have much to say about how they 'd make it right .
they want your vote , but they do n't want you to know their plan .
and that 's because all they have to offer is the same prescriptions they 've had for the last 30 years -- have a surplus ?
try a tax cut .
deficit too high ?
try another .
feel a cold coming on ?
take two tax cuts , roll back some regulations and call us in the morning .
now , i 've cut taxes for those who need it -- middle - class families , small businesses .
but i do n't believe that another round of tax breaks for millionaires will bring good jobs to our shores or pay down our deficit .
i do n't believe that firing teachers or kicking students off financial aid will grow the economy , or help us compete with the scientists and engineers coming out of china .
after all we 've been through , i do n't believe that rolling back regulations on wall street will help the small businesswoman expand or the laid - off construction worker keep his home .
we have been there .
we 've tried that and we 're not going back .
we are moving forward , america .
now , i wo n't pretend the path i 'm offering is quick or easy .
i never have .
you did n't elect me to tell you what you wanted to hear .
you elected me to tell you the truth .
and the truth is it will take more than a few years for us to solve challenges that have built up over decades .
it will require common effort and shared responsibility , and the kind of bold , persistent experimentation that franklin roosevelt pursued during the only crisis worse than this one .
and , by the way , those of us who carry on his party 's legacy should remember that not every problem can be remedied with another government program or dictate from washington .
but know this , america -- our problems can be solved .
our challenges can be met .
the path we offer may be harder , but it leads to a better place .
and i 'm asking you to choose that future .
i 'm asking you to rally around a set of goals for your country -- goals in manufacturing , energy , education , national security , and the deficit -- real , achievable plans that will lead to new jobs , more opportunity and rebuild this economy on a stronger foundation .
that 's what we can do in the next four years -- and that is why i 'm running for a second term as president of the united states .
we can choose a future where we export more products and outsource fewer jobs .
after a decade that was defined by what we bought and borrowed , we 're getting back to basics , and doing what america has always done best : we are making things again .
i 've met workers in detroit and toledo --   -- who feared they 'd never build another american car .
and today , they ca n't build them fast enough , because we reinvented a dying auto industry that 's back on the top of the world .
i 've worked with business leaders who are bringing jobs back to america -- not because our workers make less pay , but because we make better products .
because we work harder and smarter than anyone else .
i 've signed trade agreements that are helping our companies sell more goods to millions of new customers -- goods that are stamped with three proud words : made in america .
and after a decade of decline , this country created over half a million manufacturing jobs in the last two and a half years .
and now you have a choice : we can give more tax breaks to corporations that ship jobs overseas , or we can start rewarding companies that open new plants and train new workers and create new jobs here , in the united states of america .
we can help big factories and small businesses double their exports , and if we choose this path , we can create a million new manufacturing jobs in the next four years .
you can make that happen .
you can choose that future .
you can choose the path where we control more of our own energy .
after 30 years of inaction , we raised fuel standards so that by the middle of the next decade , cars and trucks will go twice as far on a gallon of gas .
we have doubled our use of renewable energy , and thousands of americans have jobs today building wind turbines and long - lasting batteries .
in the last year alone , we cut oil imports by 1 million barrels a day -- more than any administration in recent history .
and today , the united states of america is less dependent on foreign oil than at any time in the last two decades .
so now you have a choice -- between a strategy that reverses this progress , or one that builds on it .
we 've opened millions of new acres for oil and gas exploration in the last three years , and we 'll open more .
but unlike my opponent , i will not let oil companies write this country 's energy plan , or endanger our coastlines , or collect another $ 4 billion in corporate welfare from our taxpayers .
we 're offering a better path .
we 're offering a better path , where we -- a future where we keep investing in wind and solar and clean coal ; where farmers and scientists harness new biofuels to power our cars and trucks ; where construction workers build homes and factories that waste less energy ; where we develop a hundred - year supply of natural gas that 's right beneath our feet .
if you choose this path , we can cut our oil imports in half by 2020 and support more than 600,000 new jobs in natural gas alone .
and , yes , my plan will continue to reduce the carbon pollution that is heating our planet -- because climate change is not a hoax .
more droughts and floods and wildfires are not a joke .
they are a threat to our children 's future .
and in this election , you can do something about it .
you can choose a future where more americans have the chance to gain the skills they need to compete , no matter how old they are or how much money they have .
education was the gateway to opportunity for me .
it was the gateway for michelle .
it was the gateway for most of you .
and now more than ever , it is the gateway to a middle - class life .
for the first time in a generation , nearly every state has answered our call to raise their standards for teaching and learning .
some of the worst schools in the country have made real gains in math and reading .
millions of students are paying less for college today because we finally took on a system that wasted billions of taxpayer dollars on banks and lenders .
and now you have a choice -- we can gut education , or we can decide that in the united states of america , no child should have her dreams deferred because of a crowded classroom or a crumbling school .
no family should have to set aside a college acceptance letter because they do n't have the money .
no company should have to look for workers overseas because they could n't find any with the right skills here at home .
that 's not our future .
that is not our future .
and government has a role in this .
but teachers must inspire ; principals must lead ; parents must instill a thirst for learning .
and , students , you 've got to do the work .
and together , i promise you , we can out - educate and out - compete any nation on earth .
so help me .
help me recruit 100,000 math and science teachers within 10 years and improve early - childhood education .
help give 2 million workers the chance to learn skills at their community college that will lead directly to a job .
help us work with colleges and universities to cut in half the growth of tuition costs over the next 10 years .
we can meet that goal together .
you can choose that future for america .
that 's our future .
in a world of new threats and new challenges , you can choose leadership that has been tested and proven .
four years ago , i promised to end the war in iraq .
we did .
i promised to refocus on the terrorists who actually attacked us on 9/11 .
and we have .
we 've blunted the taliban 's momentum in afghanistan , and in 2014 , our longest war will be over .
a new tower rises above the new york skyline ; al qaeda is on the path to defeat ; and osama bin laden is dead .
tonight , we pay tribute to the americans who still serve in harm 's way .
we are forever in debt to a generation whose sacrifice has made this country safer and more respected .
we will never forget you .
and so long as i 'm commander - in - chief , we will sustain the strongest military the world has ever known .
when you take off the uniform , we will serve you as well as you 've served us -- because no one who fights for this country should have to fight for a job , or a roof over their heads , or the care that they need when they come home .
around the world , we 've strengthened old alliances and forged new coalitions to stop the spread of nuclear weapons .
we 've reasserted our power across the pacific and stood up to china on behalf of our workers .
from burma to libya to south sudan , we have advanced the rights and dignity of all human beings -- men and women ; christians and muslims and jews .
but for all the progress that we 've made , challenges remain .
terrorist plots must be disrupted .
europe 's crisis must be contained .
our commitment to israel 's security must not waver , and neither must our pursuit of peace .
the iranian government must face a world that stays united against its nuclear ambitions .
the historic change sweeping across the arab world must be defined not by the iron fist of a dictator or the hate of extremists , but by the hopes and aspirations of ordinary people who are reaching for the same rights that we celebrate here today .
so now we have a choice .
my opponent and his running mate are new to foreign policy --   -- but from all that we 've seen and heard , they want to take us back to an era of blustering and blundering that cost america so dearly .
after all , you do n't call russia our number - one enemy -- not al qaeda -- russia -- unless you 're still stuck in a cold war mind warp .
you might not be ready for diplomacy with beijing if you ca n't visit the olympics without insulting our closest ally .
my opponent said that it was " tragic " to end the war in iraq .
and he wo n't tell us how he 'll end the war in afghanistan .
well , i have -- and i will .
and while my opponent would spend more money on military hardware that our joint chiefs do n't even want , i will use the money we 're no longer spending on war to pay down our debt and put more people back to work rebuilding roads and bridges and schools and runways .
because after two wars that have cost us thousands of live and over a trillion dollars , it 's time to do some nation - building right here at home .
you can choose a future where we reduce our deficit without sticking it to the middle class .
independent experts say that my plan would cut our deficit by $ 4 trillion .
and last summer i worked with republicans in congress to cut a billion   dollars in spending -- because those of us who believe government can be a force for good should work harder than anyone to reform it so that it 's leaner and more efficient and more responsive to the american people .
i want to reform the tax code so that it 's simple , fair , and asks the wealthiest households to pay higher taxes on incomes over $ 250,000 -- the same rate we had when bill clinton was president ; the same rate when our economy created nearly 23 million new jobs , the biggest surplus in history and a whole lot of millionaires to boot .
now , i 'm still eager to reach an agreement based on the principles of my bipartisan debt commission .
no party has a monopoly on wisdom .
no democracy works without compromise .
i want to get this done , and we can get it done .
but when governor romney and his friends in congress tell us we can somehow lower our deficits by spending trillions more on new tax breaks for the wealthy , well , what did bill clinton call it -- you do the arithmetic .
you do the math .
i refuse to go along with that and as long as i 'm president , i never will .
i refuse to ask middle - class families to give up their deductions for owning a home or raising their kids just to pay for another millionaire 's tax cut .
i refuse to ask students to pay more for college , or kick children out of head start programs , or eliminate health insurance for millions of americans who are poor and elderly or disabled -- all so those with the most can pay less .
i 'm not going along with that .
and i will never -- i will never -- turn medicare into a voucher .
no american should ever have to spend their golden years at the mercy of insurance companies .
they should retire with the care and the dignity that they have earned .
yes , we will reform and strengthen medicare for the long haul , but we 'll do it by reducing the cost of health care -- not by asking seniors to pay thousands of dollars more .
and we will keep the promise of social security by taking the responsible steps to strengthen it , not by turning it over to wall street .
this is the choice we now face .
this is what the election comes down to .
over and over , we 've been told by our opponents that bigger tax cuts and fewer regulations are the only way -- that since government ca n't do everything , it should do almost nothing .
if you ca n't afford health insurance , hope that you do n't get sick .
if a company releases toxic pollution into the air your children breathe , well , that 's the price of progress .
if you ca n't afford to start a business or go to college , take my opponent 's advice and borrow money from your parents .
you know what , that 's not who we are .
that 's not what this country 's about .
as americans , we believe we are endowed by our creator with certain , inalienable rights -- rights that no man or government can take away .
we insist on personal responsibility and we celebrate individual initiative .
we 're not entitled to success -- we have to earn it .
we honor the strivers , the dreamers , the risk - takers , the entrepreneurs who have always been the driving force behind our free enterprise system , the greatest engine of growth and prosperity that the world 's ever known .
but we also believe in something called citizenship .
citizenship : a word at the very heart of our founding ; a word at the very essence of our democracy ; the idea that this country only works when we accept certain obligations to one another and to future generations .
we believe that when a ceo pays his autoworkers enough to buy the cars that they build , the whole company does better .
we believe that when a family can no longer be tricked into signing a mortgage they ca n't afford , that family is protected , but so is the value of other people 's homes and so is the entire economy .
we believe the little girl who 's offered an escape from poverty by a great teacher or a grant for college could become the next steve jobs or the scientist who cures cancer or the president of the united states , and it is in our power to give her that chance .
we know that churches and charities can often make more of a difference than a poverty program alone .
we do n't want handouts for people who refuse to help themselves and we certainly do n't want bailouts for banks that break the rules .
we do n't think that government can solve all of our problems , but we do n't think that government is the source of all of our problems -- any more than are welfare recipients , or corporations , or unions , or immigrants , or gays , or any other group we 're told to blame for our troubles .
because , america , we understand that this democracy is ours .
we , the people , recognize that we have responsibilities as well as rights ; that our destinies are bound together ; that a freedom which asks only " what 's in it for me , " a freedom without commitment to others , a freedom without love or charity or duty or patriotism is unworthy of our founding ideals and those who died in their defense .
as citizens , we understand that america is not about what can be done for us ; it 's about what can be done by us , together , through the hard and frustrating , but necessary work of self - government .
that 's what we believe .
so , you see , the election four years ago was n't about me .
it was about you .
my fellow citizens , you were the change .
you 're the reason there 's a little girl with a heart disorder in phoenix who will get the surgery she needs because an insurance company ca n't limit her coverage .
you did that .
you 're the reason a young man in colorado who never thought he 'd be able to afford his dream of earning a medical degree is about to get that chance .
you made that possible .
you 're the reason a young immigrant who grew up here and went to school here and pledged allegiance to our flag will no longer be deported from the only country she 's ever called home 
 --   -- why selfless soldiers wo n't be kicked out of the military because of who they are or who they love ; why thousands of families have finally been able to say to the loved ones who served us so bravely : " welcome home . " "
welcome home . "
you did that .
you did that .
you did that .
if you turn away now -- if you buy into the cynicism that the change we fought for is n't possible , well , change will not happen .
if you give up on the idea that your voice can make a difference , then other voices will fill the void -- the lobbyists and special interests ; the people with the $ 10 million checks who are trying to buy this election and those who are making it harder for you to vote ; washington politicians who want to decide who you can marry , or control health care choices that women should be making for themselves .
only you can make sure that does n't happen .
only you have the power to move us forward .
i recognize that times have changed since i first spoke to this convention .
the times have changed , and so have i. i 'm no longer just a candidate .
i 'm the president .
and that means i know what it means to send young americans into battle , for i have held in my arms the mothers and fathers of those who did n't return .
i 've shared the pain of families who 've lost their homes , and the frustration of workers who 've lost their jobs .
if the critics are right that i 've made all my decisions based on polls , then i must not be very good at reading them .
and while i 'm very proud of what we 've achieved together , i 'm far more mindful of my own failings , knowing exactly what lincoln meant when he said , " i have been driven to my knees many times by the overwhelming conviction that i had no place else to go . "
but as i stand here tonight , i have never been more hopeful about america .
not because i think i have all the answers .
not because i 'm na&iuml;ve about the magnitude of our challenges .
i 'm hopeful because of you .
the young woman i met at a science fair who won national recognition for her biology research while living with her family at a homeless shelter -- she gives me hope .
the autoworker who won the lottery after his plant almost closed , but kept coming to work every day , and bought flags for his whole town , and one of the cars that he built to surprise his wife -- he gives me hope .
the family business in warroad , minnesota , that did n't lay off a single one of their 4,000 employees when the recession hit , even when their competitors shut down dozens of plants , even when it meant the owner gave up some perks and some pay because they understood that their biggest asset was the community and the workers who had helped build that business -- they give me hope .
i think about the young sailor i met at walter reed hospital , still recovering from a grenade attack that would cause him to have his leg amputated above the knee .
six months ago , we would watch him walk into a white house dinner honoring those who served in iraq , tall and 20 pounds heavier , dashing in his uniform , with a big grin on his face , sturdy on his new leg .
and i remember how a few months after that i would watch him on a bicycle , racing with his fellow wounded warriors on a sparkling spring day , inspiring other heroes who had just begun the hard path he had traveled -- he gives me hope .
he gives me hope .
i do n't know what party these men and women belong to .
i do n't know if they 'll vote for me .
but i know that their spirit defines us .
they remind me , in the words of scripture , that ours is a " future filled with hope . "
and if you share that faith with me -- if you share that hope with me -- i ask you tonight for your vote .
if you reject the notion that this nation 's promise is reserved for the few , your voice must be heard in this election .
if you reject the notion that our government is forever beholden to the highest bidder , you need to stand up in this election .
if you believe that new plants and factories can dot our landscape , that new energy can power our future , that new schools can provide ladders of opportunity to this nation of dreamers ; if you believe in a country where everyone gets a fair shot , and everyone does their fair share , and everyone plays by the same rules -- then i need you to vote this november .
america , i never said this journey would be easy , and i wo n't promise that now .
yes , our path is harder , but it leads to a better place .
yes , our road is longer , but we travel it together .
we do n't turn back .
we leave no one behind .
we pull each other up .
we draw strength from our victories , and we learn from our mistakes , but we keep our eyes fixed on that distant horizon , knowing that providence is with us , and that we are surely blessed to be citizens of the greatest nation on earth .
thank you .
god bless you .
and god bless these united states .

thank you !
thank you !
thank you so much .
it is good to be back in las vegas !
and it is good to be among so many good friends .
let me start off by thanking everybody at del sol high school for hosting us .
go dragons !
let me especially thank your outstanding principal , lisa primas .
there are all kinds of notable guests here , but i just want to mention a few .
first of all , our outstanding secretary of the department of homeland security , janet napolitano , is here .
our wonderful secretary of the interior , ken salazar .
former secretary of labor , hilda solis .
two of the outstanding members of the congressional delegation from nevada , steve horsford and dina titus .
your own mayor , carolyn goodman .
but we also have some mayors that flew in because they know how important the issue we 're going to talk about today is .
marie lopez rogers from avondale , arizona .
kasim reed from atlanta , georgia .
greg stanton from phoenix , arizona .
and ashley swearengin from fresno , california .
and all of you are here , as well as some of the top labor leaders in the country .
and we are just so grateful .
some outstanding business leaders are here as well .
and of course , we 've got wonderful students here , so i could not be prouder of our students .
now , those of you have a seat , feel free to take a seat .
i do n't mind .
i love you back .
now , last week , i had the honor of being sworn in for a second term as president of the united states .
and during my inaugural address , i talked about how making progress on the defining challenges of our time does n't require us to settle every debate or ignore every difference that we may have , but it does require us to find common ground and move forward in common purpose .
it requires us to act .
i know that some issues will be harder to lift than others .
some debates will be more contentious .
that 's to be expected .
but the reason i came here today is because of a challenge where the differences are dwindling ; where a broad consensus is emerging ; and where a call for action can now be heard coming from all across america .
i 'm here today because the time has come for common - sense , comprehensive immigration reform .
the time is now .
now is the time .
now is the time .
now is the time .
now is the time .
i 'm here because most americans agree that it 's time to fix a system that 's been broken for way too long .
i 'm here because business leaders , faith leaders , labor leaders , law enforcement , and leaders from both parties are coming together to say now is the time to find a better way to welcome the striving , hopeful immigrants who still see america as the land of opportunity .
now is the time to do this so we can strengthen our economy and strengthen our country 's future .
think about it -- we define ourselves as a nation of immigrants .
that 's who we are -- in our bones .
the promise we see in those who come here from every corner of the globe , that 's always been one of our greatest strengths .
it keeps our workforce young .
it keeps our country on the cutting edge .
and it 's helped build the greatest economic engine the world has ever known .
after all , immigrants helped start businesses like google and yahoo!. they created entire new industries that , in turn , created new jobs and new prosperity for our citizens .
in recent years , one in four high - tech startups in america were founded by immigrants .
one in four new small business owners were immigrants , including right here in nevada -- folks who came here seeking opportunity and now want to share that opportunity with other americans .
but we all know that today , we have an immigration system that 's out of date and badly broken ; a system that 's holding us back instead of helping us grow our economy and strengthen our middle class .
right now , we have 11 million undocumented immigrants in america ; 11 million men and women from all over the world who live their lives in the shadows .
yes , they broke the rules .
they crossed the border illegally .
maybe they overstayed their visas .
those are facts .
nobody disputes them .
but these 11 million men and women are now here .
many of them have been here for years .
and the overwhelming majority of these individuals are n't looking for any trouble .
they 're contributing members of the community .
they 're looking out for their families .
they 're looking out for their neighbors .
they 're woven into the fabric of our lives .
every day , like the rest of us , they go out and try to earn a living .
often they do that in a shadow economy -- a place where employers may offer them less than the minimum wage or make them work overtime without extra pay .
and when that happens , it 's not just bad for them , it 's bad for the entire economy .
because all the businesses that are trying to do the right thing -- that are hiring people legally , paying a decent wage , following the rules -- they 're the ones who suffer .
they 've got to compete against companies that are breaking the rules .
and the wages and working conditions of american workers are threatened , too .
so if we 're truly committed to strengthening our middle class and providing more ladders of opportunity to those who are willing to work hard to make it into the middle class , we 've got to fix the system .
we have to make sure that every business and every worker in america is playing by the same set of rules .
we have to bring this shadow economy into the light so that everybody is held accountable -- businesses for who they hire , and immigrants for getting on the right side of the law .
that 's common sense .
and that 's why we need comprehensive immigration reform .
there 's another economic reason why we need reform .
it 's not just about the folks who come here illegally and have the effect they have on our economy .
it 's also about the folks who try to come here legally but have a hard time doing so , and the effect that has on our economy .
right now , there are brilliant students from all over the world sitting in classrooms at our top universities .
they 're earning degrees in the fields of the future , like engineering and computer science .
but once they finish school , once they earn that diploma , there 's a good chance they 'll have to leave our country .
think about that .
intel was started with the help of an immigrant who studied here and then stayed here .
instagram was started with the help of an immigrant who studied here and then stayed here .
right now in one of those classrooms , there 's a student wrestling with how to turn their big idea -- their intel or instagram -- into a big business .
we 're giving them all the skills they need to figure that out , but then we 're going to turn around and tell them to start that business and create those jobs in china or india or mexico or someplace else ?
that 's not how you grow new industries in america .
that 's how you give new industries to our competitors .
that 's why we need comprehensive immigration reform .
now , during my first term , we took steps to try and patch up some of the worst cracks in the system .
first , we strengthened security at the borders so that we could finally stem the tide of illegal immigrants .
we put more boots on the ground on the southern border than at any time in our history .
and today , illegal crossings are down nearly 80 percent from their peak in 2000 .
second , we focused our enforcement efforts on criminals who are here illegally and who endanger our communities .
and today , deportations of criminals is at its highest level ever .
and third , we took up the cause of the dreamers --   -- the young people who were brought to this country as children , young people who have grown up here , built their lives here , have futures here .
we said that if you 're able to meet some basic criteria like pursuing an education , then we 'll consider offering you the chance to come out of the shadows so that you can live here and work here legally , so that you can finally have the dignity of knowing you belong .
but because this change is n't permanent , we need congress to act -- and not just on the dream act .
we need congress to act on a comprehensive approach that finally deals with the 11 million undocumented immigrants who are in the country right now .
that 's what we need .
now , the good news is that for the first time in many years , republicans and democrats seem ready to tackle this problem together .
members of both parties , in both chambers , are actively working on a solution .
yesterday , a bipartisan group of senators announced their principles for comprehensive immigration reform , which are very much in line with the principles i 've proposed and campaigned on for the last few years .
so at this moment , it looks like there 's a genuine desire to get this done soon , and that 's very encouraging .
but this time , action must follow .
we ca n't allow immigration reform to get bogged down in an endless debate .
we 've been debating this a very long time .
so it 's not as if we do n't know technically what needs to get done .
as a consequence , to help move this process along , today i 'm laying out my ideas for immigration reform .
and my hope is that this provides some key markers to members of congress as they craft a bill , because the ideas i 'm proposing have traditionally been supported by both democrats like ted kennedy and republicans like president george w. bush .
you do n't get that matchup very often .
so we know where the consensus should be .
now , of course , there will be rigorous debate about many of the details , and every stakeholder should engage in real give and take in the process .
but it 's important for us to recognize that the foundation for bipartisan action is already in place .
and if congress is unable to move forward in a timely fashion , i will send up a bill based on my proposal and insist that they vote on it right away .
so the principles are pretty straightforward .
there are a lot of details behind it .
we 're going to hand out a bunch of paper so that everybody will know exactly what we 're talking about .
but the principles are pretty straightforward .
first , i believe we need to stay focused on enforcement .
that means continuing to strengthen security at our borders .
it means cracking down more forcefully on businesses that knowingly hire undocumented workers .
to be fair , most businesses want to do the right thing , but a lot of them have a hard time figuring out who 's here legally , who 's not .
so we need to implement a national system that allows businesses to quickly and accurately verify someone 's employment status .
and if they still knowingly hire undocumented workers , then we need to ramp up the penalties .
second , we have to deal with the 11 million individuals who are here illegally .
we all agree that these men and women should have to earn their way to citizenship .
but for comprehensive immigration reform to work , it must be clear from the outset that there is a pathway to citizenship .
we 've got to lay out a path -- a process that includes passing a background check , paying taxes , paying a penalty , learning english , and then going to the back of the line , behind all the folks who are trying to come here legally .
that 's only fair , right ?
so that means it wo n't be a quick process but it will be a fair process .
and it will lift these individuals out of the shadows and give them a chance to earn their way to a green card and eventually to citizenship .
and the third principle is we 've got to bring our legal immigration system into the 21st century because it no longer reflects the realities of our time .
for example , if you are a citizen , you should n't have to wait years before your family is able to join you in america .
you should n't have to wait years .
if you 're a foreign student who wants to pursue a career in science or technology , or a foreign entrepreneur who wants to start a business with the backing of american investors , we should help you do that here .
because if you succeed , you 'll create american businesses and american jobs .
you 'll help us grow our economy .
you 'll help us strengthen our middle class .
so that 's what comprehensive immigration reform looks like : smarter enforcement ; a pathway to earned citizenship ; improvements in the legal immigration system so that we continue to be a magnet for the best and the brightest all around the world .
it 's pretty straightforward .
the question now is simple : do we have the resolve as a people , as a country , as a government to finally put this issue behind us ?
i believe that we do .
i believe that we do .
i believe we are finally at a moment where comprehensive immigration reform is within our grasp .
but i promise you this : the closer we get , the more emotional this debate is going to become .
immigration has always been an issue that enflames passions .
that 's not surprising .
there are few things that are more important to us as a society than who gets to come here and call our country home ; who gets the privilege of becoming a citizen of the united states of america .
that 's a big deal .
when we talk about that in the abstract , it 's easy sometimes for the discussion to take on a feeling of " us " versus " them . "
and when that happens , a lot of folks forget that most of " us " used to be " them . "
we forget that .
it 's really important for us to remember our history .
unless you 're one of the first americans , a native american , you came from someplace else .
somebody brought you .
ken salazar , he 's of mexican american descent , but he points that his family has been living where he lives for 400 years , so he did n't immigrate anywhere .
the irish who left behind a land of famine .
the germans who fled persecution .
the scandinavians who arrived eager to pioneer out west .
the polish .
the russians .
the italians .
the chinese .
the japanese .
the west indians .
the huddled masses who came through ellis island on one coast and angel island on the other .
all those folks , before they were " us , " they were " them . "
and when each new wave of immigrants arrived , they faced resistance from those who were already here .
they faced hardship .
they faced racism .
they faced ridicule .
but over time , as they went about their daily lives , as they earned a living , as they raised a family , as they built a community , as their kids went to school here , they did their part to build a nation .
they were the einsteins and the carnegies .
but they were also the millions of women and men whose names history may not remember , but whose actions helped make us who we are ; who built this country hand by hand , brick by brick .
they all came here knowing that what makes somebody an american is not just blood or birth , but allegiance to our founding principles and the faith in the idea that anyone from anywhere can write the next great chapter of our story .
and that 's still true today .
just ask alan aleman .
alan is here this afternoon -- where is alan ?
he 's around here -- there he is right here .
alan was born in mexico .
he was brought to this country by his parents when he was a child .
growing up , alan went to an american school , pledged allegiance to the american flag , felt american in every way -- and he was , except for one : on paper .
in high school , alan watched his friends come of age -- driving around town with their new licenses , earning some extra cash from their summer jobs at the mall .
he knew he could n't do those things .
but it did n't matter that much .
what mattered to alan was earning an education so that he could live up to his god - given potential .
last year , when alan heard the news that we were going to offer a chance for folks like him to emerge from the shadows -- even if it 's just for two years at a time -- he was one of the first to sign up .
and a few months ago he was one of the first people in nevada to get approved .
in that moment , alan said , " i felt the fear vanish .
i felt accepted . "
so today , alan is in his second year at the college of southern nevada .
alan is studying to become a doctor .
he hopes to join the air force .
he 's working hard every single day to build a better life for himself and his family .
and all he wants is the opportunity to do his part to build a better america .
so in the coming weeks , as the idea of reform becomes more real and the debate becomes more heated , and there are folks who are trying to pull this thing apart , remember alan and all those who share the same hopes and the same dreams .
remember that this is not just a debate about policy .
it 's about people .
it 's about men and women and young people who want nothing more than the chance to earn their way into the american story .
throughout our history , that has only made our nation stronger .
and it 's how we will make sure that this century is the same as the last : an american century welcoming of everybody who aspires to do something more , and who is willing to work hard to do it , and is willing to pledge that allegiance to our flag .
thank you .
god bless you .
and god bless the united states of america .

thank you , everybody .
please have a seat .
you guys can sit down , too .
let me begin by saying thank you to a few people -- first of all , your outstanding governor , bill ritter .
please give bill a big round of applause .
lieutenant governor barbara o'brien .
secretary of state bernie buescher .
your outstanding mayor , john hickenlooper .
your new senator , michael bennett .
your old senator , now my secretary of the interior , ken salazar .
mark udall is not here , but give him a round of applause anyway .
one of the outstanding leaders who helped shepherd this process through in record time -- please give max baucus of montana a big round of applause .
thank you , max .
to secretary federico pena , one of my national co - chairs -- i would not be here if it were not for federico .
thank you .
to representative diana degette , who is a -- we are in her district .
so , thank you so much .
representative betsy markey .
representative jared polis .
representative ed perlmutter .
to all the other elected officials and outstanding leaders who are here .
and to the whole namaste family and mr. jones for outstanding work , congratulations .
give them a big round of applause .
and to the best vice president that we 've had in a long time -- joe biden .
it is great to be back in denver .
i was here last summer -- we had a good time --   -- to accept the nomination of my party and to make a promise to people of all parties that i would do all that i could to give every american the chance to make of their lives what they will ; to see their children climb higher than they did .
and i 'm back today to say that we have begun the difficult work of keeping that promise .
we have begun the essential work of keeping the american dream alive in our time .
and that 's why we 're here today .
now , i do n't want to pretend that today marks the end of our economic problems .
nor does it constitute all of what we 're going to have to do to turn our economy around .
but today does mark the beginning of the end -- the beginning of what we need to do to create jobs for americans scrambling in the wake of layoffs ; the beginning of what we need to do to provide relief for families worried they wo n't be able to pay next month 's bills ; the beginning of the first steps to set our economy on a firmer foundation , paving the way to long - term growth and prosperity .
the american recovery and reinvestment act that i will sign today -- a plan that meets the principles i laid out in january -- is the most sweeping economic recovery package in our history .
it 's the product of broad consultation and the recipient of broad support -- from business leaders , unions , public interest groups , from the chamber of commerce and the national association of manufacturers , as well as the afl - cio .
from democrats and republicans , mayors as well as governors .
it 's a rare thing in washington for people with such diverse and different viewpoints to come together and support the same bill .
and on behalf of our nation , i want to thank all of them for it , including your two outstanding senators , michael bennett and mark udall , as well as all the members of your congressional delegation .
they did an outstanding job and they deserve a big round of applause .
i also want to thank joe biden for working behind the scenes from the very start to make this recovery act possible .
i want to thank speaker pelosi and harry reid for acting so quickly and for proving that congress could step up to this challenge .
i have special thanks to max baucus , who 's the chairman of the finance committee .
without max , none of this would have happened .
he had to work overtime , and push his committee to work overtime .
and i want to thank all the committee chairs and members of congress for coming up with a plan that is both bold and balanced enough to meet the demands of this moment .
the american people were looking to them for leadership , and that 's what they provided .
now , what makes this recovery plan so important is not just that it will create or save 3.5 million jobs over the next two years , including 60,000-plus here in colorado .
it 's that we 're putting americans to work doing the work that america needs done -- -   -- in critical areas that have been neglected for too long ; work that will bring real and lasting change for generations to come .
because we know we ca n't build our economic future on the transportation and information networks of the past , we are remaking the american landscape with the largest new investment in our nation 's infrastructure since eisenhower built an interstate highway system in the 1950s .
because of this investment , nearly 400,000 men and women will go to work rebuilding our crumbling roads and bridges , repairing our faulty dams and levees , bringing critical broadband connections to businesses and homes in nearly every community in america , upgrading mass transit , building high - speed rail lines that will improve travel and commerce throughout our nation .
because we know america ca n't out - compete the world tomorrow if our children are being out - educated today , we 're making the largest investment in education in our nation 's history .
it 's an investment that will create jobs building 21st century classrooms and libraries and labs for millions of children across america .
it will provide funds to train a new generation of math and science teachers , while giving aid to states and school districts to stop teachers from being laid off and education programs from being cut .
in a place like new york city , 14,000 teachers who were set to be let go may now be able to continue pursuing their critical mission .
it 's an investment that will create a new $ 2,500 annual tax credit to put the dream of a college degree within reach for middle - class families and make college affordable for 7 million students --   -- helping more of our sons and daughters aim higher , reach further , fulfill their god - given potential .
because we know that spiraling health care costs are crushing families and businesses alike , we 're taking the most meaningful steps in years towards modernizing our health care system .
it 's an investment that will take the long overdue step of computerizing america 's medical records to reduce the duplication and waste that costs billions of health care dollars , and medical errors that cost thousands of lives each year .
further , thanks to the actions we 've taken , 7 million americans who lost their health care along the way will continue to get the coverage they need , and roughly 20 million more americans can breathe a little easier knowing that their health care wo n't be cut due to a state budget shortfall .
and a historic commitment to wellness initiatives will keep millions of americans from setting foot in the doctor 's office in the first place -- because these are preventable diseases and we 're going to invest in prevention .
so taken together with the enactment earlier this month of a long - delayed law to extend health care to millions more children of working families --   -- we have done more in 30 days to advance the cause of health care reform than this country has done in an entire decade .
and that 's something we should be proud of .
because we know we ca n't power america 's future on energy that 's controlled by foreign dictators , we are taking big steps down the road to energy independence , laying the groundwork for new green energy economies that can create countless well - paying jobs .
it 's an investment that will double the amount of renewable energy produced over the next three years .
think about that -- double the amount of renewable energy in three years .
provide tax credits and loan guarantees to companies like namaste , a company that will be expanding , instead of laying people off , as a result of the plan that i 'm about to sign .
and in the process , we will transform the way we use energy .
today , the electricity we use is carried along a grid of lines and wires that date back to thomas edison -- a grid that ca n't support the demands of this economy .
this means we 're using 19th and 20th century technologies to battle 21st century problems like climate change and energy security .
it also means that places like north dakota can -- that can produce a lot of wind energy ca n't deliver it to communities that want it , leading to a gap between how much clean energy we are using and how much we could be using .
the investment we 're making today will create a newer , smarter electric grid that will allow for broader use of alternative energy .
we will build on the work that 's being done in places like boulder -- a community that 's on its -- that 's on pace to be the world 's first smart grid city .
this investment will place smart meters in homes to make our energy bills lower , make outages less likely , and make it easier to use clean energy .
it 's an investment that will save taxpayers over $ 1 billion by slashing energy costs in our federal buildings by 25 percent ; save working families hundreds of dollars a year on their energy bills by weatherizing over 1 million homes .
and it 's an investment that takes the important first step towards a national transmission superhighway that will connect our cities to the windy plains of the dakotas and the sunny deserts of the southwest .
even beyond energy , from the national institutes of health to the national science foundation , this recovery act represents the biggest increase in basic research funding in the long history of america 's noble endeavor to better understand our world .
and just as president kennedy sparked an explosion of innovation when he set america 's sights on the moon , i hope this investment will ignite our imagination once more , spurring new discoveries and breakthroughs in science , in medicine , in energy , to make our economy stronger and our nation more secure and our planet safer for our children .
now , while this package is composed mostly of critical investments , it also includes aid to state and local governments to prevent layoffs of firefighters or police recruits in --   -- recruits like the ones in columbus , ohio , who were told that instead of being sworn in as officers , they were about to be let go .
it includes help for those hardest hit by our economic crisis like the nearly 18 million americans who will get larger unemployment checks in the mail .
about a third of this package comes in the forms of tax cuts -- by the way , the most progressive in our history --   -- not only spurring job creation , but putting money in the pockets of 95 percent of hardworking families in america .
so unlike the tax cuts that we 've seen in recent years , the vast majority of these tax benefits will go not to the wealthiest americans , but to the middle class --   -- with those workers who make the least benefiting the most .
and it 's a plan that rewards responsibility , lifting two million americans from poverty by ensuring that anyone who works hard does not have to raise a child below the poverty line .
so as a whole , this plan will help poor and working americans pull themselves into the middle class in a way we have n't seen in nearly 50 years .
what i 'm signing , then , is a balanced plan with a mix of tax cuts and investments .
it 's a plan that 's been put together without earmarks or the usual pork barrel spending .
it 's a plan that will be implemented with an unprecedented level of transparency and accountability .
with a recovery package of this size comes a responsibility to assure every taxpayer that we are being careful with the money they work so hard to earn .
and that 's why i 'm assigning a team of managers to ensure that the precious dollars we 've invested are being spent wisely and well .
we will --   -- governor ritter , mayor hickenlooper , we 're going to hold governors and local officials who receive the money to the same high standard .
and we expect you , the american people , to hold us accountable for the results .
and that 's why we 've created recovery .
gov -- a web site so that every american can go online and see how this money is being spent and what kind of job is being created , where those jobs are being created .
we want transparency and accountability throughout this process .
now , as important as the step we take today is , this legislation represents only the first part of the broad strategy we need to address our economic crisis .
in the coming days and weeks , i 'll be launching other aspects of the plan .
we will need to stabilize , repair , and reform our banking system , and get credit flowing again to families and businesses .
we will need to end the culture where we ignore problems until they become full - blown crises instead of recognizing that the only way to build a thriving economy is to set and enforce firm rules of the road .
we must stem the spread of foreclosures and falling home values for all americans , and do everything we can to help responsible homeowners stay in their homes -- something i 'll talk more about tomorrow .
and we will need to do everything in the short term to get our economy moving again , while at the same time recognizing that we have inherited a trillion - dollar deficit , and we need to begin restoring fiscal discipline and taming our exploding deficits over the long term .
none of this will be easy .
the road to recovery will not be straight .
we will make progress and there may be some slippage along the way .
it will demand courage and discipline .
it will demand a new sense of responsibility that 's been missing from wall street all the way to washington .
there will be hazards and reverses .
but i have every confidence that if we are willing to continue doing the critical work that must be done -- by each of us , by all of us -- then we will leave this struggling economy behind us , and come out on the other side , more prosperous as a people .
for our american story is not -- and has never been -- about things coming easy .
it 's about rising to the moment when the moment is hard , and converting crisis into opportunity , and seeing to it that we emerge from whatever trials we face stronger than we were before .
it 's about rejecting the notion that our fate is somehow written for us , and instead laying claim to a destiny of our own making .
that 's what earlier generations of americans have done , that 's what we owe our children , that 's what we are doing today .
thank you , colorado .
let 's get to work .
thank you .

mr. speaker , mr. vice president , members of congress , my fellow americans : 
 today in america , a teacher spent extra time with a student who needed it , and did her part to lift america 's graduation rate to its highest level in more than three decades .
an entrepreneur flipped on the lights in her tech startup , and did her part to add to the more than eight million new jobs our businesses have created over the past four years .
an autoworker fine - tuned some of the best , most fuel - efficient cars in the world , and did his part to help america wean itself off foreign oil .
a farmer prepared for the spring after the strongest five - year stretch of farm exports in our history .
a rural doctor gave a young child the first prescription to treat asthma that his mother could afford .
a man took the bus home from the graveyard shift , bone - tired but dreaming big dreams for his son .
and in tight - knit communities across america , fathers and mothers will tuck in their kids , put an arm around their spouse , remember fallen comrades , and give thanks for being home from a war that , after twelve long years , is finally coming to an end .
tonight , this chamber speaks with one voice to the people we represent : it is you , our citizens , who make the state of our union strong .
here are the results of your efforts : the lowest unemployment rate in over five years .
a rebounding housing market .
a manufacturing sector that 's adding jobs for the first time since the 1990s .
more oil produced at home than we buy from the rest of the world -- the first time that 's happened in nearly twenty years .
our deficits -- cut by more than half .
and for the first time in over a decade , business leaders around the world have declared that china is no longer the world 's number one place to invest ; america is .
that 's why i believe this can be a breakthrough year for america .
after five years of grit and determined effort , the united states is better - positioned for the 21st century than any other nation on earth .
the question for everyone in this chamber , running through every decision we make this year , is whether we are going to help or hinder this progress .
for several years now , this town has been consumed by a rancorous argument over the proper size of the federal government .
it 's an important debate -- one that dates back to our very founding .
but when that debate prevents us from carrying out even the most basic functions of our democracy -- when our differences shut down government or threaten the full faith and credit of the united states -- then we are not doing right by the american people .
as president , i 'm committed to making washington work better , and rebuilding the trust of the people who sent us here .
i believe most of you are , too .
last month , thanks to the work of democrats and republicans , this congress finally produced a budget that undoes some of last year 's severe cuts to priorities like education .
nobody got everything they wanted , and we can still do more to invest in this country 's future while bringing down our deficit in a balanced way .
but the budget compromise should leave us freer to focus on creating new jobs , not creating new crises .
in the coming months , let 's see where else we can make progress together .
let 's make this a year of action .
that 's what most americans want -- for all of us in this chamber to focus on their lives , their hopes , their aspirations .
and what i believe unites the people of this nation , regardless of race or region or party , young or old , rich or poor , is the simple , profound belief in opportunity for all -- the notion that if you work hard and take responsibility , you can get ahead .
let 's face it : that belief has suffered some serious blows .
over more than three decades , even before the great recession hit , massive shifts in technology and global competition had eliminated a lot of good , middle - class jobs , and weakened the economic foundations that families depend on .
today , after four years of economic growth , corporate profits and stock prices have rarely been higher , and those at the top have never done better .
but average wages have barely budged .
inequality has deepened .
upward mobility has stalled .
the cold , hard fact is that even in the midst of recovery , too many americans are working more than ever just to get by -- let alone get ahead .
and too many still are n't working at all .
our job is to reverse these trends .
it wo n't happen right away , and we wo n't agree on everything .
but what i offer tonight is a set of concrete , practical proposals to speed up growth , strengthen the middle class , and build new ladders of opportunity into the middle class .
some require congressional action , and i 'm eager to work with all of you .
but america does not stand still -- and neither will i. so wherever and whenever i can take steps without legislation to expand opportunity for more american families , that 's what i 'm going to do .
as usual , our first lady sets a good example .
michelle 's let 's move partnership with schools , businesses , and local leaders has helped bring down childhood obesity rates for the first time in thirty years -- an achievement that will improve lives and reduce health care costs for decades to come .
the joining forces alliance that michelle and jill biden launched has already encouraged employers to hire or train nearly 400,000 veterans and military spouses .
taking a page from that playbook , the white house just organized a college opportunity summit where already , 150 universities , businesses , and nonprofits have made concrete commitments to reduce inequality in access to higher education -- and help every hardworking kid go to college and succeed when they get to campus .
across the country , we 're partnering with mayors , governors , and state legislatures on issues from homelessness to marriage equality .
the point is , there are millions of americans outside washington who are tired of stale political arguments , and are moving this country forward .
they believe , and i believe , that here in america , our success should depend not on accident of birth , but the strength of our work ethic and the scope of our dreams .
that 's what drew our forebears here .
it 's how the daughter of a factory worker is ceo of america 's largest automaker;how the son of a barkeeper is speaker of the house ; how the son of a single mom can be president of the greatest nation on earth .
opportunity is who we are .
and the defining project of our generation is to restore that promise .
we know where to start : the best measure of opportunity is access to a good job .
with the economy picking up speed , companies say they intend to hire more people this year .
and over half of big manufacturers say they 're thinking of insourcing jobs from abroad .
so let 's make that decision easier for more companies .
both democrats and republicans have argued that our tax code is riddled with wasteful , complicated loopholes that punish businesses investing here , and reward companies that keep profits abroad .
let 's flip that equation .
let 's work together to close those loopholes , end those incentives to ship jobs overseas , and lower tax rates for businesses that create jobs here at home .
moreover , we can take the money we save with this transition to tax reform to create jobs rebuilding our roads , upgrading our ports , unclogging our commutes -- because in today 's global economy , first - class jobs gravitate to first - class infrastructure .
we 'll need congress to protect more than three million jobs by finishing transportation and waterways bills this summer .
but i will act on my own to slash bureaucracy and streamline the permitting process for key projects , so we can get more construction workers on the job as fast as possible .
we also have the chance , right now , to beat other countries in the race for the next wave of high - tech manufacturing jobs .
my administration has launched two hubs for high - tech manufacturing in raleigh and youngstown , where we 've connected businesses to research universities that can help america lead the world in advanced technologies .
tonight , i 'm announcing we 'll launch six more this year .
bipartisan bills in both houses could double the number of these hubs and the jobs they create .
so get those bills to my desk and put more americans back to work .
let 's do more to help the entrepreneurs and small business owners who create most new jobs in america .
over the past five years , my administration has made more loans to small business owners than any other .
and when ninety - eight percent of our exporters are small businesses , new trade partnerships with europe and the asia - pacific will help them create more jobs .
we need to work together on tools like bipartisan trade promotion authority to protect our workers , protect our environment , and open new markets to new goods stamped " made in the usa . "
china and europe are n't standing on the sidelines .
neither should we .
we know that the nation that goes all - in on innovation today will own the global economy tomorrow .
this is an edge america can not surrender .
federally - funded research helped lead to the ideas and inventions behind google and smartphones .
that 's why congress should undo the damage done by last year 's cuts to basic research so we can unleash the next great american discovery -- whether it 's vaccines that stay ahead of drug - resistant bacteria , or paper - thin material that 's stronger than steel .
and let 's pass a patent reform bill that allows our businesses to stay focused on innovation , not costly , needless litigation .
now , one of the biggest factors in bringing more jobs back is our commitment to american energy .
the all - of - the - above energy strategy i announced a few years ago is working , and today , america is closer to energy independence than we 've been in decades .
one of the reasons why is natural gas -- if extracted safely , it 's the bridge fuel that can power our economy with less of the carbon pollution that causes climate change .
businesses plan to invest almost $ 100 billion in new factories that use natural gas .
i 'll cut red tape to help states get those factories built , and this congress can help by putting people to work building fueling stations that shift more cars and trucks from foreign oil to american natural gas .
my administration will keep working with the industry to sustain production and job growth while strengthening protection of our air , our water , and our communities .
and while we 're at it , i 'll use my authority to protect more of our pristine federal lands for future generations .
it 's not just oil and natural gas production that 's booming ; we 're becoming a global leader in solar , too .
every four minutes , another american home or business goes solar ; every panel pounded into place by a worker whose job ca n't be outsourced .
let 's continue that progress with a smarter tax policy that stops giving $ 4 billion a year to fossil fuel industries that do n't need it , so that we can invest more in fuels of the future that do .
and even as we 've increased energy production , we 've partnered with businesses , builders , and local communities to reduce the energy we consume .
when we rescued our automakers , for example , we worked with them to set higher fuel efficiency standards for our cars .
in the coming months , i 'll build on that success by setting new standards for our trucks , so we can keep driving down oil imports and what we pay at the pump .
taken together , our energy policy is creating jobs and leading to a cleaner , safer planet .
over the past eight years , the united states has reduced our total carbon pollution more than any other nation on earth .
but we have to act with more urgency -- because a changing climate is already harming western communities struggling with drought , and coastal cities dealing with floods .
that 's why i directed my administration to work with states , utilities , and others to set new standards on the amount of carbon pollution our power plants are allowed to dump into the air .
the shift to a cleaner energy economy wo n't happen overnight , and it will require tough choices along the way .
but the debate is settled .
climate change is a fact .
and when our children 's children look us in the eye and ask if we did all we could to leave them a safer , more stable world , with new sources of energy , i want us to be able to sayyes , we did .
finally , if we are serious about economic growth , it is time to heed the call of business leaders , labor leaders , faith leaders , and law enforcement -- and fix our broken immigration system .
republicans and democrats in the senate have acted .
i know that members of both parties in the house want to do the same .
independent economists say immigration reform will grow our economy and shrink our deficits by almost $ 1 trillion in the next two decades .
and for good reason : when people come here to fulfill their dreams -- to study , invent , and contribute to our culture -- they make our country a more attractive place for businesses to locate and create jobs for everyone .
so let 's get immigration reform done this year .
the ideas i 've outlined so far can speed up growth and create more jobs .
but in this rapidly - changing economy , we have to make sure that every american has the skills to fill those jobs .
the good news is , we know how to do it .
two years ago , as the auto industry came roaring back , andra rush opened up a manufacturing firm in detroit .
she knew that ford needed parts for the best - selling truck in america , and she knew how to make them .
she just needed the workforce .
so she dialed up what we call an american job center -- places where folks can walk in to get the help or training they need to find a new job , or better job .
she was flooded with new workers .
and today , detroit manufacturing systems has more than 700 employees .
what andra and her employees experienced is how it should be for every employer -- and every job seeker .
so tonight , i 've asked vice president biden to lead an across - the - board reform of america 's training programs to make sure they have one mission : train americans with the skills employers need , and match them to good jobs that need to be filled right now .
that means more on - the - job training , and more apprenticeships that set a young worker on an upward trajectory for life .
it means connecting companies to community colleges that can help design training to fill their specific needs .
and if congress wants to help , you can concentrate funding on proven programs that connect more ready - to - work americans with ready - to - be - filled jobs .
i 'm also convinced we can help americans return to the workforce faster by reforming unemployment insurance so that it 's more effective in today 's economy .
but first , this congress needs to restore the unemployment insurance you just let expire for 1.6 million people .
let me tell you why .
misty demars is a mother of two young boys .
she 'd been steadily employed since she was a teenager .
she put herself through college .
she 'd never collected unemployment benefits .
in may , she and her husband used their life savings to buy their first home .
a week later , budget cuts claimed the job she loved .
last month , when their unemployment insurance was cut off , she sat down and wrote me a letter -- the kind i get every day . "
we are the face of the unemployment crisis , " she wrote . "
i am not dependent on the government&hellip;our country depends on people like us who build careers , contribute to society&hellip;care about our neighbors&hellip;i am confident that in time i will find a job&hellip;i will pay my taxes , and we will raise our children in their own home in the community we love .
please give us this chance . "
congress , give these hardworking , responsible americans that chance .
they need our help , but more important , this country needs them in the game .
that 's why i 've been asking ceos to give more long - term unemployed workers a fair shot at that new job and new chance to support their families ; this week , many will come to the white house to make that commitment real .
tonight , i ask every business leader in america to join us and to do the same -- because we are stronger when america fields a full team .
of course , it 's not enough to train today 's workforce .
we also have to prepare tomorrow 's workforce , by guaranteeing every child access to a world - class education .
estiven rodriguez could n't speak a word of english when he moved to new york city at age nine .
but last month , thanks to the support of great teachers and an innovative tutoring program , he led a march of his classmates -- through a crowd of cheering parents and neighbors -- from their high school to the post office , where they mailed off their college applications .
and this son of a factory worker just found out he 's going to college this fall .
five years ago , we set out to change the odds for all our kids .
we worked with lenders to reform student loans , and today , more young people are earning college degrees than ever before .
race to the top , with the help of governors from both parties , has helped states raise expectations and performance .
teachers and principals in schools from tennessee to washington , d. c. are making big strides in preparing students with skills for the new economy -- problem solving , critical thinking , science , technology , engineering , and math .
some of this change is hard .
it requires everything from more challenging curriculums and more demanding parents to better support for teachers and new ways to measure how well our kids think , not how well they can fill in a bubble on a test .
but it 's worth it -- and it 's working .
the problem is we 're still not reaching enough kids , and we 're not reaching them in time .
that has to change .
research shows that one of the best investments we can make in a child 's life is high - quality early education .
last year , i asked this congress to help states make high - quality pre - k available to every four year - old .
as a parent as well as a president , i repeat that request tonight .
but in the meantime , thirty states have raised pre - k funding on their own .
they know we ca n't wait .
so just as we worked with states to reform our schools , this year , we 'll invest in new partnerships with states and communities across the country in a race to the top for our youngest children .
and as congress decides what it 's going to do , i 'm going to pull together a coalition of elected officials , business leaders , and philanthropists willing to help more kids access the high - quality pre - k they need .
last year , i also pledged to connect 99 percent of our students to high - speed broadband over the next four years .
tonight , i can announce that with the support of the fcc and companies like apple , microsoft , sprint , and verizon , we 've got a down payment to start connecting more than 15,000 schools and twenty million students over the next two years , without adding a dime to the deficit .
we 're working to redesign high schools and partner them with colleges and employers that offer the real - world education and hands - on training that can lead directly to a job and career .
we 're shaking up our system of higher education to give parents more information , and colleges more incentives to offer better value , so that no middle - class kid is priced out of a college education .
we 're offering millions the opportunity to cap their monthly student loan payments to ten percent of their income , and i want to work with congress to see how we can help even more americans who feel trapped by student loan debt .
and i 'm reaching out to some of america 's leading foundations and corporations ona new initiativeto help more young men of color facing tough odds stay on track and reach their full potential .
the bottom line is , michelle and i want every child to have the same chance this country gave us .
but we know our opportunity agenda wo n't be complete -- and too many young people entering the workforce today will see the american dream as an empty promise -- unless we do more to make sure our economy honors the dignity of work , and hard work pays off for every single american .
today , women make up about half our workforce .
but they still make 77 cents for every dollar a man earns .
that is wrong , and in 2014 , it 's an embarrassment .
a woman deserves equal pay for equal work .
she deserves to have a baby without sacrificing her job .
a mother deserves a day off to care for a sick child or sick parent without running into hardship -- and you know what , a father does , too .
it 's time to do away with workplace policies that belong in a " mad men " episode .
this year , let 's all come together -- congress , the white house , and businesses from wall street to main street -- to give every woman the opportunity she deserves .
because i firmly believe when women succeed , america succeeds .
now , women hold a majority of lower - wage jobs -- but they 're not the only ones stifled by stagnant wages .
americans understand that some people will earn more than others , and we do n't resent those who , by virtue of their efforts , achieve incredible success .
but americans overwhelmingly agree that no one who works full time should ever have to raise a family in poverty .
in the year since i asked this congress to raise the minimum wage , five states have passed laws to raise theirs .
many businesses have done it on their own .
nick chute is here tonight with his boss , john soranno .
john 's an owner of punch pizza in minneapolis , and nick helps make the dough .
only now he makes more of it : john just gave his employees a raise , to ten bucks an hour -- a decision that eased their financial stress and boosted their morale .
tonight , i ask more of america 's business leaders to follow john 's lead and do what you can to raise your employees ' wages .
to every mayor , governor , and state legislator in america , i say , you do n't have to wait for congress to act ; americans will support you if you take this on .
and as a chief executive , i intend to lead by example .
profitable corporations like costco see higher wages as the smart way to boost productivity and reduce turnover .
we should too .
in the coming weeks , i will issue an executive order requiring federal contractors to pay their federally - funded employees a fair wage of at least $ 10.10 an hour -- because if you cook our troops ' meals or wash their dishes , you should n't have to live in poverty .
of course , to reach millions more , congress needs to get on board .
today , the federal minimum wage is worth about twenty percent less than it was when ronald reagan first stood here .
tom harkin and george miller have a bill to fix that by lifting the minimum wage to $ 10.10 .
this will help families .
it will give businesses customers with more money to spend .
it does n't involve any new bureaucratic program .
so join the rest of the country .
say yes .
give america a raise .
there are other steps we can take to help families make ends meet , and few are more effective at reducing inequality and helping families pull themselves up through hard work than the earned income tax credit .
right now , it helps about half of all parents at some point .
but i agree with republicans like senator rubio that it does n't do enough for single workers who do n't have kids .
so let 's work together to strengthen the credit , reward work , and help more americans get ahead .
let 's do more to help americans save for retirement .
today , most workers do n't have a pension .
a social security check often is n't enough on its own .
and while the stock market has doubled over the last five years , that does n't help folks who do n't have 401ks .
that 's why , tomorrow , i will direct the treasury to create a new way for working americans to start their own retirement savings : myra .
it 's a new savings bond that encourages folks to build a nest egg .
myra guarantees a decent return with no risk of losing what you put in .
and if this congress wants to help , work with me to fix an upside - down tax code that gives big tax breaks to help the wealthy save , but does little to nothing for middle - class americans .
offer every american access to an automatic ira on the job , so they can save at work just like everyone in this chamber can .
and since the most important investment many families make is their home , send me legislation that protects taxpayers from footing the bill for a housing crisis ever again , and keeps the dream of homeownership alive for future generations of americans .
one last point on financial security .
for decades , few things exposed hard - working families to economic hardship more than a broken health care system .
and in case you have n't heard , we 're in the process of fixing that .
a pre - existing condition used to mean that someone like amanda shelley , a physician assistant and single mom from arizona , could n't get health insurance .
but on january 1st , she got covered .
on january 3rd , she felt a sharp pain .
on january 6th , she had emergency surgery .
just one week earlier , amanda said , that surgery would 've meant bankruptcy .
that 's what health insurance reform is all about -- the peace of mind that if misfortune strikes , you do n't have to lose everything .
already , because of the affordable care act , more than three million americans under age 26 have gained coverage under their parents ' plans .
more than nine million americans have signed up for private health insurance or medicaid coverage .
and here 's another number : zero .
because of this law , no american can ever again be dropped or denied coverage for a preexisting condition like asthma , back pain , or cancer .
no woman can ever be charged more just because she 's a woman .
and we did all this while adding years to medicare 's finances , keeping medicare premiums flat , and lowering prescription costs for millions of seniors .
now , i do n't expect to convince my republican friends on the merits of this law .
but i know that the american people are n't interested in refighting old battles .
so again , if you have specific plans to cut costs , cover more people , and increase choice -- tell america what you 'd do differently .
let 's see if the numbers add up .
but let 's not have another forty - something votes to repeal a law that 's already helping millions of americans like amanda .
the first forty were plenty .
we got it .
we all owe it to the american people to say what we 're for , not just what we 're against .
and if you want to know the real impact this law is having , just talk to governor steve beshear of kentucky , who 's here tonight .
kentucky 's not the most liberal part of the country , but he 's like a man possessed when it comes to covering his commonwealth 's families . "
they are our friends and neighbors , " he said . "
they are people we shop and go to church with&hellip;farmers out on the tractors&hellip;grocery clerks&hellip;they are people who go to work every morning praying they do n't get sick .
no one deserves to live that way . "
steve 's right .
that 's why , tonight , i ask every american who knows someone without health insurance to help them get covered by march 31st .
moms , get on your kids to sign up .
kids , call your mom and walk her through the application .
it will give her some peace of mind -- plus , she 'll appreciate hearing from you .
after all , that 's the spirit that has always moved this nation forward .
it 's the spirit of citizenship -- the recognition that through hard work and responsibility , we can pursue our individual dreams , but still come together as one american family to make sure the next generation can pursue its dreams as well .
citizenship means standing up for everyone 's right to vote .
last year , part of the voting rights act was weakened .
but conservative republicans and liberal democrats are working together to strengthen it ; and the bipartisan commission i appointed last year has offered reforms so that no one has to wait more than a half hour to vote .
let 's support these efforts .
it should be the power of our vote , not the size of our bank account , that drives our democracy .
citizenship means standing up for the lives that gun violence steals from us each day .
i have seen the courage of parents , students , pastors , and police officers all over this country who say " we are not afraid , " and i intend to keep trying , with or without congress , to help stop more tragedies from visiting innocent americans in our movie theaters , shopping malls , or schools like sandy hook .
citizenship demands a sense of common cause ; participation in the hard work of self - government ; an obligation to serve to our communities .
and i know this chamber agrees that few americans give more to their country than our diplomats and the men and women of the united states armed forces .
tonight , because of the extraordinary troops and civilians who risk and lay down their lives to keep us free , the united states is more secure .
when i took office , nearly 180,000 americans were serving in iraq and afghanistan .
today , all our troops are out of iraq .
more than 60,000 of our troops have already come home from afghanistan .
with afghan forces now in the lead for their own security , our troops have moved to a support role .
together with our allies , we will complete our mission there by the end of this year , and america 's longest war will finally be over .
after 2014 , we will support a unified afghanistan as it takes responsibility for its own future .
if the afghan government signs a security agreement that we have negotiated , a small force of americans could remain in afghanistan with nato allies to carry out two narrow missions : training and assisting afghan forces , and counterterrorism operations to pursue any remnants of al qaeda .
for while our relationship with afghanistan will change , one thing will not : our resolve that terrorists do not launch attacks against our country .
the fact is , that danger remains .
while we have put al qaeda 's core leadership on a path to defeat , the threat has evolved , as al qaeda affiliates and other extremists take root in different parts of the world .
in yemen , somalia , iraq , and mali , we have to keep working with partners to disrupt and disable these networks .
in syria , we 'll support the opposition that rejects the agenda of terrorist networks .
here at home , we 'll keep strengthening our defenses , and combat new threats like cyberattacks .
and as we reform our defense budget , we have to keep faith with our men and women in uniform , and invest in the capabilities they need to succeed in future missions .
we have to remain vigilant .
but i strongly believe our leadership and our security can not depend on our military alone .
as commander - in - chief , i have used force when needed to protect the american people , and i will never hesitate to do so as long as i hold this office .
but i will not send our troops into harm 's way unless it 's truly necessary ; nor will i allow our sons and daughters to be mired in open - ended conflicts .
we must fight the battles that need to be fought , not those that terrorists prefer from us -- large - scale deployments that drain our strength and may ultimately feed extremism .
so , even as we aggressively pursue terrorist networks -- through more targeted efforts and by building the capacity of our foreign partners -- america must move off a permanent war footing .
that 's why i 've imposed prudent limits on the use of drones -- for we will not be safer if people abroad believe we strike within their countries without regard for the consequence .
that 's why , working with this congress , i will reform our surveillance programs -- because the vital work of our intelligence community depends on public confidence , here and abroad , that the privacy of ordinary people is not being violated .
and with the afghan war ending , this needs to be the year congress lifts the remaining restrictions on detainee transfers and we close the prison at guantanamo bay -- because we counter terrorism not just through intelligence and military action , but by remaining true to our constitutional ideals , and setting an example for the rest of the world .
you see , in a world of complex threats , our security and leadership depends on all elements of our power -- including strong and principled diplomacy .
american diplomacy has rallied more than fifty countries to prevent nuclear materials from falling into the wrong hands , and allowed us to reduce our own reliance on cold war stockpiles .
american diplomacy , backed by the threat of force , is why syria 's chemical weapons are being eliminated , and we will continue to work with the international community to usher in the future the syrian people deserve -- a future free of dictatorship , terror and fear .
as we speak , american diplomacy is supporting israelis and palestinians as they engage in difficult but necessary talks to end the conflict there ; to achieve dignity and an independent state for palestinians , and lasting peace and security for the state of israel -- a jewish state that knows america will always be at their side .
and it is american diplomacy , backed by pressure , that has halted the progress of iran 's nuclear program -- and rolled parts of that program back -- for the very first time in a decade .
as we gather here tonight , iran has begun to eliminate its stockpile of higher levels of enriched uranium .
it is not installing advanced centrifuges .
unprecedented inspections help the world verify , every day , that iran is not building a bomb .
and with our allies and partners , we 're engaged in negotiations to see if we can peacefully achieve a goal we all share : preventing iran from obtaining a nuclear weapon .
these negotiations will be difficult .
they may not succeed .
we are clear - eyed about iran 's support for terrorist organizations like hezbollah , which threaten our allies ; and the mistrust between our nations can not be wished away .
but these negotiations do not rely on trust ; any long - term deal we agree to must be based on verifiable action that convinces us and the international community that iran is not building a nuclear bomb .
if john f. kennedy and ronald reagan could negotiate with the soviet union , then surely a strong and confident america can negotiate with less powerful adversaries today .
the sanctions that we put in place helped make this opportunity possible .
but let me be clear : if this congress sends me a new sanctions bill now that threatens to derail these talks , i will veto it .
for the sake of our national security , we must give diplomacy a chance to succeed .
if iran 's leaders do not seize this opportunity , then i will be the first to call for more sanctions , and stand ready to exercise all options to make sure iran does not build a nuclear weapon .
but if iran 's leaders do seize the chance , then iran could take an important step to rejoin the community of nations , and we will have resolved one of the leading security challenges of our time without the risks of war .
finally , let 's remember that our leadership is defined not just by our defense against threats , but by the enormous opportunities to do good and promote understanding around the globe -- to forge greater cooperation , to expand new markets , to free people from fear and want .
and no one is better positioned to take advantage of those opportunities than america .
our alliance with europe remains the strongest the world has ever known .
from tunisia to burma , we 're supporting those who are willing to do the hard work of building democracy .
in ukraine , we stand for the principle that all people have the right to express themselves freely and peacefully , and have a say in their country 's future .
across africa , we 're bringing together businesses and governments to double access to electricity and help end extreme poverty .
in the americas , we are building new ties of commerce , but we 're also expanding cultural and educational exchanges among young people .
and we will continue to focus on the asia - pacific , where we support our allies , shape a future of greater security and prosperity , and extend a hand to those devastated by disaster -- as we did in the philippines , when our marines and civilians rushed to aid those battered by a typhoon , and were greeted with words like , " we will never forget your kindness " and " god bless america ! "
we do these things because they help promote our long - term security .
and we do them because we believe in the inherent dignity and equality of every human being , regardless of race or religion , creed or sexual orientation .
and next week , the world will see one expression of that commitment -- when team usa marches the red , white , and blue into the olympic stadium -- and brings home the gold .
my fellow americans , no other country in the world does what we do .
on every issue , the world turns to us , not simply because of the size of our economy or our military might -- but because of the ideals we stand for , and the burdens we bear to advance them .
no one knows this better than those who serve in uniform .
as this time of war draws to a close , a new generation of heroes returns to civilian life .
we 'll keep slashing that backlog so our veterans receive the benefits they 've earned , and our wounded warriors receive the health care -- including the mental health care -- that they need .
we 'll keep working to help all our veterans translate their skills and leadership into jobs here at home .
and we all continue to join forces to honor and support our remarkable military families .
let me tell you about one of those families i 've come to know .
i first met cory remsburg , a proud army ranger , at omaha beach on the 65th anniversary of d - day .
along with some of his fellow rangers , he walked me through the program -- a strong , impressive young man , with an easy manner , sharp as a tack .
we joked around , and took pictures , and i told him to stay in touch .
a few months later , on his tenth deployment , cory was nearly killed by a massive roadside bomb in afghanistan .
his comrades found him in a canal , face down , underwater , shrapnel in his brain .
for months , he lay in a coma .
the next time i met him , in the hospital , he could n't speak ; he could barely move .
over the years , he 's endured dozens of surgeries and procedures , and hours of grueling rehab every day .
even now , cory is still blind in one eye .
he still struggles on his left side .
but slowly , steadily , with the support of caregivers like his dad craig , and the community around him , cory has grown stronger .
day by day , he 's learned to speak again and stand again and walk again -- and he 's working toward the day when he can serve his country again .
" my recovery has not been easy , " he says . "
nothing in life that 's worth anything is easy . "
cory is here tonight .
and like the army he loves , like the america he serves , sergeant first class cory remsburg never gives up , and he does not quit .
my fellow americans , men and women like cory remind us that america has never come easy .
our freedom , our democracy , has never been easy .
sometimes we stumble ; we make mistakes ; we get frustrated or discouraged .
but for more than two hundred years , we have put those things aside and placed our collective shoulder to the wheel of progress -- to create and build and expand the possibilities of individual achievement ; to free other nations from tyranny and fear ; to promote justice , and fairness , and equality under the law , so that the words set to paper by our founders are made real for every citizen .
the america we want for our kids -- a rising america where honest work is plentiful and communities are strong ; where prosperity is widely shared and opportunity for all lets us go as far as our dreams and toil will take us -- none of it is easy .
but if we work together ; if we summon what is best in us , with our feet planted firmly in today but our eyes cast towards tomorrow -- i know it 's within our reach .
believe it .
god bless you , and god bless the united states of america .

thank you .
thank you so much .
well , it is a great honor to be with you here in jerusalem , and i 'm so grateful for the welcome that i 've received from the people of israel .
thank you .
i bring with me the support of the american people --   -- and the friendship that binds us together .
over the last two days , i 've reaffirmed the bonds between our countries with prime minister netanyahu and president peres .
i 've borne witness to the ancient history of the jewish people at the shrine of the book , and i 've seen israel 's shining future in your scientists and your entrepreneurs .
this is a nation of museums and patents , timeless holy sites and ground - breaking innovation .
only in israel could you see the dead sea scrolls and the place where the technology on board the mars rover originated at the same time .
but what i 've most looked forward to is the ability to speak directly to you , the israeli people -- especially so many young people who are here today --   -- to talk about the history that brought us here today , and the future that you will make in the years to come .
now , i know that in israel 's vibrant democracy , every word , every gesture is carefully scrutinized .
but i want to clear something up just so you know -- any drama between me and my friend , bibi , over the years was just a plot to create material for eretz nehederet .
that 's the only thing that was going on .
we just wanted to make sure the writers had good material .
i also know that i come to israel on the eve of a sacred holiday -- the celebration of passover .
and that is where i would like to begin today .
just a few days from now , jews here in israel and around the world will sit with family and friends at the seder table , and celebrate with songs , wine and symbolic foods .
after enjoying seders with family and friends in chicago and on the campaign trail , i 'm proud that i 've now brought this tradition into the white house .
i did so because i wanted my daughters to experience the haggadah , and the story at the center of passover that makes this time of year so powerful .
it 's a story of centuries of slavery , and years of wandering in the desert ; a story of perseverance amidst persecution , and faith in god and the torah .
it 's a story about finding freedom in your own land .
and for the jewish people , this story is central to who you 've become .
but it 's also a story that holds within it the universal human experience , with all of its suffering , but also all of its salvation .
it 's a part of the three great religions -- judaism , christianity , and islam -- that trace their origins to abraham , and see jerusalem as sacred .
and it 's a story that 's inspired communities across the globe , including me and my fellow americans .
in the united states -- a nation made up of people who crossed oceans to start anew -- we 're naturally drawn to the idea of finding freedom in our land .
to african americans , the story of the exodus was perhaps the central story , the most powerful image about emerging from the grip of bondage to reach for liberty and human dignity -- a tale that was carried from slavery through the civil rights movement into today .
for generations , this promise helped people weather poverty and persecution , while holding on to the hope that a better day was on the horizon .
for me , personally , growing up in far - flung parts of the world and without firm roots , the story spoke to a yearning within every human being for a home .
of course , even as we draw strength from the story of god 's will and his gift of freedom expressed on passover , we also know that here on earth we must bear our responsibilities in an imperfect world .
that means accepting our measure of sacrifice and struggle , just like previous generations .
it means us working through generation after generation on behalf of that ideal of freedom .
as dr. martin luther king said on the day before he was killed , " i may not get there with you .
but i want you to know that we , as a people , will get to the promised land . "
so just as joshua carried on after moses , the work goes on for all of you , the joshua generation , for justice and dignity ; for opportunity and freedom .
for the jewish people , the journey to the promise of the state of israel wound through countless generations .
it involved centuries of suffering and exile , prejudice and pogroms and even genocide .
through it all , the jewish people sustained their unique identity and traditions , as well as a longing to return home .
and while jews achieved extraordinary success in many parts of the world , the dream of true freedom finally found its full expression in the zionist idea -- to be a free people in your homeland .
that 's why i believe that israel is rooted not just in history and tradition , but also in a simple and profound idea -- the idea that people deserve to be free in a land of their own .
over the last 65 years , when israel has been at its best , israelis have demonstrated that responsibility does not end when you reach the promised land , it only begins .
and so israel has been a refuge for the diaspora -- welcoming jews from europe , from the former soviet union , from ethiopia , from north africa .
israel has built a prosperous nation -- through kibbutzeem that made the desert bloom , business that broadened the middle class , innovators who reached new frontiers , from the smallest microchip to the orbits of space .
israel has established a thriving democracy , with a spirited civil society and proud political parties , and a tireless free press , and a lively public debate - -- " lively " may even be an understatement .
and israel has achieved all this even as it 's overcome relentless threats to its security -- through the courage of the israel defense forces , and the citizenry that is so resilient in the face of terror .
this is the story of israel .
this is the work that has brought the dreams of so many generations to life .
and every step of the way , israel has built unbreakable bonds of friendship with my country , the united states of america .
those ties began only 11 minutes after israeli independence , when the united states was the first nation to recognize the state of israel .
as president truman said in explaining his decision to recognize israel , he said , " i believe it has a glorious future before it not just as another sovereign nation , but as an embodiment of the great ideals of our civilization . "
and since then , we 've built a friendship that advances our shared interests .
together , we share a commitment to security for our citizens and the stability of the middle east and north africa .
together , we share a focus on advancing economic growth around the globe , and strengthening the middle class within our own countries .
together , we share a stake in the success of democracy .
but the source of our friendship extends beyond mere interests , just as it has transcended political parties and individual leaders .
america is a nation of immigrants .
america is strengthened by diversity .
america is enriched by faith .
we are governed not simply by men and women , but by laws .
we 're fueled by entrepreneurship and innovation , and we are defined by a democratic discourse that allows each generation to reimagine and renew our union once more .
so in israel , we see values that we share , even as we recognize what makes us different .
that is an essential part of our bond .
now , i stand here today mindful that for both our nations , these are some complicated times .
we have difficult issues to work through within our own countries , and we face dangers and upheaval around the world .
and when i look at young people within the united states , i think about the choices that they must make in their lives to define who we 'll be as a nation in this 21st century , particularly as we emerge from two wars and the worst recession since the great depression .
but part of the reason i like talking to young people is because no matter how great the challenges are , their idealism , their energy , their ambition always gives me hope .
and i see the same spirit in the young people here today .
i believe that you will shape our future .
and given the ties between our countries , i believe your future is bound to ours .
no , no -- this is part of the lively debate that we talked about .
this is good .
you know , i have to say we actually arranged for that , because it made me feel at home .
i would n't feel comfortable if i did n't have at least one heckler .
i 'd like to focus on how we -- and when i say " we , " in particular young people -- can work together to make progress in three areas that will define our times -- security , peace and prosperity .
let me begin with security .
i 'm proud that the security relationship between the united states and israel has never been stronger .
never .
more exercises between our militaries ; more exchanges among our political and military and intelligence officials than ever before ; the largest program to date to help you retain your qualitative military edge .
these are the facts .
these are n't my opinions , these are facts .
but , to me , this is not simply measured on a balance sheet .
i know that here , in israel , security is something personal .
here 's what i think about when i consider these issues .
when i consider israel 's security , i think about children like osher twito , who i met in sderot --   -- children the same age as my own daughters who went to bed at night fearful that a rocket would land in their bedroom simply because of who they are and where they live .
that reality is why we 've invested in the iron dome system to save countless lives -- because those children deserve to sleep better at night .
that 's why we 've made it clear , time and again , that israel can not accept rocket attacks from gaza , and we have stood up for israel 's right to defend itself .
and that 's why israel has a right to expect hamas to renounce violence and recognize israel 's right to exist .
when i think about israel 's security , i think about five israelis who boarded a bus in bulgaria , who were blown up because of where they came from ; robbed of the ability to live , and love , and raise families .
that 's why every country that values justice should call hizbollah what it truly is -- a terrorist organization .
because the world can not tolerate an organization that murders innocent civilians , stockpiles rockets to shoot at cities , and supports the massacre of men and women and children in syria right now .
the fact that hizbollah 's ally -- the assad regime -- has stockpiles of chemical weapons only heightens the urgency .
we will continue to cooperate closely to guard against that danger .
i 've made it clear to bashar al - assad and all who follow his orders : we will not tolerate the use of chemical weapons against the syrian people , or the transfer of those weapons to terrorists .
the world is watching ; we will hold you accountable .
the syrian people have the right to be freed from the grip of a dictator who would rather kill his own people than relinquish power .
assad must go so that syria 's future can begin .
because true stability in syria depends upon establishing a government that is responsible to its people -- one that protects all communities within its borders , while making peace with countries beyond them .
these are the things i think about when i think about israel 's security .
when i consider israel 's security , i also think about a people who have a living memory of the holocaust , faced with the prospect of a nuclear - armed iranian government that has called for israel 's destruction .
it 's no wonder israelis view this as an existential threat .
but this is not simply a challenge for israel -- it is a danger for the entire world , including the united states .
a nuclear - armed iran would raise the risk of nuclear terrorism .
it would undermine the non - proliferation regime .
it would spark an arms race in a volatile region .
and it would embolden a government that has shown no respect for the rights of its own people or the responsibilities of nations .
that 's why america has built a coalition to increase the cost to iran of failing to meet their obligations .
the iranian government is now under more pressure than ever before , and that pressure is increasing .
it is isolated .
its economy is in dire straits .
its leadership is divided .
and its position -- in the region , and the world -- has only grown weaker .
i do believe that all of us have an interest in resolving this issue peacefully .
strong and principled diplomacy is the best way to ensure that the iranian government forsakes nuclear weapons .
peace is far more preferable to war .
and the inevitable costs , the unintended consequences that would come with war means that we have to do everything we can to try to resolve this diplomatically .
because of the cooperation between our governments , we know that there remains time to pursue a diplomatic resolution .
that 's what america will do , with clear eyes -- working with a world that 's united , and with the sense of urgency that 's required .
but iran must know this time is not unlimited .
and i 've made the position of the united states of america clear : iran must not get a nuclear weapon .
this is not a danger that can be contained , and as president , i 've said all options are on the table for achieving our objectives .
america will do what we must to prevent a nuclear - armed iran .
for young israelis , i know that these issues of security are rooted in an experience that is even more fundamental than the pressing threat of the day .
you live in a neighborhood where many of your neighbors have rejected the right of your nation to exist .
your grandparents had to risk their lives and all that they had to make a place for themselves in this world .
your parents lived through war after war to ensure the survival of the jewish state .
your children grow up knowing that people they 've never met may hate them because of who they are , in a region that is full of turmoil and changing underneath your feet .
so that 's what i think about when israel is faced with these challenges -- - that sense of an israel that is surrounded by many in this region who still reject it , and many in the world who refuse to accept it .
and that 's why the security of the jewish people in israel is so important .
it can not be taken for granted .
but make no mistake -- those who adhere to the ideology of rejecting israel 's right to exist , they might as well reject the earth beneath them or the sky above , because israel is not going anywhere .
and today , i want to tell you -- particularly the young people -- so that there 's no mistake here , so long as there is a united states of america -- atem lo levad .
you are not alone .
the question is what kind of future israel will look forward to .
israel is not going anywhere -- but especially for the young people in this audience , the question is what does its future hold ?
and that brings me to the subject of peace .
i know israel has taken risks for peace .
brave leaders -- menachem begin , yitzhak rabin -- reached treaties with two of your neighbors .
you made credible proposals to the palestinians at annapolis .
you withdrew from gaza and lebanon , and then faced terror and rockets .
across the region , you 've extended a hand of friendship and all too often you 've been confronted with rejection and , in some cases , the ugly reality of anti - semitism .
so i believe that the israeli people do want peace , and i also understand why too many israelis -- maybe an increasing number , maybe a lot of young people here today -- are skeptical that it can be achieved .
but today , israel is at a crossroads .
it can be tempting to put aside the frustrations and sacrifices that come with the pursuit of peace , particularly when iron dome repels rockets , barriers keep out suicide bombers .
there 's so many other pressing issues that demand your attention .
and i know that only israelis can make the fundamental decisions about your country 's future .
i recognize that .
i also know , by the way , that not everyone in this hall will agree with what i have to say about peace .
i recognize that there are those who are not simply skeptical about peace , but question its underlying premise , have a different vision for israel 's future .
and that 's part of a democracy .
that 's part of the discourse between our two countries .
i recognize that .
but i also believe it 's important to be open and honest , especially with your friends .
i also believe that .
politically , given the strong bipartisan support for israel in america , the easiest thing for me to do would be to put this issue aside -- just express unconditional support for whatever israel decides to do -- that would be the easiest political path .
but i want you to know that i speak to you as a friend who is deeply concerned and committed to your future , and i ask you to consider three points .
first , peace is necessary .
i believe that .
i believe that peace is the only path to true security .
you have the opportunity to be the generation that permanently secures the zionist dream , or you can face a growing challenge to its future .
given the demographics west of the jordan river , the only way for israel to endure and thrive as a jewish and democratic state is through the realization of an independent and viable palestine .
that is true .
there are other factors involved .
given the frustration in the international community about this conflict , israel needs to reverse an undertow of isolation .
and given the march of technology , the only way to truly protect the israeli people over the long term is through the absence of war .
because no wall is high enough and no iron dome is strong enough or perfect enough to stop every enemy that is intent on doing so from inflicting harm .
and this truth is more pronounced given the changes sweeping the arab world .
i understand that with the uncertainty in the region -- people in the streets , changes in leadership , the rise of non - secular parties in politics -- it 's tempting to turn inward , because the situation outside of israel seems so chaotic .
but this is precisely the time to respond to the wave of revolution with a resolve and commitment for peace .
because as more governments respond to popular will , the days when israel could seek peace simply with a handful of autocratic leaders , those days are over .
peace will have to be made among peoples , not just governments .
no one -- no single step can change overnight what lies in the hearts and minds of millions .
no single step is going to erase years of history and propaganda .
but progress with the palestinians is a powerful way to begin , while sidelining extremists who thrive on conflict and thrive on division .
it would make a difference .
so peace is necessary .
but peace is also just .
peace is also just .
there is no question that israel has faced palestinian factions who turned to terror , leaders who missed historic opportunities .
that is all true .
and that 's why security must be at the center of any agreement .
and there is no question that the only path to peace is through negotiations -- which is why , despite the criticism we 've received , the united states will oppose unilateral efforts to bypass negotiations through the united nations .
it has to be done by the parties .
but the palestinian people 's right to self - determination , their right to justice , must also be recognized .
put yourself in their shoes .
look at the world through their eyes .
it is not fair that a palestinian child can not grow up in a state of their own .
living their entire lives with the presence of a foreign army that controls the movements not just of those young people but their parents , their grandparents , every single day .
it 's not just when settler violence against palestinians goes unpunished .
it 's not right to prevent palestinians from farming their lands ; or restricting a student 's ability to move around the west bank ; or displace palestinian families from their homes .
neither occupation nor expulsion is the answer .
just as israelis built a state in their homeland , palestinians have a right to be a free people in their own land .
i 'm going off script here for a second , but before i came here , i met with a group of young palestinians from the age of 15 to 22 .
and talking to them , they were n't that different from my daughters .
they were n't that different from your daughters or sons .
i honestly believe that if any israeli parent sat down with those kids , they 'd say , i want these kids to succeed ; i want them to prosper .
i want them to have opportunities just like my kids do .
i believe that 's what israeli parents would want for these kids if they had a chance to listen to them and talk to them .
i believe that .
now , only you can determine what kind of democracy you will have .
but remember that as you make these decisions , you will define not simply the future of your relationship with the palestinians -- you will define the future of israel as well .
as ariel sharon said -- i 'm quoting him -- " it is impossible to have a jewish democratic state , at the same time to control all of eretz israel .
if we insist on fulfilling the dream in its entirety , we are liable to lose it all . "
or , from a different perspective , i think of what the novelist david grossman said shortly after losing his son , as he described the necessity of peace -- " a peace of no choice " he said , " must be approached with the same determination and creativity as one approaches a war of no choice . "
now , israel can not be expected to negotiate with anyone who is dedicated to its destruction .
but while i know you have had differences with the palestinian authority , i genuinely believe that you do have a true partner in president abbas and prime minister fayyad .
i believe that .
and they have a track record to prove it .
over the last few years , they have built institutions and maintained security on the west bank in ways that few could have imagined just a few years ago .
so many palestinians -- including young people -- have rejected violence as a means of achieving their aspirations .
there is an opportunity there , there 's a window -- which brings me to my third point : peace is possible .
it is possible .
i 'm not saying it 's guaranteed .
i ca n't even say that it is more likely than not .
but it is possible .
i know it does n't seem that way .
there are always going to be reasons to avoid risk .
there are costs for failure .
there will always be extremists who provide an excuse not to act .
i know there must be something exhausting about endless talks about talks , and daily controversies , and just the grinding status quo .
and i 'm sure there 's a temptation just to say , " ah , enough .
let me focus on my small corner of the world and my family and my job and what i can control . "
but it 's possible .
negotiations will be necessary , but there 's little secret about where they must lead -- two states for two peoples .
two states for two peoples .
there will be differences about how to get there .
there are going to be hard choices along the way .
arab states must adapt to a world that has changed .
the days when they could condemn israel to distract their people from a lack of opportunity , or government corruption or mismanagement -- those days need to be over .
now is the time for the arab world to take steps toward normalizing relations with israel .
meanwhile , palestinians must recognize that israel will be a jewish state and that israelis have the right to insist upon their security .
israelis must recognize that continued settlement activity is counterproductive to the cause of peace , and that an independent palestine must be viable with real borders that have to be drawn .
i 've suggested principles on territory and security that i believe can be the basis for these talks .
but for the moment , put aside the plans and the process .
i ask you , instead , to think about what can be done to build trust between people .
four years ago , i stood in cairo in front of an audience of young people -- politically , religiously , they must seem a world away .
but the things they want , they 're not so different from what the young people here want .
they want the ability to make their own decisions and to get an education , get a good job ; to worship god in their own way ; to get married ; to raise a family .
the same is true of those young palestinians that i met with this morning .
the same is true for young palestinians who yearn for a better life in gaza .
that 's where peace begins -- not just in the plans of leaders , but in the hearts of people .
not just in some carefully designed process , but in the daily connections -- that sense of empathy that takes place among those who live together in this land and in this sacred city of jerusalem .
and let me say this as a politician -- i can promise you this , political leaders will never take risks if the people do not push them to take some risks .
you must create the change that you want to see .
ordinary people can accomplish extraordinary things .
i know this is possible .
look to the bridges being built in business and civil society by some of you here today .
look at the young people who 've not yet learned a reason to mistrust , or those young people who 've learned to overcome a legacy of mistrust that they inherited from their parents , because they simply recognize that we hold more hopes in common than fears that drive us apart .
your voices must be louder than those who would drown out hope .
your hopes must light the way forward .
look to a future in which jews and muslims and christians can all live in peace and greater prosperity in this holy land .
believe in that .
and most of all , look to the future that you want for your own children -- a future in which a jewish , democratic , vibrant state is protected and accepted for this time and for all time .
there will be many who say this change is not possible , but remember this -- israel is the most powerful country in this region .
israel has the unshakeable support of the most powerful country in the world .
israel is not going anywhere .
israel has the wisdom to see the world as it is , but -- this is in your nature -- israel also has the courage to see the world as it should be .
ben gurion once said , " in israel , in order to be a realist you must believe in miracles . "
sometimes , the greatest miracle is recognizing that the world can change .
that 's a lesson that the world has learned from the jewish people .
and that brings me to the final area that i 'll focus on : prosperity , and israel 's broader role in the world .
i know that all the talk about security and peace can sometimes seem to dominate the headlines , but that 's not where people live .
and every day , even amidst the threats that you face , israelis are defining themselves by the opportunities that you 're creating .
through talent and hard work , israelis have put this small country at the forefront of the global economy .
israelis understand the value of education and have produced 10 nobel laureates .
israelis understand the power of invention , and your universities educate engineers and inventors .
and that spirit has led to economic growth and human progress -- solar power and electric cars , bandages and prosthetic limbs that save lives , stem cell research and new drugs that treat disease , cell phones and computer technology that changed the way people around the world live .
so if people want to see the future of the world economy , they should look at tel aviv , home to hundreds of start - ups and research centers .
israelis are so active on social media that every day seemed to bring a different facebook campaign about where i should give this speech .
that innovation is just as important to the relationship between the united states and israel as our security cooperation .
our first free trade agreement in the world was reached with israel , nearly three decades ago .
today the trade between our two countries is at $ 40 billion every year .
more importantly , that partnership is creating new products and medical treatments ; it 's pushing new frontiers of science and exploration .
that 's the kind of relationship that israel should have -- and could have -- with every country in the world .
already , we see how that innovation could reshape this region .
there 's a program here in jerusalem that brings together young israelis and palestinians to learn vital skills in technology and business .
an israeli and palestinian have started a venture capital fund to finance palestinian start - ups .
over 100 high - tech companies have found a home on the west bank -- which speaks to the talent and entrepreneurial spirit of the palestinian people .
one of the great ironies of what 's happening in the broader region is that so much of what people are yearning for -- education , entrepreneurship , the ability to start a business without paying a bribe , the ability to connect to the global economy -- those are things that can be found here in israel .
this should be a hub for thriving regional trade , and an engine for opportunity .
israel is already a center for innovation that helps power the global economy .
and i believe that all of that potential for prosperity can be enhanced with greater security , enhanced with lasting peace .
here , in this small strip of land that has been the center of so much of the world 's history , so much triumph and so much tragedy , israelis have built something that few could have imagined 65 years ago .
tomorrow , i will pay tribute to that history -- at the grave of herzl , a man who had the foresight to see the future of the jewish people had to be reconnected to their past ; at the grave of rabin , who understood that israel 's victories in war had to be followed by the battles for peace ; at yad vashem , where the world is reminded of the cloud of evil that can descend on the jewish people and all of humanity if we ever fail to be vigilant .
we bear all that history on our shoulders .
we carry all that history in our hearts .
today , as we face the twilight of israel 's founding generation , you -- the young people of israel 
 -- must now claim its future .
it falls to you to write the next chapter in the great story of this great nation .
and as the president of a country that you can count on as your greatest friend --   -- i am confident that you can help us find the promise in the days that lie ahead .
and as a man who 's been inspired in my own life by that timeless calling within the jewish experience -- tikkun olam --   -- i am hopeful that we can draw upon what 's best in ourselves to meet the challenges that will come ; to win the battles for peace in the wake of so much war ; and to do the work of repairing this world .
that 's your job .
that 's my job .
that 's the task of all of us .
may god bless you .
may god bless israel .
may god bless the united states of america .
toda raba .
thank you .

madam speaker , vice president biden , members of congress , distinguished guests , and fellow americans : 
 our constitution declares that from time to time , the president shall give to congress information about the state of our union .
for 220 years , our leaders have fulfilled this duty .
they 've done so during periods of prosperity and tranquility , and they 've done so in the midst of war and depression , at moments of great strife and great struggle .
it 's tempting to look back on these moments and assume that our progress was inevitable , that america was always destined to succeed .
but when the union was turned back at bull run and the allies first landed at omaha beach , victory was very much in doubt .
when the market crashed on black tuesday and civil rights marchers were beaten on bloody sunday , the future was anything but certain .
these were the times that tested the courage of our convictions and the strength of our union .
and despite all our divisions and disagreements , our hesitations and our fears , america prevailed because we chose to move forward as one nation , as one people .
again , we are tested .
and again , we must answer history 's call .
one year ago , i took office amid two wars , an economy rocked by a severe recession , a financial system on the verge of collapse , and a government deeply in debt .
experts from across the political spectrum warned that if we did not act , we might face a second depression .
so we acted , immediately and aggressively .
and 1 year later , the worst of the storm has passed .
but the devastation remains .
one in 10 americans still can not find work .
many businesses have shuttered .
home values have declined .
small towns and rural communities have been hit especially hard .
and for those who 'd already known poverty , life 's become that much harder .
this recession has also compounded the burdens that america 's families have been dealing with for decades : the burden of working harder and longer for less , of being unable to save enough to retire or help kids with college .
so i know the anxieties that are out there right now .
they 're not new .
these struggles are the reason i ran for president .
these struggles are what i 've witnessed for years , in places like elkhart , indiana ; galesburg , illinois .
i hear about them in the letters that i read each night .
the toughest to read are those written by children asking why they have to move from their home , asking when their mom or dad will be able to go back to work .
for these americans and so many others , change has not come fast enough .
some are frustrated , some are angry .
they do n't understand why it seems like bad behavior on wall street is rewarded , but hard work on main street is n't , or why washington has been unable or unwilling to solve any of our problems .
they 're tired of the partisanship and the shouting and the pettiness .
they know we ca n't afford it .
not now .
so we face big and difficult challenges .
and what the american people hope , what they deserve , is for all of us , democrats and republicans , to work through our differences , to overcome the numbing weight of our politics .
for while the people who sent us here have different backgrounds , different stories , different beliefs , the anxieties they face are the same .
the aspirations they hold are shared : a job that pays the bills ; a chance to get ahead ; most of all , the ability to give their children a better life .
and you know what else they share ?
they share a stubborn resilience in the face of adversity .
after one of the most difficult years in our history , they remain busy building cars and teaching kids , starting businesses and going back to school .
they 're coaching little league and helping their neighbors .
one woman wrote to me and said , " we are strained but hopeful , struggling but encouraged . "
it 's because of this spirit , this great decency and great strength , that i have never been more hopeful about america 's future than i am tonight .
despite our hardships , our union is strong .
we do not give up .
we do not quit .
we do not allow fear or division to break our spirit .
in this new decade , it 's time the american people get a government that matches their decency , that embodies their strength .
and tonight i 'd like to talk about how together we can deliver on that promise .
it begins with our economy .
our most urgent task upon taking office was to shore up the same banks that helped cause this crisis .
it was not easy to do .
and if there 's one thing that has unified democrats and republicans and everybody in between , it 's that we all hated the bank bailout .
i hated it .
i hated it ; you hated it .
it was about as popular as a root canal .
but when i ran for president , i promised i would n't just do what was popular ; i would do what was necessary .
and if we had allowed the meltdown of the financial system , unemployment might be double what it is today .
more businesses would certainly have closed .
more homes would have surely been lost .
so i supported the last administration 's efforts to create the financial rescue program .
and when we took that program over , we made it more transparent and more accountable .
and as a result , the markets are now stabilized , and we 've recovered most of the money we spent on the banks -- most but not all .
to recover the rest , i 've proposed a fee on the biggest banks .
now , i know wall street is n't keen on this idea .
but if these firms can afford to hand out big bonuses again , they can afford a modest fee to pay back the taxpayers who rescued them in their time of need .
now , as we stabilized the financial system , we also took steps to get our economy growing again , save as many jobs as possible , and help americans who had become unemployed .
that 's why we extended or increased unemployment benefits for more than 18 million americans , made health insurance 65 percent cheaper for families who get their coverage through cobra , and passed 25 different tax cuts .
now , let me repeat : we cut taxes .
we cut taxes for 95 percent of working families .
we cut taxes for small businesses .
we cut taxes for first - time home buyers .
we cut taxes for parents trying to care for their children .
we cut taxes for 8 million americans paying for college .
i thought i 'd get some applause on that one .
as a result , millions of americans had more to spend on gas and food and other necessities , all of which helped businesses keep more workers .
and we have n't raised income taxes by a single dime on a single person -- not a single dime .
now , because of the steps we took , there are about 2 million americans working right now who would otherwise be unemployed .
two hundred thousand work in construction and clean energy .
three hundred thousand are teachers and other education workers .
tens of thousands are cops , firefighters , correctional officers , first - responders .
and we 're on track to add another 1&frac12 ; million jobs to this total by the end of the year .
the plan that has made all of this possible , from the tax cuts to the jobs , is the recovery act .
that 's right , the recovery act , also known as the stimulus bill .
economists on the left and the right say this bill has helped save jobs and avert disaster .
but you do n't have to take their word for it .
talk to the small business in phoenix that will triple its workforce because of the recovery act .
talk to the window manufacturer in philadelphia who said he used to be skeptical about the recovery act , until he had to add two more work shifts just because of the business it created .
talk to the single teacher raising two kids who was told by her principal in the last week of school that because of the recovery act , she would n't be laid off after all .
there are stories like this all across america .
and after 2 years of recession , the economy is growing again .
retirement funds have started to gain back some of their value .
businesses are beginning to invest again , and slowly some are starting to hire again .
but i realize that for every success story , there are other stories , of men and women who wake up with the anguish of not knowing where their next paycheck will come from , who send out resumes week after week and hear nothing in response .
that is why jobs must be our number - one focus in 2010 , and that 's why i 'm calling for a new jobs bill tonight .
now , the true engine of job creation in this country will always be america 's businesses .
i agree , absolutely .
but government can create the conditions necessary for businesses to expand and hire more workers .
we should start where most new jobs do , in small businesses , companies that begin when an entrepreneur takes a chance on a dream or a worker decides it 's time she became her own boss .
through sheer grit and determination , these companies have weathered the recession , and they 're ready to grow .
but when you talk to small - business owners in places like allentown , pennsylvania , or elyria , ohio , you find out that even though banks on wall street are lending again , they 're mostly lending to bigger companies .
financing remains difficult for small - business owners across the country , even those that are making a profit .
so tonight i 'm proposing that we take $ 30 billion of the money wall street banks have repaid and use it to help community banks give small businesses the credit they need to stay afloat .
i 'm also proposing a new small business tax credit , one that will go to over 1 million small businesses who hire new workers or raise wages .
while we 're at it , let 's also eliminate all capital gains taxes on small - business investment and provide a tax incentive for all large businesses and all small businesses to invest in new plants and equipment .
next , we can put americans to work today building the infrastructure of tomorrow .
from the first railroads to the interstate highway system , our nation has always been built to compete .
there 's no reason europe or china should have the fastest trains or the new factories that manufacture clean energy products .
tomorrow i 'll visit tampa , florida , where workers will soon break ground on a new high - speed railroad funded by the recovery act .
there are projects like that all across this country that will create jobs and help move our nation 's goods , services , and information .
we should put more americans to work building clean energy facilities and give rebates to americans who make their homes more energy efficient , which supports clean energy jobs .
and to encourage these and other businesses to stay within our borders , it is time to finally slash the tax breaks for companies that ship our jobs overseas and give those tax breaks to companies that create jobs right here in the united states of america .
now , the house has passed a jobs bill that includes some of these steps .
as the first order of business this year , i urge the senate to do the same , and i know they will .
they will .
people are out of work .
they 're hurting .
they need our help .
and i want a jobs bill on my desk without delay .
but the truth is , these steps wo n't make up for the 7 million jobs that we 've lost over the last 2 years .
the only way to move to full employment is to lay a new foundation for long - term economic growth and finally address the problems that america 's families have confronted for years .
we ca n't afford another so - called economic " expansion " like the one from the last decade , what some call the " lost decade , " where jobs grew more slowly than during any prior expansion , where the income of the average american household declined while the cost of health care and tuition reached record highs , where prosperity was built on a housing bubble and financial speculation .
from the day i took office , i 've been told that addressing our larger challenges is too ambitious ; such an effort would be too contentious .
i 've been told that our political system is too gridlocked and that we should just put things on hold for a while .
for those who make these claims , i have one simple question : how long should we wait ?
how long should america put its future on hold ?
you see , washington has been telling us to wait for decades , even as the problems have grown worse .
meanwhile , china 's not waiting to revamp its economy .
germany 's not waiting .
india 's not waiting .
these nations are -- they 're not standing still .
these nations are n't playing for second place .
they 're putting more emphasis on math and science .
they 're rebuilding their infrastructure .
they 're making serious investments in clean energy because they want those jobs .
well , i do not accept second place for the united states of america .
as hard as it may be , as uncomfortable and contentious as the debates may become , it 's time to get serious about fixing the problems that are hampering our growth .
now , one place to start is serious financial reform .
look , i am not interested in punishing banks .
i 'm interested in protecting our economy .
a strong , healthy financial market makes it possible for businesses to access credit and create new jobs .
it channels the savings of families into investments that raise incomes .
but that can only happen if we guard against the same recklessness that nearly brought down our entire economy .
we need to make sure consumers and middle class families have the information they need to make financial decisions .
we ca n't allow financial institutions , including those that take your deposits , to take risks that threaten the whole economy .
now , the house has already passed financial reform with many of these changes , and the lobbyists are trying to kill it .
but we can not let them win this fight .
and if the bill that ends up on my desk does not meet the test of real reform , i will send it back until we get it right .
we 've got to get it right .
next , we need to encourage american innovation .
last year , we made the largest investment in basic research funding in history , an investment that could lead to the world 's cheapest solar cells or treatment that kills cancer cells but leaves healthy ones untouched .
and no area is more ripe for such innovation than energy .
you can see the results of last year 's investments in clean energy in the north carolina company that will create 1,200 jobs nationwide helping to make advanced batteries or in the california business that will put a thousand people to work making solar panels .
but to create more of these clean energy jobs , we need more production , more efficiency , more incentives .
and that means building a new generation of safe , clean nuclear powerplants in this country .
it means making tough decisions about opening new offshore areas for oil and gas development .
it means continued investment in advanced biofuels and clean coal technologies .
and , yes , it means passing a comprehensive energy and climate bill with incentives that will finally make clean energy the profitable kind of energy in america .
now , i am grateful to the house for passing such a bill last year .
and this year , i 'm eager to help advance the bipartisan effort in the senate .
i know there have been questions about whether we can afford such changes in a tough economy .
i know that there are those who disagree with the overwhelming scientific evidence on climate change .
but here 's the thing : even if you doubt the evidence , providing incentives for energy efficiency and clean energy are the right thing to do for our future , because the nation that leads the clean energy economy will be the nation that leads the global economy .
and america must be that nation .
third , we need to export more of our goods , because the more products we make and sell to other countries , the more jobs we support right here in america .
so tonight we set a new goal : we will double our exports over the next 5 years , an increase that will support 2 million jobs in america .
to help meet this goal , we 're launching a national export initiative that will help farmers and small businesses increase their exports and reform export controls consistent with national security .
we have to seek new markets aggressively , just as our competitors are .
if america sits on the sidelines while other nations sign trade deals , we will lose the chance to create jobs on our shores .
but realizing those benefits also means enforcing those agreements so our trading partners play by the rules .
and that 's why we 'll continue to shape a doha trade agreement that opens global markets and why we will strengthen our trade relations in asia and with key partners like south korea and panama and colombia .
fourth , we need to invest in the skills and education of our people .
now , this year , we 've broken through the stalemate between left and right by launching a national competition to improve our schools .
and the idea here is simple : instead of rewarding failure , we only reward success .
instead of funding the status quo , we only invest in reform , reform that raises student achievement , inspires students to excel in math and science , and turns around failing schools that steal the future of too many young americans , from rural communities to the inner city .
in the 21st century , the best antipoverty program around is a world - class education .
and in this country , the success of our children can not depend more on where they live than on their potential .
when we renew the elementary and secondary education act , we will work with congress to expand these reforms to all 50 states .
still , in this economy , a high school diploma no longer guarantees a good job .
that 's why i urge the senate to follow the house and pass a bill that will revitalize our community colleges , which are a career pathway to the children of so many working families .
to make college more affordable , this bill will finally end the unwarranted taxpayer subsidies that go to banks for student loans .
instead , let 's take that money and give families a $ 10,000 tax credit for 4 years of college and increase pell grants .
and let 's tell another 1 million students that when they graduate , they will be required to pay only 10 percent of their income on student loans and all of their debt will be forgiven after 20 years -- and forgiven after 10 years if they choose a career in public service , because in the united states of america , no one should go broke because they chose to go to college .
and by the way , it 's time for colleges and universities to get serious about cutting their own costs , because they too have a responsibility to help solve this problem .
now , the price of college tuition is just one of the burdens facing the middle class .
that 's why last year , i asked vice president biden to chair a task force on middle class families .
that 's why we 're nearly doubling the child care tax credit and making it easier to save for retirement by giving access to every worker a retirement account and expanding the tax credit for those who start a nest egg .
that 's why we 're working to lift the value of a family 's single largest investment , their home .
the steps we took last year to shore up the housing market have allowed millions of americans to take out new loans and save an average of $ 1,500 on mortgage payments .
this year , we will step up refinancing so that homeowners can move into more affordable mortgages .
and it is precisely to relieve the burden on middle class families that we still need health insurance reform .
yes , we do .
now , let 's clear a few things up .
i did n't choose to tackle this issue to get some legislative victory under my belt .
and by now it should be fairly obvious that i did n't take on health care because it was good politics .
i took on health care because of the stories i 've heard from americans with preexisting conditions whose lives depend on getting coverage , patients who 've been denied coverage , families , even those with insurance , who are just one illness away from financial ruin .
after nearly a century of trying -- democratic administrations , republican administrations -- we are closer than ever to bringing more security to the lives of so many americans .
the approach we 've taken would protect every american from the worst practices of the insurance industry .
it would give small businesses and uninsured americans a chance to choose an affordable health care plan in a competitive market .
it would require every insurance plan to cover preventive care .
and by the way , i want to acknowledge our first lady , michelle obama , who this year is creating a national movement to tackle the epidemic of childhood obesity and make kids healthier .
thank you , honey .
she gets embarrassed .
our approach would preserve the right of americans who have insurance to keep their doctor and their plan .
it would reduce costs and premiums for millions of families and businesses .
and according to the congressional budget office , the independent organization that both parties have cited as the official scorekeeper for congress , our approach would bring down the deficit by as much as $ 1 trillion over the next two decades .
still , this is a complex issue , and the longer it was debated , the more skeptical people became .
i take my share of the blame for not explaining it more clearly to the american people .
and i know that with all the lobbying and horse - trading , the process left most americans wondering , " what 's in it for me ? "
but i also know this problem is not going away .
by the time i 'm finished speaking tonight , more americans will have lost their health insurance .
millions will lose it this year .
our deficit will grow .
premiums will go up .
patients will be denied the care they need .
small - business owners will continue to drop coverage altogether .
i will not walk away from these americans , and neither should the people in this chamber .
so , as temperatures cool , i want everyone to take another look at the plan we 've proposed .
there 's a reason why many doctors , nurses , and health care experts who know our system best consider this approach a vast improvement over the status quo .
but if anyone from either party has a better approach that will bring down premiums , bring down the deficit , cover the uninsured , strengthen medicare for seniors , and stop insurance company abuses , let me know .
let me know .
let me know .
i 'm eager to see it .
here 's what i ask congress , though : do n't walk away from reform .
not now .
not when we are so close .
let us find a way to come together and finish the job for the american people .
let 's get it done .
let 's get it done .
now , even as health care reform would reduce our deficit , it 's not enough to dig us out of a massive fiscal hole in which we find ourselves .
it 's a challenge that makes all others that much harder to solve and one that 's been subject to a lot of political posturing .
so let me start the discussion of government spending by setting the record straight .
at the beginning of the last decade , the year 2000 , america had a budget surplus of over $ 200 billion .
by the time i took office , we had a 1-year deficit of over $ 1 trillion and projected deficits of $ 8 trillion over the next decade .
most of this was the result of not paying for two wars , two tax cuts , and an expensive prescription drug program .
on top of that , the effects of the recession put a $ 3 trillion hole in our budget .
all this was before i walked in the door .
now -- just stating the facts .
now , if we had taken office in ordinary times , i would have liked nothing more than to start bringing down the deficit .
but we took office amid a crisis .
and our efforts to prevent a second depression have added another $ 1 trillion to our national debt .
that too is a fact .
i 'm absolutely convinced that was the right thing to do .
but families across the country are tightening their belts and making tough decisions .
the federal government should do the same .
so tonight i 'm proposing specific steps to pay for the trillion dollars that it took to rescue the economy last year .
starting in 2011 , we are prepared to freeze government spending for 3 years .
spending related to our national security , medicare , medicaid , and social security will not be affected .
but all other discretionary government programs will .
like any cash - strapped family , we will work within a budget to invest in what we need and sacrifice what we do n't .
and if i have to enforce this discipline by veto , i will .
we will continue to go through the budget , line by line , page by page , to eliminate programs that we ca n't afford and do n't work .
we 've already identified $ 20 billion in savings for next year .
to help working families , we 'll extend our middle class tax cuts .
but at a time of record deficits , we will not continue tax cuts for oil companies , for investment fund managers , and for those making over $ 250,000 a year .
we just ca n't afford it .
now , even after paying for what we spent on my watch , we 'll still face the massive deficit we had when i took office .
more importantly , the cost of medicare , medicaid , and social security will continue to skyrocket .
that 's why i 've called for a bipartisan fiscal commission , modeled on a proposal by republican judd gregg and democrat kent conrad .
this ca n't be one of those washington gimmicks that lets us pretend we solve a problem .
the commission will have to provide a specific set of solutions by a certain deadline .
now , yesterday the senate blocked a bill that would have created this commission , so i 'll issue an executive order that will allow us to go forward , because i refuse to pass this problem on to another generation of americans .
and when the vote comes tomorrow , the senate should restore the pay - as - you - go law that was a big reason for why we had record surpluses in the 1990s .
now , i know that some in my own party will argue that we ca n't address the deficit or freeze government spending when so many are still hurting .
and i agree , which is why this freeze wo n't take effect until next year , when the economy is stronger .
that 's how budgeting works .
but understand , if we do n't take meaningful steps to rein in our debt , it could damage our markets , increase the cost of borrowing , and jeopardize our recovery , all of which would have an even worse effect on our job growth and family incomes .
from some on the right , i expect we 'll hear a different argument , that if we just make fewer investments in our people , extend tax cuts , including those for the wealthier americans , eliminate more regulations , maintain the status quo on health care , our deficits will go away .
the problem is , that 's what we did for 8 years .
that 's what helped us into this crisis .
it 's what helped lead to these deficits .
we ca n't do it again .
rather than fight the same tired battles that have dominated washington for decades , it 's time to try something new .
let 's invest in our people without leaving them a mountain of debt .
let 's meet our responsibility to the citizens who sent us here .
let 's try common sense -- a novel concept .
now , to do that , we have to recognize that we face more than a deficit of dollars right now .
we face a deficit of trust , deep and corrosive doubts about how washington works that have been growing for years .
to close that credibility gap , we have to take action on both ends of pennsylvania avenue to end the outsized influence of lobbyists , to do our work openly , to give our people the government they deserve .
now , that 's what i came to washington to do .
that 's why , for the first time in history , my administration posts on -- our white house visitors online .
that 's why we 've excluded lobbyists from policymaking jobs or seats on federal boards and commissions .
but we ca n't stop there .
it 's time to require lobbyists to disclose each contact they make on behalf of a client , with my administration or with congress .
it 's time to put strict limits on the contributions that lobbyists give to candidates for federal office .
with all due deference to separation of powers , last week , the supreme court reversed a century of law that i believe will open the floodgates for special interests , including foreign corporations , to spend without limit in our elections .
i do n't think american elections should be bankrolled by america 's most powerful interests , or worse , by foreign entities .
they should be decided by the american people .
and i 'd urge democrats and republicans to pass a bill that helps correct some of these problems .
i 'm also calling on congress to continue down the path of earmark reform , democrats and republicans -- democrats and republicans .
look , you 've trimmed some of this spending , you 've embraced some meaningful change , but restoring the public trust demands more .
for example , some members of congress post some earmark requests online .
tonight i 'm calling on congress to publish all earmark requests on a single web site before there 's a vote so that the american people can see how their money is being spent .
of course , none of these reforms will even happen if we do n't also reform how we work with one another .
now , i 'm not naive .
i never thought that the mere fact of my election would usher in peace and harmony and -- some postpartisan era .
i knew that both parties have fed divisions that are deeply entrenched .
and on some issues , there are simply philosophical differences that will always cause us to part ways .
these disagreements , about the role of government in our lives , about our national priorities and our national security , they 've been taking place for over 200 years .
they 're the very essence of our democracy .
but what frustrates the american people is a washington where every day is election day .
we ca n't wage a perpetual campaign where the only goal is to see who can get the most embarrassing headlines about the other side , a belief that if you lose , i win .
neither party should delay or obstruct every single bill just because they can .
the confirmation of -- i 'm speaking to both parties now .
the confirmation of well - qualified public servants should n't be held hostage to the pet projects or grudges of a few individual senators .
washington may think that saying anything about the other side , no matter how false , no matter how malicious , is just part of the game .
but it 's precisely such politics that has stopped either party from helping the american people .
worse yet , it 's sowing further division among our citizens , further distrust in our government .
so , no , i will not give up on trying to change the tone of our politics .
i know it 's an election year .
and after last week , it 's clear that campaign fever has come even earlier than usual .
but we still need to govern .
to democrats , i would remind you that we still have the largest majority in decades and the people expect us to solve problems , not run for the hills .
and if the republican leadership is going to insist that 60 votes in the senate are required to do any business at all in this town -- a supermajority -- then the responsibility to govern is now yours as well .
just saying no to everything may be good short - term politics , but it 's not leadership .
we were sent here to serve our citizens , not our ambitions .
so let 's show the american people that we can do it together .
this week , i 'll be addressing a meeting of the house republicans .
i 'd like to begin monthly meetings with both democratic and republican leadership .
i know you ca n't wait .
now , throughout our history , no issue has united this country more than our security .
sadly , some of the unity we felt after 9/11 has dissipated .
and we can argue all we want about who 's to blame for this , but i 'm not interested in relitigating the past .
i know that all of us love this country .
all of us are committed to its defense .
so let 's put aside the schoolyard taunts about who 's tough .
let 's reject the false choice between protecting our people and upholding our values .
let 's leave behind the fear and division and do what it takes to defend our nation and forge a more hopeful future for america and for the world .
that 's the work we began last year .
since the day i took office , we 've renewed our focus on the terrorists who threaten our nation .
we 've made substantial investments in our homeland security and disrupted plots that threatened to take american lives .
we are filling unacceptable gaps revealed by the failed christmas attack , with better airline security and swifter action on our intelligence .
we 've prohibited torture and strengthened partnerships from the pacific to south asia to the arabian peninsula .
and in the last year , hundreds of al qaida 's fighters and affiliates , including many senior leaders , have been captured or killed , far more than in 2008 .
and in afghanistan , we 're increasing our troops and training afghan security forces so they can begin to take the lead in july of 2011 and our troops can begin to come home .
we will reward good governance , work to reduce corruption , and support the rights of all afghans , men and women alike .
we 're joined by allies and partners who have increased their own commitments and who will come together tomorrow in london to reaffirm our common purpose .
there will be difficult days ahead , but i am absolutely confident we will succeed .
as we take the fight to al qaida , we are responsibly leaving iraq to its people .
as a candidate , i promised that i would end this war , and that is what i am doing as president .
we will have all of our combat troops out of iraq by the end of this august .
we will support the iraqi government as they hold elections , and we will continue to partner with the iraqi people to promote regional peace and prosperity .
but make no mistake : this war is ending , and all of our troops are coming home .
tonight all of our men and women in uniform , in iraq , in afghanistan , and around the world , they have to know that we -- that they have our respect , our gratitude , our full support .
and just as they must have the resources they need in war , we all have a responsibility to support them when they come home .
that 's why we made the largest increase in investments for veterans in decades last year .
that 's why we 're building a 21st century va .
and that 's why michelle has joined with jill biden to forge a national commitment to support military families .
now , even as we prosecute two wars , we 're also confronting perhaps the greatest danger to the american people , the threat of nuclear weapons .
i 've embraced the vision of john f. kennedy and ronald reagan through a strategy that reverses the spread of these weapons and seeks a world without them .
to reduce our stockpiles and launchers , while ensuring our deterrent , the united states and russia are completing negotiations on the farthest reaching arms control treaty in nearly two decades .
and at april 's nuclear security summit , we will bring 44 nations together here in washington , dc , behind a clear goal : securing all vulnerable nuclear materials around the world in 4 years so that they never fall into the hands of terrorists .
now , these diplomatic efforts have also strengthened our hand in dealing with those nations that insist on violating international agreements in pursuit of nuclear weapons .
that 's why north korea now faces increased isolation and stronger sanctions , sanctions that are being vigorously enforced .
that 's why the international community is more united and the islamic republic of iran is more isolated .
and as iran 's leaders continue to ignore their obligations , there should be no doubt : they too will face growing consequences .
that is a promise .
that 's the leadership we are providing : engagement that advances the common security and prosperity of all people .
we 're working through the g-20 to sustain a lasting global recovery .
we 're working with muslim communities around the world to promote science and education and innovation .
we have gone from a bystander to a leader in the fight against climate change .
we 're helping developing countries to feed themselves and continuing the fight against hiv / aids .
and we are launching a new initiative that will give us the capacity to respond faster and more effectively to bioterrorism or an infectious disease , a plan that will counter threats at home and strengthen public health abroad .
as we have for over 60 years , america takes these actions because our destiny is connected to those beyond our shores .
but we also do it because it is right .
that 's why , as we meet here tonight , over 10,000 americans are working with many nations to help the people of haiti recover and rebuild .
that 's why we stand with the girl who yearns to go to school in afghanistan , why we support the human rights of the women marching through the streets of iran , why we advocate for the young man denied a job by corruption in guinea .
for america must always stand on the side of freedom and human dignity -- always .
abroad , america 's greatest source of strength has always been our ideals .
the same is true at home .
we find unity in our incredible diversity , drawing on the promise enshrined in our constitution : the notion that we 're all created equal ; that no matter who you are or what you look like , if you abide by the law , you should be protected by it ; if you adhere to our common values , you should be treated no different than anyone else .
we must continually renew this promise .
my administration has a civil rights division that is once again prosecuting civil rights violations and employment discrimination .
we finally strengthened our laws to protect against crimes driven by hate .
this year , i will work with congress and our military to finally repeal the law that denies gay americans the right to serve the country they love because of who they are .
it 's the right thing to do .
we 're going to crackdown on violations of equal pay laws so that women get equal pay for an equal day 's work .
and we should continue the work of fixing our broken immigration system , to secure our borders and enforce our laws and ensure that everyone who plays by the rules can contribute to our economy and enrich our nation .
in the end , it 's our ideals , our values that built america , values that allowed us to forge a nation made up of immigrants from every corner of the globe , values that drive our citizens still .
every day , americans meet their responsibilities to their families and their employers .
time and again , they lend a hand to their neighbors and give back to their country .
they take pride in their labor and are generous in spirit .
these are n't republican values or democratic values that they 're living by , business values or labor values , they 're american values .
unfortunately , too many of our citizens have lost faith that our biggest institutions -- our corporations , our media , and , yes , our government -- still reflect these same values .
each of these institutions are full of honorable men and women doing important work that helps our country prosper .
but each time a ceo rewards himself for failure or a banker puts the rest of us at risk for his own selfish gain , people 's doubts grow .
each time lobbyists game the system or politicians tear each other down instead of lifting this country up , we lose faith .
the more that tv pundits reduce serious debates to silly arguments , big issues into sound bites , our citizens turn away .
no wonder there 's so much cynicism out there .
no wonder there 's so much disappointment .
i campaigned on the promise of change .
change we can believe in , the slogan went .
and right now i know there are many americans who are n't sure if they still believe we can change or that i can deliver it .
but remember this : i never suggested that change would be easy or that i could do it alone .
democracy in a nation of 300 million people can be noisy and messy and complicated .
and when you try to do big things and make big changes , it stirs passions and controversy .
that 's just how it is .
those of us in public office can respond to this reality by playing it safe and avoid telling hard truths and pointing fingers .
we can do what 's necessary to keep our poll numbers high and get through the next election , instead of doing what 's best for the next generation .
but i also know this : if people had made that decision 50 years ago or 100 years ago or 200 years ago , we would n't be here tonight .
the only reason we are here is because generations of americans were unafraid to do what was hard , to do what was needed even when success was uncertain , to do what it took to keep the dream of this nation alive for their children and their grandchildren .
now , our administration has had some political setbacks this year , and some of them were deserved .
but i wake up every day knowing that they are nothing compared to the setbacks that families all across this country have faced this year .
and what keeps me going , what keeps me fighting , is that despite all these setbacks , that spirit of determination and optimism , that fundamental decency that has always been at the core of the american people , that lives on .
it lives on in the struggling small - business owner who wrote to me of his company , " none of us , " he said , " . . .
are willing to consider , even slightly , that we might fail . "
it lives on in the woman who said that even though she and her neighbors have felt the pain of recession , " we are strong .
we are resilient .
we are american . "
it lives on in the 8-year - old boy in louisiana who just sent me his allowance and asked if i would give it to the people of haiti .
and it lives on in all the americans who 've dropped everything to go someplace they 've never been and pull people they 've never known from the rubble , prompting chants of " u. s.a. !
u. s.a. !
u. s.a ! "
when another life was saved .
the spirit that has sustained this nation for more than two centuries lives on in you , its people .
we have finished a difficult year .
we have come through a difficult decade .
but a new year has come .
a new decade stretches before us .
we do n't quit .
i do n't quit .
let 's seize this moment to start anew , to carry the dream forward , and to strengthen our union once more .
thank you .
god bless you .
and god bless the united states of america .

my fellow americans , tonight i want to talk to you about syria -- why it matters , and where we go from here .
over the past two years , what began as a series of peaceful protests against the repressive regime of bashar al - assad has turned into a brutal civil war .
over 100,000 people have been killed .
millions have fled the country .
in that time , america has worked with allies to provide humanitarian support , to help the moderate opposition , and to shape a political settlement .
but i have resisted calls for military action , because we can not resolve someone else 's civil war through force , particularly after a decade of war in iraq and afghanistan .
the situation profoundly changed , though , on august 21st , when assad 's government gassed to death over a thousand people , including hundreds of children .
the images from this massacre are sickening : men , women , children lying in rows , killed by poison gas .
others foaming at the mouth , gasping for breath .
a father clutching his dead children , imploring them to get up and walk .
on that terrible night , the world saw in gruesome detail the terrible nature of chemical weapons , and why the overwhelming majority of humanity has declared them off - limits -- a crime against humanity , and a violation of the laws of war .
this was not always the case .
in world war i , american gis were among the many thousands killed by deadly gas in the trenches of europe .
in world war ii , the nazis used gas to inflict the horror of the holocaust .
because these weapons can kill on a mass scale , with no distinction between soldier and infant , the civilized world has spent a century working to ban them .
and in 1997 , the united states senate overwhelmingly approved an international agreement prohibiting the use of chemical weapons , now joined by 189 governments that represent 98 percent of humanity .
on august 21st , these basic rules were violated , along with our sense of common humanity .
no one disputes that chemical weapons were used in syria .
the world saw thousands of videos , cell phone pictures , and social media accounts from the attack , and humanitarian organizations told stories of hospitals packed with people who had symptoms of poison gas .
moreover , we know the assad regime was responsible .
in the days leading up to august 21st , we know that assad 's chemical weapons personnel prepared for an attack near an area where they mix sarin gas .
they distributed gasmasks to their troops .
then they fired rockets from a regime - controlled area into 11 neighborhoods that the regime has been trying to wipe clear of opposition forces .
shortly after those rockets landed , the gas spread , and hospitals filled with the dying and the wounded .
we know senior figures in assad 's military machine reviewed the results of the attack , and the regime increased their shelling of the same neighborhoods in the days that followed .
we 've also studied samples of blood and hair from people at the site that tested positive for sarin .
when dictators commit atrocities , they depend upon the world to look the other way until those horrifying pictures fade from memory .
but these things happened .
the facts can not be denied .
the question now is what the united states of america , and the international community , is prepared to do about it .
because what happened to those people -- to those children -- is not only a violation of international law , it 's also a danger to our security .
let me explain why .
if we fail to act , the assad regime will see no reason to stop using chemical weapons .
as the ban against these weapons erodes , other tyrants will have no reason to think twice about acquiring poison gas , and using them .
over time , our troops would again face the prospect of chemical warfare on the battlefield .
and it could be easier for terrorist organizations to obtain these weapons , and to use them to attack civilians .
if fighting spills beyond syria 's borders , these weapons could threaten allies like turkey , jordan , and israel .
and a failure to stand against the use of chemical weapons would weaken prohibitions against other weapons of mass destruction , and embolden assad 's ally , iran -- which must decide whether to ignore international law by building a nuclear weapon , or to take a more peaceful path .
this is not a world we should accept .
this is what 's at stake .
and that is why , after careful deliberation , i determined that it is in the national security interests of the united states to respond to the assad regime 's use of chemical weapons through a targeted military strike .
the purpose of this strike would be to deter assad from using chemical weapons , to degrade his regime 's ability to use them , and to make clear to the world that we will not tolerate their use .
that 's my judgment as commander - in - chief .
but i 'm also the president of the world 's oldest constitutional democracy .
so even though i possess the authority to order military strikes , i believed it was right , in the absence of a direct or imminent threat to our security , to take this debate to congress .
i believe our democracy is stronger when the president acts with the support of congress .
and i believe that america acts more effectively abroad when we stand together .
this is especially true after a decade that put more and more war - making power in the hands of the president , and more and more burdens on the shoulders of our troops , while sidelining the people 's representatives from the critical decisions about when we use force .
now , i know that after the terrible toll of iraq and afghanistan , the idea of any military action , no matter how limited , is not going to be popular .
after all , i 've spent four and a half years working to end wars , not to start them .
our troops are out of iraq .
our troops are coming home from afghanistan .
and i know americans want all of us in washington 
 -- especially me -- to concentrate on the task of building our nation here at home : putting people back to work , educating our kids , growing our middle class .
it 's no wonder , then , that you 're asking hard questions .
so let me answer some of the most important questions that i 've heard from members of congress , and that i 've read in letters that you 've sent to me .
first , many of you have asked , wo n't this put us on a slippery slope to another war ?
one man wrote to me that we are " still recovering from our involvement in iraq . "
a veteran put it more bluntly : " this nation is sick and tired of war . "
my answer is simple : i will not put american boots on the ground in syria .
i will not pursue an open - ended action like iraq or afghanistan .
i will not pursue a prolonged air campaign like libya or kosovo .
this would be a targeted strike to achieve a clear objective : deterring the use of chemical weapons , and degrading assad 's capabilities .
others have asked whether it 's worth acting if we do n't take out assad .
as some members of congress have said , there 's no point in simply doing a " pinprick " strike in syria .
let me make something clear : the united states military does n't do pinpricks .
even a limited strike will send a message to assad that no other nation can deliver .
i do n't think we should remove another dictator with force -- we learned from iraq that doing so makes us responsible for all that comes next .
but a targeted strike can make assad , or any other dictator , think twice before using chemical weapons .
other questions involve the dangers of retaliation .
we do n't dismiss any threats , but the assad regime does not have the ability to seriously threaten our military .
any other retaliation they might seek is in line with threats that we face every day .
neither assad nor his allies have any interest in escalation that would lead to his demise .
and our ally , israel , can defend itself with overwhelming force , as well as the unshakeable support of the united states of america .
many of you have asked a broader question : why should we get involved at all in a place that 's so complicated , and where -- as one person wrote to me -- " those who come after assad may be enemies of human rights ? "
it 's true that some of assad 's opponents are extremists .
but al qaeda will only draw strength in a more chaotic syria if people there see the world doing nothing to prevent innocent civilians from being gassed to death .
the majority of the syrian people -- and the syrian opposition we work with -- just want to live in peace , with dignity and freedom .
and the day after any military action , we would redouble our efforts to achieve a political solution that strengthens those who reject the forces of tyranny and extremism .
finally , many of you have asked : why not leave this to other countries , or seek solutions short of force ?
as several people wrote to me , " we should not be the world 's policeman . "
i agree , and i have a deeply held preference for peaceful solutions .
over the last two years , my administration has tried diplomacy and sanctions , warning and negotiations -- but chemical weapons were still used by the assad regime .
however , over the last few days , we 've seen some encouraging signs .
in part because of the credible threat of u. s. military action , as well as constructive talks that i had with president putin , the russian government has indicated a willingness to join with the international community in pushing assad to give up his chemical weapons .
the assad regime has now admitted that it has these weapons , and even said they 'd join the chemical weapons convention , which prohibits their use .
it 's too early to tell whether this offer will succeed , and any agreement must verify that the assad regime keeps its commitments .
but this initiative has the potential to remove the threat of chemical weapons without the use of force , particularly because russia is one of assad 's strongest allies .
i have , therefore , asked the leaders of congress to postpone a vote to authorize the use of force while we pursue this diplomatic path .
i 'm sending secretary of state john kerry to meet his russian counterpart on thursday , and i will continue my own discussions with president putin .
i 've spoken to the leaders of two of our closest allies , france and the united kingdom , and we will work together in consultation with russia and china to put forward a resolution at the u. n. security council requiring assad to give up his chemical weapons , and to ultimately destroy them under international control .
we 'll also give u. n. inspectors the opportunity to report their findings about what happened on august 21st .
and we will continue to rally support from allies from europe to the americas -- from asia to the middle east -- who agree on the need for action .
meanwhile , i 've ordered our military to maintain their current posture to keep the pressure on assad , and to be in a position to respond if diplomacy fails .
and tonight , i give thanks again to our military and their families for their incredible strength and sacrifices .
my fellow americans , for nearly seven decades , the united states has been the anchor of global security .
this has meant doing more than forging international agreements -- it has meant enforcing them .
the burdens of leadership are often heavy , but the world is a better place because we have borne them .
and so , to my friends on the right , i ask you to reconcile your commitment to america 's military might with a failure to act when a cause is so plainly just .
to my friends on the left , i ask you to reconcile your belief in freedom and dignity for all people with those images of children writhing in pain , and going still on a cold hospital floor .
for sometimes resolutions and statements of condemnation are simply not enough .
indeed , i 'd ask every member of congress , and those of you watching at home tonight , to view those videos of the attack , and then ask : what kind of world will we live in if the united states of america sees a dictator brazenly violate international law with poison gas , and we choose to look the other way ?
franklin roosevelt once said , " our national determination to keep free of foreign wars and foreign entanglements can not prevent us from feeling deep concern when ideals and principles that we have cherished are challenged . "
our ideals and principles , as well as our national security , are at stake in syria , along with our leadership of a world where we seek to ensure that the worst weapons will never be used .
america is not the world 's policeman .
terrible things happen across the globe , and it is beyond our means to right every wrong .
but when , with modest effort and risk , we can stop children from being gassed to death , and thereby make our own children safer over the long run , i believe we should act .
that 's what makes america different .
that 's what makes us exceptional .
with humility , but with resolve , let us never lose sight of that essential truth .
thank you .
god bless you .
and god bless the united states of america .

hello , connecticut .
thank you .
well , thank you so much , everybody .
let me begin by thanking nicole , and ian , for your brave words .
i want to thank them and all the newtown families who have come here today , including your first selectman , pat llodra .
nobody could be more eloquent than nicole and the other families on this issue .
and we are so grateful for their courage and willingness to share their stories again and again , understanding that nothing is going to be more important in making sure the congress moves forward this week than hearing from them .
i want to thank all the educators from sandy hook elementary who have come here as well --   -- the survivors -- 

 > the president : > i love you back .
i do .
-- the survivors who still mourn and grieve , but are still going to work every day to love and raise those precious children in their care as fiercely as ever .
i want to thank governor malloy for his leadership .
very proud of him .
i want to thank the university of hartford for hosting us this afternoon .
thank you , hawks .
and i want to thank the people of connecticut for everything you 've done to honor the memories of the victims --   -- because you 're part of their family as well .
one of your recent alumni , rachel d'avino , was a behavioral therapist at sandy hook .
two alumni of your performing arts school , jimmy greene and nelba marquez - greene , lost their daughter , ana -- an incredible , vibrant young girl who looked up to them , and learned from them , and inherited their talents by singing before she could talk .
so every family in this state was shaken by the tragedy of that morning .
every family in this country was shaken .
we hugged our kids more tightly .
we asked what could we do , as a society , to help prevent a tragedy like that from happening again .
and as a society , we decided that we have to change .
we must .
we must change .
i noticed that nicole and others refer to that day as " 12/14 . "
for these families , it was a day that changed everything .
and i know many of you in newtown wondered if the rest of us would live up to the promise we made in those dark days -- if we 'd change , too ; or if once the television trucks left , once the candles flickered out , once the teddy bears were carefully gathered up , that the country would somehow move on to other things .
over the weekend , i heard francine wheeler , who lost her son ben that day , say that the four months since the tragedy might feel like a brief moment for some , but for her , it feels like it 's been years since she saw ben .
and she 's determined not to let what happened that day just fade away . "
we 're not going anywhere , " she said . "
we are here .
and we are going to be here . "
and i know that she speaks for everybody in newtown , everybody who was impacted .
and , newtown , we want you to know that we 're here with you .
we will not walk away from the promises we 've made .
we are as determined as ever to do what must be done .
in fact , i 'm here to ask you to help me show that we can get it done .
we 're not forgetting .
we ca n't forget .
your families still grieve in ways most of us ca n't comprehend .
but so many of you have used that grief to make a difference -- not just to honor your own children , but to protect the lives of all of our children .
so many of you have mobilized , and organized , and petitioned your elected officials " with love and logic , " as nicole put it -- as citizens determined to right something gone wrong .
and last week , here in connecticut , your elected leaders responded .
the connecticut legislature , led by many of the legislators here today , passed new measures to protect more of our children and our communities from gun violence .
and governor malloy signed that legislation into law .
so i want to be clear .
you , the families of newtown , people across connecticut , you helped make that happen .
your voices , your determination made that happen .
obviously , the elected leaders did an extraordinary job moving it forward , but it could n't have happened if they were n't hearing from people in their respective districts , people all across the state .
that 's the power of your voice .
and , by the way , connecticut is not alone .
in the past few months , new york , colorado , maryland have all passed new , common - sense gun safety reforms as well .
these are all states that share an awful familiarity with gun violence , whether it 's the horror of mass killings , or the street crime that 's too common in too many neighborhoods .
all of these states also share a strong tradition of hunting , and sport shooting , and gun ownership .
it 's been a part of the fabric of people 's lives for generations .
and every single one of those states -- including here in connecticut -- decided that , yes , we can protect more of our citizens from gun violence while still protecting our second amendment rights .
those two things do n't contradict each other .
we can pass common - sense laws that protect our kids and protect our rights .
so connecticut has shown the way .
and now is the time for congress to do the same .
now is the time for congress to do the same .
this week is the time for congress to do the same .
now , back in january , just a few months after the tragedy in newtown , i announced a series of executive actions to reduce gun violence and keep our kids safe .
and i put forward common - sense proposals -- much like those that passed here in connecticut -- for congress to consider .
and you 'll remember in my state of the union address , i urged congress to give those proposals a vote .
and that moment is now .
as soon as this week , congress will begin debating these common - sense proposals to reduce gun violence .
your senators , dick blumenthal and chris murphy -- they 're here --   -- your representatives , john larson , rosa delauro , elizabeth esty , jim hines , joe courtney , they are all pushing to pass this legislation .
but much of congress is going to only act if they hear from you , the american people .
so here 's what we have to do .
i appreciate that .
here 's what we 've got to do .
we have to tell congress it 's time to require a background check for anyone who wants to buy a gun so that people who are dangerous to themselves and others can not get their hands on a gun .
let 's make that happen .
we have to tell congress it 's time to crack down on gun trafficking so that folks will think twice before buying a gun as part of a scheme to arm someone who wo n't pass a background check .
let 's get that done .
we have to tell congress it 's time to restore the ban on military - style assault weapons , and a 10-round limit for magazines , to make it harder for a gunman to fire 154 bullets into his victims in less than five minutes .
let 's put that to a vote .
we have to tell congress it 's time to strengthen school safety and help people struggling with mental health problems get the treatment they need before it 's too late .
let 's do that for our kids and for our communities .
now , i know that some of these proposals inspire more debate than others , but each of them has the support of the majority of the american people .
all of them are common sense .
all of them deserve a vote .
all of them deserve a vote .
consider background checks .
over the past 20 years , background checks have kept more than 2 million dangerous people from getting their hands on a gun .
a group of police officers in colorado told me last week that , thanks to background checks , they 've been able to stop convicted murderers , folks under restraining orders for committing violent domestic abuse from buying a gun .
in some cases , they 've actually arrested the person as they were coming to purchase the gun .
so we know that background checks can work .
but the problem is loopholes in the current law let so many people avoid background checks altogether .
that 's not safe .
it does n't make sense .
if you 're a law - abiding citizen and you go through a background check to buy a gun , would n't you expect other people to play by the same rules ?
if you 're a law - abiding gun seller , would n't you want to know you 're not selling your gun to someone who 's likely to commit a crime ?
should n't we make it harder , not easier for somebody who is convicted of domestic abuse to get his hands on a gun ?
it turns out 90 percent of americans think so .
ninety percent of americans support universal background checks .
think about that .
how often do 90 percent of americans agree on anything ?
and yet , 90 percent agree on this -- republicans , democrats , folks who own guns , folks who do n't own guns ; 80 percent of republicans , more than 80 percent of gun owners , more than 70 percent of nra households .
it is common sense .
and yet , there is only one thing that can stand in the way of change that just about everybody agrees on , and that 's politics in washington .
you would think that with those numbers congress would rush to make this happen .
that 's what you would think .
if our democracy is working the way it 's supposed to , and 90 percent of the american people agree on something , in the wake of a tragedy you 'd think this would not be a heavy lift .
and yet , some folks back in washington are already floating the idea that they may use political stunts to prevent votes on any of these reforms .
think about that .
they 're not just saying they 'll vote " no " on ideas that almost all americans support .
they 're saying they 'll do everything they can to even prevent any votes on these provisions .
they 're saying your opinion does n't matter .
and that 's not right .
that is not right .
we need a vote .
we need a vote .
now , i 've also heard some in the washington press suggest that what happens to gun violence legislation in congress this week will either be a political victory or defeat for me .
connecticut , this is not about me .
this is not about politics .
this is about doing the right thing for all the families who are here that have been torn apart by gun violence .
it 's about them and all the families going forward , so we can prevent this from happening again .
that 's what it 's about .
it 's about the law enforcement officials putting their lives at risk .
that 's what this is about .
this is not about politics .
this is not about politics .
this is about these families and families all across the country who are saying let 's make it a little harder for our kids to get gunned down .
when i said in my state of the union address that these proposals deserve a vote -- that families of newtown , and aurora , and tucson , and a former member of congress , gabby giffords , that they all deserved a vote - -- virtually every member of that chamber stood up and applauded .
and now they 're going to start denying your families a vote when the cameras are off and when the lobbyists have worked what they do ?
you deserve better than that .
you deserve a vote .
now , look , we knew from the beginning of this debate that change would not be easy .
we knew that there would be powerful interests that are very good at confusing the subject , that are good at amplifying conflict and extremes , that are good at drowning out rational debate , good at ginning up irrational fears , all of which stands in the way of progress .
but if our history teaches us anything , then it 's up to us -- - the people - -- to stand up to those who say we ca n't , or we wo n't ; stand up for the change that we need .
and i believe that that 's what the american people are looking for .
when i first ran for this office , i said that i did not believe the country was as divided as our politics would suggest , and i still believe that .
i know sometimes , when you watch cable news or talk radio , or you browse the internet , you 'd think , man , everybody just hates each other , everybody is just at each other 's throats .
but that 's not how most americans think about these issues .
there are good people on both sides of every issue .
so if we 're going to move forward , we ca n't just talk past one another .
we 've got to listen to one another .
that 's what governor malloy and all these legislative leaders did .
that 's why they were able to pass bipartisan legislation .
i 've got stacks of letters from gun owners who want me to know that they care passionately about their right to bear arms , do n't want them infringed upon , and i appreciate every one of those letters .
i 've learned from them .
but a lot of those letters , what they 've also said is they 're not just gun owners ; they 're also parents or police officers or veterans , and they agree that we ca n't stand by and keep letting these tragedies happen ; that with our rights come some responsibilities and obligations to our communities and ourselves , and most of all to our children .
we ca n't just think about " us " -- - we 've got to think about " we , the people . "
i was in colorado .
i told a story about michelle .
she came back from a trip to rural iowa ; we were out there campaigning .
sometimes it would be miles between farms , let alone towns .
and she said , you know , coming back , i can understand why somebody would want a gun for protection .
if somebody drove up into the driveway and , barack , you were n't home , the sheriff lived miles away , i might want that security .
so she can understand what it might be like in terms of somebody wanting that kind of security .
on the other hand , i also talked to a hunter last week who said , all my experiences with guns have been positive , but i also realize that for others , all their experiences with guns have been negative .
and when he said that , i thought about the mom i met from suburban chicago whose son was killed in a random shooting .
and this mom told me , i hate it when people tell me that my son was in the wrong place at the wrong time .
he was on his way to school .
he was exactly where he was supposed to be .
he was in the right place at the right time , and he still got shot .
the kids at sandy hook were where they were supposed to be .
so were those moviegoers in aurora .
so were those worshippers in oak creek .
so was gabby giffords .
she was at a supermarket , listening to the concerns of her constituents .
they were exactly where they were supposed to be .
they were also exercising their rights -- to assemble peaceably ; to worship freely and safely .
they were exercising the rights of life and liberty , and the pursuit of happiness .
so surely , we can reconcile those two things .
surely , america does n't have to be divided between rural and urban , and democrat and republican when it comes to something like this .
if you 're an american who wants to do something to prevent more families from knowing the immeasurable anguish that these families here have known , then we have to act .
now is the time to get engaged .
now is the time to get involved .
now is the time to push back on fear , and frustration , and misinformation .
now is the time for everybody to make their voices heard from every state house to the corridors of congress .
and i 'm asking everyone listening today , find out where your member of congress stands on this .
if they 're not part of the 90 percent of americans who agree on background checks , then ask them , why not ?
why would n't you want to make it easier for law enforcement to do their job ?
why would n't you want to make it harder for a dangerous person to get his or her hands on a gun ?
what 's more important to you : our children , or an a - grade from the gun lobby ?
i 've heard nicole talk about what her life has been like since dylan was taken from her in december .
and one thing she said struck me .
she said , " every night , i beg for him to come to me in my dreams so that i can see him again .
and during the day , i just focus on what i need to do to honor him and make change . "
now , if nicole can summon the courage to do that , how can the rest of us do any less ?
how can we do any less ?
if there is even one thing we can do to protect our kids , do n't we have an obligation to try ?
if there is even one step we can take to keep somebody from murdering dozens of innocents in the span of minutes , should n't we be taking that step ?
if there is just one thing we can do to keep one father from having to bury his child , is n't that worth fighting for ?
i 've got to tell you , i 've had tough days in the presidency -- i 've said this before .
the day newtown happened was the toughest day of my presidency .
but i 've got to tell you , if we do n't respond to this , that will be a tough day for me , too .
because we 've got to expect more from ourselves , and we 've got to expect more from congress .
we 've got to believe that every once in a while , we set politics aside and we just do what 's right .
we 've got to believe that .
and if you believe that , i 'm asking you to stand up .
if you believe in the right to bears arms , like i do , but think we should prevent an irresponsible few from inflicting harm -- stand up .
stand up .
if you believe that the families of newtown and aurora and tucson and virginia tech and the thousands of americans who have been gunned down in the last four months deserve a vote , we all have to stand up .
if you want the people you send to washington to have just an iota of the courage that the educators at sandy hook showed when danger arrived on their doorstep , then we 're all going to have to stand up .
and if we do , if we come together and raise our voices together and demand this change together , i 'm convinced cooperation and common sense will prevail .
we will find sensible , intelligent ways to make this country stronger and safer for our children .
so let 's do the right thing .
let 's do right by our kids .
let 's do right by these families .
let 's get this done .
connecticut , thank you .
god bless you .
god bless the united states of america .

thank you .
muchas gracias .
thank you so much .
thank you very much .
president castro , the people of cuba , thank you so much for the warm welcome that i have received , that my family have received , and that our delegation has received .
it is an extraordinary honor to be here today .
before i begin , please indulge me .
i want to comment on the terrorist attacks that have taken place in brussels .
the thoughts and the prayers of the american people are with the people of belgium .
we stand in solidarity with them in condemning these outrageous attacks against innocent people .
we will do whatever is necessary to support our friend and ally , belgium , in bringing to justice those who are responsible .
and this is yet another reminder that the world must unite , we must be together , regardless of nationality , or race , or faith , in fighting against the scourge of terrorism .
we can -- and will -- defeat those who threaten the safety and security of people all around the world .
to the government and the people of cuba , i want to thank you for the kindness that you 've shown to me and michelle , malia , sasha , my mother - in - law , marian .
" cultivo una rosa blanca . "
in his most famous poem , jose marti made this offering of friendship and peace to both his friend and his enemy .
today , as the president of the united states of america , i offer the cuban people el saludo de paz .
havana is only 90 miles from florida , but to get here we had to travel a great distance -- over barriers of history and ideology ; barriers of pain and separation .
the blue waters beneath air force one once carried american battleships to this island -- to liberate , but also to exert control over cuba .
those waters also carried generations of cuban revolutionaries to the united states , where they built support for their cause .
and that short distance has been crossed by hundreds of thousands of cuban exiles -- on planes and makeshift rafts -- who came to america in pursuit of freedom and opportunity , sometimes leaving behind everything they owned and every person that they loved .
like so many people in both of our countries , my lifetime has spanned a time of isolation between us .
the cuban revolution took place the same year that my father came to the united states from kenya .
the bay of pigs took place the year that i was born .
the next year , the entire world held its breath , watching our two countries , as humanity came as close as we ever have to the horror of nuclear war .
as the decades rolled by , our governments settled into a seemingly endless confrontation , fighting battles through proxies .
in a world that remade itself time and again , one constant was the conflict between the united states and cuba .
i have come here to bury the last remnant of the cold war in the americas .
i have come here to extend the hand of friendship to the cuban people .
i want to be clear : the differences between our governments over these many years are real and they are important .
i 'm sure president castro would say the same thing -- i know , because i 've heard him address those differences at length .
but before i discuss those issues , we also need to recognize how much we share .
because in many ways , the united states and cuba are like two brothers who 've been estranged for many years , even as we share the same blood .
we both live in a new world , colonized by europeans .
cuba , like the united states , was built in part by slaves brought here from africa .
like the united states , the cuban people can trace their heritage to both slaves and slave - owners .
we 've welcomed both immigrants who came a great distance to start new lives in the americas .
over the years , our cultures have blended together .
dr. carlos finlay 's work in cuba paved the way for generations of doctors , including walter reed , who drew on dr. finlay 's work to help combat yellow fever .
just as marti wrote some of his most famous words in new york , ernest hemingway made a home in cuba , and found inspiration in the waters of these shores .
we share a national past - time -- la pelota -- and later today our players will compete on the same havana field that jackie robinson played on before he made his major league debut .
and it 's said that our greatest boxer , muhammad ali , once paid tribute to a cuban that he could never fight -- saying that he would only be able to reach a draw with the great cuban , teofilo stevenson .
so even as our governments became adversaries , our people continued to share these common passions , particularly as so many cubans came to america .
in miami or havana , you can find places to dance the cha - cha - cha or the salsa , and eat ropa vieja .
people in both of our countries have sung along with celia cruz or gloria estefan , and now listen to reggaeton or pitbull .
millions of our people share a common religion -- a faith that i paid tribute to at the shrine of our lady of charity in miami , a peace that cubans find in la cachita .
for all of our differences , the cuban and american people share common values in their own lives .
a sense of patriotism and a sense of pride -- a lot of pride .
a profound love of family .
a passion for our children , a commitment to their education .
and that 's why i believe our grandchildren will look back on this period of isolation as an aberration , as just one chapter in a longer story of family and of friendship .
but we can not , and should not , ignore the very real differences that we have -- about how we organize our governments , our economies , and our societies .
cuba has a one - party system ; the united states is a multi - party democracy .
cuba has a socialist economic model ; the united states is an open market .
cuba has emphasized the role and rights of the state ; the united states is founded upon the rights of the individual .
despite these differences , on december 17th 2014 , president castro and i announced that the united states and cuba would begin a process to normalize relations between our countries .
since then , we have established diplomatic relations and opened embassies .
we 've begun initiatives to cooperate on health and agriculture , education and law enforcement .
we 've reached agreements to restore direct flights and mail service .
we 've expanded commercial ties , and increased the capacity of americans to travel and do business in cuba .
and these changes have been welcomed , even though there are still opponents to these policies .
but still , many people on both sides of this debate have asked : why now ?
why now ?
there is one simple answer : what the united states was doing was not working .
we have to have the courage to acknowledge that truth .
a policy of isolation designed for the cold war made little sense in the 21st century .
the embargo was only hurting the cuban people instead of helping them .
and i 've always believed in what martin luther king , jr. called " the fierce urgency of now " -- we should not fear change , we should embrace it .
that leads me to a bigger and more important reason for these changes : creo en el pueblo cubano .
i believe in the cuban people .
this is not just a policy of normalizing relations with the cuban government .
the united states of america is normalizing relations with the cuban people .
and today , i want to share with you my vision of what our future can be .
i want the cuban people -- especially the young people -- to understand why i believe that you should look to the future with hope ; not the false promise which insists that things are better than they really are , or the blind optimism that says all your problems can go away tomorrow .
hope that is rooted in the future that you can choose and that you can shape , and that you can build for your country .
i 'm hopeful because i believe that the cuban people are as innovative as any people in the world .
in a global economy , powered by ideas and information , a country 's greatest asset is its people .
in the united states , we have a clear monument to what the cuban people can build : it 's called miami .
here in havana , we see that same talent in cuentapropistas , cooperatives and old cars that still run .
el cubano inventa del aire .
cuba has an extraordinary resource -- a system of education which values every boy and every girl .
and in recent years , the cuban government has begun to open up to the world , and to open up more space for that talent to thrive .
in just a few years , we 've seen how cuentapropistas can succeed while sustaining a distinctly cuban spirit .
being self - employed is not about becoming more like america , it 's about being yourself .
look at sandra lidice aldama , who chose to start a small business .
cubans , she said , can " innovate and adapt without losing our identity&hellip;our secret is in not copying or imitating but simply being ourselves . "
look at papito valladeres , a barber , whose success allowed him to improve conditions in his neighborhood . "
i realize i 'm not going to solve all of the world 's problems , " he said . "
but if i can solve problems in the little piece of the world where i live , it can ripple across havana . "
that 's where hope begins -- with the ability to earn your own living , and to build something you can be proud of .
that 's why our policies focus on supporting cubans , instead of hurting them .
that 's why we got rid of limits on remittances -- so ordinary cubans have more resources .
that 's why we 're encouraging travel -- which will build bridges between our people , and bring more revenue to those cuban small businesses .
that 's why we 've opened up space for commerce and exchanges -- so that americans and cubans can work together to find cures for diseases , and create jobs , and open the door to more opportunity for the cuban people .
as president of the united states , i 've called on our congress to lift the embargo .
it is an outdated burden on the cuban people .
it 's a burden on the americans who want to work and do business or invest here in cuba .
it 's time to lift the embargo .
but even if we lifted the embargo tomorrow , cubans would not realize their potential without continued change here in cuba .
it should be easier to open a business here in cuba .
a worker should be able to get a job directly with companies who invest here in cuba .
two currencies should n't separate the type of salaries that cubans can earn .
the internet should be available across the island , so that cubans can connect to the wider world --   -- and to one of the greatest engines of growth in human history .
there 's no limitation from the united states on the ability of cuba to take these steps .
it 's up to you .
and i can tell you as a friend that sustainable prosperity in the 21st century depends upon education , health care , and environmental protection .
but it also depends on the free and open exchange of ideas .
if you ca n't access information online , if you can not be exposed to different points of view , you will not reach your full potential .
and over time , the youth will lose hope .
i know these issues are sensitive , especially coming from an american president .
before 1959 , some americans saw cuba as something to exploit , ignored poverty , enabled corruption .
and since 1959 , we 've been shadow - boxers in this battle of geopolitics and personalities .
i know the history , but i refuse to be trapped by it .
i 've made it clear that the united states has neither the capacity , nor the intention to impose change on cuba .
what changes come will depend upon the cuban people .
we will not impose our political or economic system on you .
we recognize that every country , every people , must chart its own course and shape its own model .
but having removed the shadow of history from our relationship , i must speak honestly about the things that i believe -- the things that we , as americans , believe .
as marti said , " liberty is the right of every man to be honest , to think and to speak without hypocrisy . "
so let me tell you what i believe .
i ca n't force you to agree , but you should know what i think .
i believe that every person should be equal under the law .
every child deserves the dignity that comes with education , and health care and food on the table and a roof over their heads .
i believe citizens should be free to speak their mind without fear --   -- to organize , and to criticize their government , and to protest peacefully , and that the rule of law should not include arbitrary detentions of people who exercise those rights .
i believe that every person should have the freedom to practice their faith peacefully and publicly .
and , yes , i believe voters should be able to choose their governments in free and democratic elections .
not everybody agrees with me on this .
not everybody agrees with the american people on this .
but i believe those human rights are universal .
i believe they are the rights of the american people , the cuban people , and people around the world .
now , there 's no secret that our governments disagree on many of these issues .
i 've had frank conversations with president castro .
for many years , he has pointed out the flaws in the american system -- economic inequality ; the death penalty ; racial discrimination ; wars abroad .
that 's just a sample .
he has a much longer list .
but here 's what the cuban people need to understand : i welcome this open debate and dialogue .
it 's good .
it 's healthy .
i 'm not afraid of it .
we do have too much money in american politics .
but , in america , it 's still possible for somebody like me -- a child who was raised by a single mom , a child of mixed race who did not have a lot of money -- to pursue and achieve the highest office in the land .
that 's what 's possible in america .
we do have challenges with racial bias -- in our communities , in our criminal justice system , in our society -- the legacy of slavery and segregation .
but the fact that we have open debates within america 's own democracy is what allows us to get better .
in 1959 , the year that my father moved to america , it was illegal for him to marry my mother , who was white , in many american states .
when i first started school , we were still struggling to desegregate schools across the american south .
but people organized ; they protested ; they debated these issues ; they challenged government officials .
and because of those protests , and because of those debates , and because of popular mobilization , i 'm able to stand here today as an african - american and as president of the united states .
that was because of the freedoms that were afforded in the united states that we were able to bring about change .
i 'm not saying this is easy .
there 's still enormous problems in our society .
but democracy is the way that we solve them .
that 's how we got health care for more of our people .
that 's how we made enormous gains in women 's rights and gay rights .
that 's how we address the inequality that concentrates so much wealth at the top of our society .
because workers can organize and ordinary people have a voice , american democracy has given our people the opportunity to pursue their dreams and enjoy a high standard of living .
now , there are still some tough fights .
it is n't always pretty , the process of democracy .
it 's often frustrating .
you can see that in the election going on back home .
but just stop and consider this fact about the american campaign that 's taking place right now .
you had two cuban americans in the republican party , running against the legacy of a black man who is president , while arguing that they 're the best person to beat the democratic nominee who will either be a woman or a democratic socialist .
who would have believed that back in 1959 ?
that 's a measure of our progress as a democracy .
so here 's my message to the cuban government and the cuban people : the ideals that are the starting point for every revolution -- america 's revolution , cuba 's revolution , the liberation movements around the world -- those ideals find their truest expression , i believe , in democracy .
not because american democracy is perfect , but precisely because we 're not .
and we -- like every country -- need the space that democracy gives us to change .
it gives individuals the capacity to be catalysts to think in new ways , and to reimagine how our society should be , and to make them better .
there 's already an evolution taking place inside of cuba , a generational change .
many suggested that i come here and ask the people of cuba to tear something down -- but i 'm appealing to the young people of cuba who will lift something up , build something new .
el futurode cuba tiene que estar en las manos del pueblo cubano .
and to president castro -- who i appreciate being here today -- i want you to know , i believe my visit here demonstrates you do not need to fear a threat from the united states .
and given your commitment to cuba 's sovereignty and self - determination , i am also confident that you need not fear the different voices of the cuban people -- and their capacity to speak , and assemble , and vote for their leaders .
in fact , i 'm hopeful for the future because i trust that the cuban people will make the right decisions .
and as you do , i 'm also confident that cuba can continue to play an important role in the hemisphere and around the globe -- and my hope is , is that you can do so as a partner with the united states .
we 've played very different roles in the world .
but no one should deny the service that thousands of cuban doctors have delivered for the poor and suffering .
last year , american health care workers -- and the u. s. military -- worked side - by - side with cubans to save lives and stamp out ebola in west africa .
i believe that we should continue that kind of cooperation in other countries .
we 've been on the different side of so many conflicts in the americas .
but today , americans and cubans are sitting together at the negotiating table , and we are helping the colombian people resolve a civil war that 's dragged on for decades .
that kind of cooperation is good for everybody .
it gives everyone in this hemisphere hope .
we took different journeys to our support for the people of south africa in ending apartheid .
but president castro and i could both be there in johannesburg to pay tribute to the legacy of the great nelson mandela .
and in examining his life and his words , i 'm sure we both realize we have more work to do to promote equality in our own countries -- to reduce discrimination based on race in our own countries .
and in cuba , we want our engagement to help lift up the cubans who are of african descent --   -- who 've proven that there 's nothing they can not achieve when given the chance .
we 've been a part of different blocs of nations in the hemisphere , and we will continue to have profound differences about how to promote peace , security , opportunity , and human rights .
but as we normalize our relations , i believe it can help foster a greater sense of unity in the americas -- todos somos americanos .
from the beginning of my time in office , i 've urged the people of the americas to leave behind the ideological battles of the past .
we are in a new era .
i know that many of the issues that i 've talked about lack the drama of the past .
and i know that part of cuba 's identity is its pride in being a small island nation that could stand up for its rights , and shake the world .
but i also know that cuba will always stand out because of the talent , hard work , and pride of the cuban people .
that 's your strength .
cuba does n't have to be defined by being against the united states , any more than the united states should be defined by being against cuba .
i 'm hopeful for the future because of the reconciliation that 's taking place among the cuban people .
i know that for some cubans on the island , there may be a sense that those who left somehow supported the old order in cuba .
i 'm sure there 's a narrative that lingers here which suggests that cuban exiles ignored the problems of pre - revolutionary cuba , and rejected the struggle to build a new future .
but i can tell you today that so many cuban exiles carry a memory of painful -- and sometimes violent -- separation .
they love cuba .
a part of them still considers this their true home .
that 's why their passion is so strong .
that 's why their heartache is so great .
and for the cuban american community that i 've come to know and respect , this is not just about politics .
this is about family -- the memory of a home that was lost ; the desire to rebuild a broken bond ; the hope for a better future the hope for return and reconciliation .
for all of the politics , people are people , and cubans are cubans .
and i 've come here -- i 've traveled this distance -- on a bridge that was built by cubans on both sides of the florida straits .
i first got to know the talent and passion of the cuban people in america .
and i know how they have suffered more than the pain of exile -- they also know what it 's like to be an outsider , and to struggle , and to work harder to make sure their children can reach higher in america .
so the reconciliation of the cuban people -- the children and grandchildren of revolution , and the children and grandchildren of exile -- that is fundamental to cuba 's future .
you see it in gloria gonzalez , who traveled here in 2013 for the first time after 61 years of separation , and was met by her sister , llorca . "
you recognized me , but i did n't recognize you , " gloria said after she embraced her sibling .
imagine that , after 61 years .
you see it in melinda lopez , who came to her family 's old home .
and as she was walking the streets , an elderly woman recognized her as her mother 's daughter , and began to cry .
she took her into her home and showed her a pile of photos that included melinda 's baby picture , which her mother had sent 50 years ago .
melinda later said , " so many of us are now getting so much back . "
you see it in cristian miguel soler , a young man who became the first of his family to travel here after 50 years .
and meeting relatives for the first time , he said , " i realized that family is family no matter the distance between us . "
sometimes the most important changes start in small places .
the tides of history can leave people in conflict and exile and poverty .
it takes time for those circumstances to change .
but the recognition of a common humanity , the reconciliation of people bound by blood and a belief in one another -- that 's where progress begins .
understanding , and listening , and forgiveness .
and if the cuban people face the future together , it will be more likely that the young people of today will be able to live with dignity and achieve their dreams right here in cuba .
the history of the united states and cuba encompass revolution and conflict ; struggle and sacrifice ; retribution and , now , reconciliation .
it is time , now , for us to leave the past behind .
it is time for us to look forward to the future together -- un future de esperanza .
and it wo n't be easy , and there will be setbacks .
it will take time .
but my time here in cuba renews my hope and my confidence in what the cuban people will do .
we can make this journey as friends , and as neighbors , and as family -- together .
si se puede .
muchas gracias .

hello , ohio !
it is good to be here in the buckeye state .
congratulations on winning the big ten championship .
i 'm filling out my brackets now .
and it 's even better to be out of washington for a little while .
yes , that kid turner looks pretty good .
you guys are doing all right .
it is wonderful to be here -- 

  i love you back .
i do .
couple of people i just want to make sure i give special mention to .
first of all , you already saw him , governor ted strickland in the house .
ted is fighting every day to bring jobs and economic development to ohio .
so is your terrific united states senator sherrod brown .
love sherrod brown .
your own congressman , who is tireless on behalf of working people , dennis kucinich .
did you hear that , dennis ?
go ahead , say that again .
a couple members of congress are here : u. s. representative betty sutton .
u. s. representative marcia fudge .
u. s. representative tim ryan .
u. s. representative charlie wilson .
i want to thank mayor tom perciak here in strongsville .
please , mr. mayor , you 're on .
that 's a good bunch of folks we got here in ohio , working hard .
which is why i 'm glad to be back -- and let 's face it , it 's nice to be out of washington once in a while .
i want to thank connie -- i want to thank connie , who introduced me .
i want to thank her and her family for being here on behalf of her sister , natoma .
i do n't know if everybody understood that natoma is in the hospital right now , so connie was filling in .
it 's not easy to share such a personal story , when your sister who you love so much is sick .
and so i appreciate connie being willing to do so here today , and --   -- and i want everybody to understand that connie and her sister are the reason that i 'm here today .
see , connie felt it was important that her sister 's story be told .
but i want to just repeat what happened here .
last month , i got a letter from connie 's sister , natoma .
she 's self - employed , she 's trying to make ends meet , and for years she 's done the responsible thing , just like most of you have .
she bought insurance -- she did n't have a big employer who provided her insurance , so she bought her health insurance through the individual market .
and it was important for her to have insurance because 16 years ago , she was diagnosed with a treatable form of cancer .
and even though she had been cancer - free for more than a decade , the insurance companies kept on jacking up her rates , year after year .
so she increased her out - of - pocket expenses .
she raised her deductible .
she did everything she could to maintain her health insurance that would be there just in case she got sick , because she figured , i did n't want to be -- she did n't want to be in a position where , if she did get sick , somebody else would have to pick up the tab ; that she 'd have to go to the emergency room ; that the cost would be shifted onto folks through their higher insurance premiums or hospitals charging higher rates .
so she tried to do the right thing .
and she upped her deductible last year to the minimum , the highest possible deductible .
but despite that , natoma 's insurance company raised her premiums by more than 25 percent .
and over the past year , she paid more than $ 6,000 in monthly premiums .
she paid more than $ 4,000 in out - of - pocket medical costs , for co - pays and medical care and prescriptions .
so all together , this woman paid $ 10,000 -- one year .
but because she never hit her deductible , her insurance company only spent $ 900 on her care .
so the insurance company is making -- getting $ 10,000 ; paying out $ 900 .
now , what comes in the mail at the end of last year ?
it 's a letter telling natoma that her premiums would go up again by more than 40 percent .
so here 's what happens .
she just could n't afford it .
she did n't have the money .
she realized that if she paid those health insurance premiums that had been jacked up by 40 percent , she could n't make her mortgage .
and despite her desire to keep her coverage , despite her fears that she would get sick and lose the home that her parents built -- she finally surrendered , she finally gave up her health insurance .
she stopped paying it -- she could n't make ends meet .
so january was her last month of being insured .
like so many responsible americans -- folks who work hard every day , who try to do the right thing -- she was forced to hang her fortunes on chance .
to take a chance , that 's all she could do .
she hoped against hope that she would stay healthy .
she feared terribly that she might not stay healthy .
that was the letter that i read to the insurance companies , including the person responsible for raising her rates .
now , i understand natoma was pretty surprised when she found out that i had read it to these ceos .
but i thought it was important for them to understand the human dimensions of this problem .
her rates have been hiked more than 40 percent .
and this was less than two weeks ago .
unfortunately , natoma 's worst fears were realized .
and just last week , she was working on a nearby farm , walking outside -- apparently , chasing after a cow --   -- when she collapsed .
and she was rushed to the hospital .
she was very sick .
she needed two blood transfusions .
doctors performed a battery of tests .
and on saturday , natoma was diagnosed with leukemia .
now , the reason natoma is not here today is that she 's lying on a hospital bed , suddenly faced with this emergency -- suddenly faced with the fight of her life .
she expects to face more than a month of aggressive chemotherapy .
she is racked with worry not only about her illness but about the costs of the tests and the treatment that she 's surely going to need to beat it .
so you want to know why i 'm here , ohio ?
i 'm here because of natoma .
i 'm here because of the countless others who have been forced to face the most terrifying challenges in their lives with the added burden of medical bills they ca n't pay .
i do n't think that 's right .
neither do you .
that 's why we need health insurance right now .
health insurance reform right now .
i 'm here because of my own mother 's story .
she died of cancer , and in the last six months of her life , she was on the phone in her hospital room arguing with insurance companies instead of focusing on getting well and spending time with her family .
i 'm here because of the millions who are denied coverage because of preexisting conditions or dropped from coverage when they get sick .
i 'm here because of the small businesses who are forced to choose between health care and hiring .
i 'm here because of the seniors unable to afford the prescriptions that they need .
i 'm here because of the folks seeing their premiums go up 20 and 30 and 40 and 50 and 60 percent in a year .
ohio , i am here because that is not the america i believe in and that 's not the america that you believe in .
so when you hear people say " start over " -- 

  -- i want you to think about natoma .
when you hear people saying that this is n't the " right time , " you think about what she 's going through .
when you hear people talk about , well , what does this mean for the democrats ?
what does this mean for the republicans ?
i do n't know how the polls are doing .
when you hear people more worried about the politics of it than what 's right and what 's wrong , i want you to think about natoma and the millions of people all across this country who are looking for some help , and looking for some relief .
that 's why we need health insurance reform right now .
part of what makes this issue difficult is most of us do have health insurance , we still do .
and so -- and so we kind of feel like , well , i do n't know , it 's kind of working for me ; i 'm not worrying too much .
but what we have to understand is that what 's happened to natoma , there but for the grace of god go any one of us .
anybody here , if you lost your job right now and after the cobra ran out -- 

  it looks like we 've got somebody who might 've fainted down there , so if we 've got a medic .
no , no , no .
hold on .
i 'm talking about there 's somebody who might 've fainted right down here , so if we can get a medic just back here .
they 're probably okay .
just give her or him some space .
> 
  so let 's just think about -- think about if you lost your job right now .
how many people here might have had a preexisting condition that would mean it 'd be very hard to get health insurance on the individual market ?
think about if you wanted to change jobs .
think about if you wanted to start your own business but you suddenly had to give up your health insurance on your job .
think about what happens if a child of yours , heaven forbid , got diagnosed with something that made it hard for them to insure .
for so many people , it may not be a problem right now but it 's going to be a problem later , at any point .
and even if you 've got good health insurance , what 's happening to your premiums ?
what 's happening to your co - payments ?
what 's happening to your deductible ?
they 're all going up .
that 's money straight out of your pocket .
so the bottom line is this : the status quo on health care is simply unsustainable .
we ca n't have -- we ca n't have a system that works better for the insurance companies than it does for the american people .
and we know what will happen if we fail to act .
we know that our government will be plunged deeper into debt .
we know that millions more people will lose their coverage .
we know that rising costs will saddle millions more families with unaffordable expenses .
and a lot of small businesses are just going to drop their coverage altogether .
that 's already what 's been happening .
a study came out just yesterday -- this is a nonpartisan study -- it 's found that without reform , premiums could more than double for individuals and families over the next decade .
family policies could go to an average of $ 25,000 or more .
can you afford that ?
you think your employer can afford that ?
your employer ca n't sustain that .
so what 's going to happen is , they 're basically -- more and more of them are just going to say , you know what ?
you 're on your own on this .
we have debated this issue now for more than a year .
every proposal has been put on the table .
every argument has been made .
i know a lot of people view this as a partisan issue , but , look , the fact is both parties have a lot of areas where we agree -- it 's just politics are getting in the way of actually getting it done .
somebody asked what 's our plan .
let me describe exactly what we 're doing , because we 've ended up with a proposal that incorporates the best ideas from democrats and republicans , even though republicans do n't give us any credit .
that 's all right .
you know , if you think about the debate around health care reform , there were some who wanted to scrap the system of private insurance and replace it with government - run care .
and , look , that works in a number of places , but i did not see that being practical to help right away for people who really need it .
and on the other end of the spectrum , and this is what a lot of the republicans are saying right now , there are those who simply believe that the answer is to unleash the insurance industry , to deregulate them further , provide them less oversight and fewer rules .
this is called the fox - guarding - the - henhouse approach to health insurance reform .
so what it would do is it would give insurance companies more leeway to raise premiums , more leeway to deny care .
it would segment the market further .
it would be good if you were rich and healthy .
you 'd save money .
but if you 're an ordinary person , if you get older , if you get a little sicker , you 'd be paying more .
now , i do n't believe we should give the government or insurance companies more control over health care in america .
i believe it 's time to give you , the american people , more control over your own health insurance .
and that 's what our proposal does .
our proposal builds on the current system where most americans get their health insurance from their employer .
so if you like your plan , you can keep your plan .
if you like your doctor , you can keep your doctor .
i do n't want to interfere with people 's relationships between them and their doctors .
essentially , here 's what my proposal would change : three things about the current health care system , but three important things .
number one , it would end the worst practices of the insurance companies .
all right ?
this is like a patient 's bill of rights on steroids .
within the first year of signing health care reform , thousands of uninsured americans with preexisting conditions will be able to purchase health insurance for the first time in their lives or the first time since they got sick .
this year , insurance companies will be banned forever from denying coverage to children with preexisting conditions .
so parents can have a little bit of security .
this year , under this legislation , insurance companies will be banned from dropping your coverage when you get sick .
those practices would end .
with this reform package , all new insurance plans would be required to offer free preventive care to their customers starting this year -- so free check - ups to catch preventable diseases on the front end .
that 's a smart thing to do .
starting this year , if you buy a new plan , there wo n't be lifetime or restrictive annual limits on the amount of care you receive from your insurance companies , so you wo n't be surprised by the fine print that says suddenly they 've stopped paying and you now suddenly are $ 50,000 or $ 100,000 or $ 200,000 out of pocket .
that wo n't -- that will not happen if this becomes law this year .
i see -- i see some young people in the audience .
if you 're an uninsured young adult , you will be able to stay on your parents ' policy until you 're 26 years old under this law .
so number one -- number one is insurance reform .
the second thing that this plan would change about the current system is this : for the first time , uninsured individuals , small businesses , they 'd have the same kind of choice of private health insurance that members of congress get for themselves .
understand if this reform becomes law , members of congress , they 'll be getting their insurance from the same place that the uninsured get theirs , because if it 's good enough for the american people , it 's good enough for the people who send us to washington .
so basically what would happen is , we 'd set up a pool of people ; millions of people across the country would all buy into these pools that give them more negotiating power .
if you work for a big company , you 've got a better insurance deal because you 've got more bargaining power as a whole .
we want you to have all the bargaining power that the federal employees have , that big companies have , so you 'll be able to buy in or a small business will be able to buy into this pool .
and that will lower rates , it 's estimated , by up to 14 to 20 percent over what you 're currently getting .
that 's money out of pocket .
and what my proposal says is if you still ca n't afford the insurance in this new marketplace , then we 're going to offer you tax credits to do so .
and that will add up to the largest middle - class tax cut for health care in history .
that 's what we 're going to do .
now , when i was talking about this at that health care summit , some of you saw it -- i sat there for about seven hours ; i know you guys watched the whole thing .
but some of these folks said , well , we just -- that 's a nice idea but we just ca n't afford to do that .
look , i want everybody to understand -- the wealthiest among us can already buy the best insurance there is .
the least well among us , the poorest among us , they get their health care through medicaid .
so it 's the middle class , it 's working people that are getting squeezed , and that 's who we have to help , and we can afford to do it .
now , it is true that providing these tax credits to middle class families and small businesses , that 's going to cost some money .
it 's going to cost about $ 100 billion per year .
but most of this comes from the nearly $ 2.5 trillion a year that americans already spend on health care .
it 's just right now , a lot of that money is being spent badly .
so with this plan , we 're going to make sure the dollars we make -- the dollars that we spend on health care are going to make insurance more affordable and more secure .
and we 're going to eliminate wasteful taxpayer subsidies that currently go to insurance company .
insurance companies are making billions of dollars on subsidies from you , the taxpayer .
and if we take those subsidies away , we can use them to help folks like natoma get health insurance so she does n't lose her house .
and , yes , we will set a new fee on insurance companies because they stand to gain millions more customers who are buying insurance .
there 's nothing wrong with them giving something back .
but here 's the bottom line : our proposal is paid for -- which , by the way , is more than can be said for our colleagues on the other side of the aisle when they passed that big prescription drug plan that cost about as much as my health care plan and they did n't pay for any of it and it went straight to the deficit .
and now they 're up there on their high horse talking about , well , we do n't want to expand the deficit .
this plan does n't expand the deficit .
their plan expanded the deficit .
that 's why we pay for what we do .
that 's the responsible thing to do .
now , so let me talk about the third thing , which is my proposal would bring down the cost of health care for families , for businesses , and for the federal government .
so americans buying comparable coverage to what they have today -- i already said this -- would see premiums fall by 14 to 20 percent -- that 's not my numbers , that 's what the nonpartisan congressional budget office says -- for americans who get their insurance through the workplace .
how many people are getting insurance through their jobs right now ?
raise your hands .
all right .
well , a lot of those folks , your employer it 's estimated would see premiums fall by as much as 3,000 percent , which means they could give you a raise .
we have incorporated most of the serious ideas from across the political spectrum about how to contain the rising costs of health care .
we go after waste and abuse in the system , especially in medicare .
our cost - cutting measures would reduce most people 's premiums and bring down our deficit by up to a trillion dollars over the next two decades .
those are n't my numbers .
those are the numbers determined by the congressional budget office .
they 're the referee .
that 's what they say , not what i say .
now , the opponents of reform , they 've tried to make a lot of different arguments to stop these changes .
you remember .
first , they said , well , there 's a government takeover of health care .
well , that was n't true .
well , that was n't true .
then they said , well , what about death panels ?
well , that turned out -- that did n't turn out to be true .
you know , the most insidious argument they 're making is the idea that somehow this would hurt medicare .
i know we 've got some seniors here with us today -- i could n't tell ; you guys look great .
i would n't have guessed .
but want to tell you directly : this proposal adds almost a decade of solvency to medicare .
this proposal would close the gap in prescription drug coverage , called the doughnut hole -- you know something about that -- that sticks seniors with thousands of dollars in drug costs .
this proposal will over time help to reduce the costs of medicare that you pay every month .
this proposal would make preventive care free so you do n't have to pay out - of - pocket for tests to keep you healthy .
so yes , we 're going after the waste , the fraud , the abuse in medicare .
we are eliminating some of the insurance subsidies that should be going to your care .
that 's because these dollars should be spent on care for seniors , not on the care and feeding of the insurance companies through sweetheart deals .
and every senior should know there is no cutting of your guaranteed medicare benefits .
period .
no " ifs , " " ands , " or " buts . "
this proposal makes medicare stronger , it makes the coverage better , and it makes the finances more secure .
and anybody who says otherwise is either misinformed -- or they 're trying to misinform you .
do n't let them hoodwink you .
they 're trying to hoodwink you .
so , look , ohio , that 's the proposal .
and i believe congress owes the american people a final up or down vote .
we need an up or down vote .
it 's time to vote .
and now as we get closer to the vote , there is a lot of hand - wringing going on .
we hear a lot of people in washington talking about politics , talking about what this means in november , talking about the poll numbers for democrats and republicans .
we need courage .
did you hear what somebody just said ?
that 's what we need .
that 's why i came here today .
we need courage .
we need courage .
you know , in the end , this debate is about far more than politics .
it comes down to what kind of country do we want to be .
it 's about the millions of lives that would be touched and , in some cases , saved , by making health insurance more secure and more affordable .
it 's about a woman who 's lying in a hospital bed who just wants to be able to pay for the care she needs .
and the truth is , what 's at stake in this debate , it 's not just our ability to solve this problem ; it 's about our ability to solve any problem .
i was talking to dennis kucinich on the way over here about this .
i said , you know what ?
it 's been such a long time since we made government on the side of ordinary working folks --   -- where we did something for them that relieved some of their struggles ; that made folks who work hard every day and are doing the right thing and who are looking out for the families and contributing to their communities , that just gave them a little bit of a better chance to live out their american dream .
the american people want to know if it 's still possible for washington to look out for these interests , for their future .
so what they 're looking for is some courage .
they 're waiting for us to act .
they 're waiting for us to lead .
they do n't want us putting our finger out to the wind .
they do n't want us reading polls .
they want us to look and see what is the best thing for america , and then do what 's right .
and as long as i hold this office , i intend to provide that leadership .
and i know these members of congress are going to provide that leadership .
i do n't know about the politics , but i know what 's the right thing to do .
and so i 'm calling on congress to pass these reforms -- and i 'm going to sign them into law .
i want some courage .
i want us to do the right thing , ohio .
and with your help , we 're going to make it happen .
god bless you , and god bless the united states of america .

thank you .
thank you .
thank you very much .
thank you .
please , have a seat .
thank you very much .
i want to begin by thanking hillary clinton , who has traveled so much these last six months that she is approaching a new landmark -- one million frequent flyer miles .
i count on hillary every single day , and i believe that she will go down as one of the finest secretaries of state in our nation 's history .
the state department is a fitting venue to mark a new chapter in american diplomacy .
for six months , we have witnessed an extraordinary change taking place in the middle east and north africa .
square by square , town by town , country by country , the people have risen up to demand their basic human rights .
two leaders have stepped aside .
more may follow .
and though these countries may be a great distance from our shores , we know that our own future is bound to this region by the forces of economics and security , by history and by faith .
today , i want to talk about this change -- the forces that are driving it and how we can respond in a way that advances our values and strengthens our security .
now , already , we 've done much to shift our foreign policy following a decade defined by two costly conflicts .
after years of war in iraq , we 've removed 100,000 american troops and ended our combat mission there .
in afghanistan , we 've broken the taliban 's momentum , and this july we will begin to bring our troops home and continue a transition to afghan lead .
and after years of war against al qaeda and its affiliates , we have dealt al qaeda a huge blow by killing its leader , osama bin laden .
bin laden was no martyr .
he was a mass murderer who offered a message of hate -- - an insistence that muslims had to take up arms against the west , and that violence against men , women and children was the only path to change .
he rejected democracy and individual rights for muslims in favor of violent extremism ; his agenda focused on what he could destroy - -- not what he could build .
bin laden and his murderous vision won some adherents .
but even before his death , al qaeda was losing its struggle for relevance , as the overwhelming majority of people saw that the slaughter of innocents did not answer their cries for a better life .
by the time we found bin laden , al qaeda 's agenda had come to be seen by the vast majority of the region as a dead end , and the people of the middle east and north africa had taken their future into their own hands .
that story of self - determination began six months ago in tunisia .
on december 17th , a young vendor named mohammed bouazizi was devastated when a police officer confiscated his cart .
this was not unique .
it 's the same kind of humiliation that takes place every day in many parts of the world - -- the relentless tyranny of governments that deny their citizens dignity .
only this time , something different happened .
after local officials refused to hear his complaints , this young man , who had never been particularly active in politics , went to the headquarters of the provincial government , doused himself in fuel , and lit himself on fire .
there are times in the course of history when the actions of ordinary citizens spark movements for change because they speak to a longing for freedom that has been building up for years .
in america , think of the defiance of those patriots in boston who refused to pay taxes to a king , or the dignity of rosa parks as she sat courageously in her seat .
so it was in tunisia , as that vendor 's act of desperation tapped into the frustration felt throughout the country .
hundreds of protesters took to the streets , then thousands .
and in the face of batons and sometimes bullets , they refused to go home -- - day after day , week after week -- until a dictator of more than two decades finally left power .
the story of this revolution , and the ones that followed , should not have come as a surprise .
the nations of the middle east and north africa won their independence long ago , but in too many places their people did not .
in too many countries , power has been concentrated in the hands of a few .
in too many countries , a citizen like that young vendor had nowhere to turn - -- no honest judiciary to hear his case ; no independent media to give him voice ; no credible political party to represent his views ; no free and fair election where he could choose his leader .
and this lack of self - determination -- - the chance to make your life what you will -- - has applied to the region 's economy as well .
yes , some nations are blessed with wealth in oil and gas , and that has led to pockets of prosperity .
but in a global economy based on knowledge , based on innovation , no development strategy can be based solely upon what comes out of the ground .
nor can people reach their potential when you can not start a business without paying a bribe .
in the face of these challenges , too many leaders in the region tried to direct their people 's grievances elsewhere .
the west was blamed as the source of all ills , a half - century after the end of colonialism .
antagonism toward israel became the only acceptable outlet for political expression .
divisions of tribe , ethnicity and religious sect were manipulated as a means of holding on to power , or taking it away from somebody else .
but the events of the past six months show us that strategies of repression and strategies of diversion will not work anymore .
satellite television and the internet provide a window into the wider world - -- a world of astonishing progress in places like india and indonesia and brazil .
cell phones and social networks allow young people to connect and organize like never before .
and so a new generation has emerged .
and their voices tell us that change can not be denied .
in cairo , we heard the voice of the young mother who said , " it 's like i can finally breathe fresh air for the first time . "
in sanaa , we heard the students who chanted , " the night must come to an end . "
in benghazi , we heard the engineer who said , " our words are free now .
it 's a feeling you ca n't explain . "
in damascus , we heard the young man who said , " after the first yelling , the first shout , you feel dignity . "
those shouts of human dignity are being heard across the region .
and through the moral force of nonviolence , the people of the region have achieved more change in six months than terrorists have accomplished in decades .
of course , change of this magnitude does not come easily .
in our day and age - -- a time of 24-hour news cycles and constant communication -- - people expect the transformation of the region to be resolved in a matter of weeks .
but it will be years before this story reaches its end .
along the way , there will be good days and there will bad days .
in some places , change will be swift ; in others , gradual .
and as we 've already seen , calls for change may give way , in some cases , to fierce contests for power .
the question before us is what role america will play as this story unfolds .
for decades , the united states has pursued a set of core interests in the region : countering terrorism and stopping the spread of nuclear weapons ; securing the free flow of commerce and safe - guarding the security of the region ; standing up for israel 's security and pursuing arab - israeli peace .
we will continue to do these things , with the firm belief that america 's interests are not hostile to people 's hopes ; they 're essential to them .
we believe that no one benefits from a nuclear arms race in the region , or al qaeda 's brutal attacks .
we believe people everywhere would see their economies crippled by a cut - off in energy supplies .
as we did in the gulf war , we will not tolerate aggression across borders , and we will keep our commitments to friends and partners .
yet we must acknowledge that a strategy based solely upon the narrow pursuit of these interests will not fill an empty stomach or allow someone to speak their mind .
moreover , failure to speak to the broader aspirations of ordinary people will only feed the suspicion that has festered for years that the united states pursues our interests at their expense .
given that this mistrust runs both ways -- - as americans have been seared by hostage - taking and violent rhetoric and terrorist attacks that have killed thousands of our citizens - -- a failure to change our approach threatens a deepening spiral of division between the united states and the arab world .
and that 's why , two years ago in cairo , i began to broaden our engagement based upon mutual interests and mutual respect .
i believed then - -- and i believe now - -- that we have a stake not just in the stability of nations , but in the self - determination of individuals .
the status quo is not sustainable .
societies held together by fear and repression may offer the illusion of stability for a time , but they are built upon fault lines that will eventually tear asunder .
so we face a historic opportunity .
we have the chance to show that america values the dignity of the street vendor in tunisia more than the raw power of the dictator .
there must be no doubt that the united states of america welcomes change that advances self - determination and opportunity .
yes , there will be perils that accompany this moment of promise .
but after decades of accepting the world as it is in the region , we have a chance to pursue the world as it should be .
of course , as we do , we must proceed with a sense of humility .
it 's not america that put people into the streets of tunis or cairo - -- it was the people themselves who launched these movements , and it 's the people themselves that must ultimately determine their outcome .
not every country will follow our particular form of representative democracy , and there will be times when our short - term interests do n't align perfectly with our long - term vision for the region .
but we can , and we will , speak out for a set of core principles -- - principles that have guided our response to the events over the past six months : 
 the united states opposes the use of violence and repression against the people of the region .
the united states supports a set of universal rights .
and these rights include free speech , the freedom of peaceful assembly , the freedom of religion , equality for men and women under the rule of law , and the right to choose your own leaders - -- whether you live in baghdad or damascus , sanaa or tehran .
and we support political and economic reform in the middle east and north africa that can meet the legitimate aspirations of ordinary people throughout the region .
our support for these principles is not a secondary interest .
today i want to make it clear that it is a top priority that must be translated into concrete actions , and supported by all of the diplomatic , economic and strategic tools at our disposal .
let me be specific .
first , it will be the policy of the united states to promote reform across the region , and to support transitions to democracy .
that effort begins in egypt and tunisia , where the stakes are high - -- as tunisia was at the vanguard of this democratic wave , and egypt is both a longstanding partner and the arab world 's largest nation .
both nations can set a strong example through free and fair elections , a vibrant civil society , accountable and effective democratic institutions , and responsible regional leadership .
but our support must also extend to nations where transitions have yet to take place .
unfortunately , in too many countries , calls for change have thus far been answered by violence .
the most extreme example is libya , where muammar qaddafi launched a war against his own people , promising to hunt them down like rats .
as i said when the united states joined an international coalition to intervene , we can not prevent every injustice perpetrated by a regime against its people , and we have learned from our experience in iraq just how costly and difficult it is to try to impose regime change by force - -- no matter how well - intentioned it may be .
but in libya , we saw the prospect of imminent massacre , we had a mandate for action , and heard the libyan people 's call for help .
had we not acted along with our nato allies and regional coalition partners , thousands would have been killed .
the message would have been clear : keep power by killing as many people as it takes .
now , time is working against qaddafi .
he does not have control over his country .
the opposition has organized a legitimate and credible interim council .
and when qaddafi inevitably leaves or is forced from power , decades of provocation will come to an end , and the transition to a democratic libya can proceed .
while libya has faced violence on the greatest scale , it 's not the only place where leaders have turned to repression to remain in power .
most recently , the syrian regime has chosen the path of murder and the mass arrests of its citizens .
the united states has condemned these actions , and working with the international community we have stepped up our sanctions on the syrian regime -- - including sanctions announced yesterday on president assad and those around him .
the syrian people have shown their courage in demanding a transition to democracy .
president assad now has a choice : he can lead that transition , or get out of the way .
the syrian government must stop shooting demonstrators and allow peaceful protests .
it must release political prisoners and stop unjust arrests .
it must allow human rights monitors to have access to cities like dara'a ; and start a serious dialogue to advance a democratic transition .
otherwise , president assad and his regime will continue to be challenged from within and will continue to be isolated abroad .
so far , syria has followed its iranian ally , seeking assistance from tehran in the tactics of suppression .
and this speaks to the hypocrisy of the iranian regime , which says it stand for the rights of protesters abroad , yet represses its own people at home .
let 's remember that the first peaceful protests in the region were in the streets of tehran , where the government brutalized women and men , and threw innocent people into jail .
we still hear the chants echo from the rooftops of tehran .
the image of a young woman dying in the streets is still seared in our memory .
and we will continue to insist that the iranian people deserve their universal rights , and a government that does not smother their aspirations .
now , our opposition to iran 's intolerance and iran 's repressive measures , as well as its illicit nuclear program and its support of terror , is well known .
but if america is to be credible , we must acknowledge that at times our friends in the region have not all reacted to the demands for consistent change -- with change that 's consistent with the principles that i 've outlined today .
that 's true in yemen , where president saleh needs to follow through on his commitment to transfer power .
and that 's true today in bahrain .
bahrain is a longstanding partner , and we are committed to its security .
we recognize that iran has tried to take advantage of the turmoil there , and that the bahraini government has a legitimate interest in the rule of law .
nevertheless , we have insisted both publicly and privately that mass arrests and brute force are at odds with the universal rights of bahrain 's citizens , and we will -- and such steps will not make legitimate calls for reform go away .
the only way forward is for the government and opposition to engage in a dialogue , and you ca n't have a real dialogue when parts of the peaceful opposition are in jail .
the government must create the conditions for dialogue , and the opposition must participate to forge a just future for all bahrainis .
indeed , one of the broader lessons to be drawn from this period is that sectarian divides need not lead to conflict .
in iraq , we see the promise of a multiethnic , multisectarian democracy .
the iraqi people have rejected the perils of political violence in favor of a democratic process , even as they 've taken full responsibility for their own security .
of course , like all new democracies , they will face setbacks .
but iraq is poised to play a key role in the region if it continues its peaceful progress .
and as they do , we will be proud to stand with them as a steadfast partner .
so in the months ahead , america must use all our influence to encourage reform in the region .
even as we acknowledge that each country is different , we need to speak honestly about the principles that we believe in , with friend and foe alike .
our message is simple : if you take the risks that reform entails , you will have the full support of the united states .
we must also build on our efforts to broaden our engagement beyond elites , so that we reach the people who will shape the future - -- particularly young people .
we will continue to make good on the commitments that i made in cairo - -- to build networks of entrepreneurs and expand exchanges in education , to foster cooperation in science and technology , and combat disease .
across the region , we intend to provide assistance to civil society , including those that may not be officially sanctioned , and who speak uncomfortable truths .
and we will use the technology to connect with - -- and listen to -- - the voices of the people .
for the fact is , real reform does not come at the ballot box alone .
through our efforts we must support those basic rights to speak your mind and access information .
we will support open access to the internet , and the right of journalists to be heard - -- whether it 's a big news organization or a lone blogger .
in the 21st century , information is power , the truth can not be hidden , and the legitimacy of governments will ultimately depend on active and informed citizens .
such open discourse is important even if what is said does not square with our worldview .
let me be clear , america respects the right of all peaceful and law - abiding voices to be heard , even if we disagree with them .
and sometimes we profoundly disagree with them .
we look forward to working with all who embrace genuine and inclusive democracy .
what we will oppose is an attempt by any group to restrict the rights of others , and to hold power through coercion and not consent .
because democracy depends not only on elections , but also strong and accountable institutions , and the respect for the rights of minorities .
such tolerance is particularly important when it comes to religion .
in tahrir square , we heard egyptians from all walks of life chant , " muslims , christians , we are one . "
america will work to see that this spirit prevails - -- that all faiths are respected , and that bridges are built among them .
in a region that was the birthplace of three world religions , intolerance can lead only to suffering and stagnation .
and for this season of change to succeed , coptic christians must have the right to worship freely in cairo , just as shia must never have their mosques destroyed in bahrain .
what is true for religious minorities is also true when it comes to the rights of women .
history shows that countries are more prosperous and more peaceful when women are empowered .
and that 's why we will continue to insist that universal rights apply to women as well as men - -- by focusing assistance on child and maternal health ; by helping women to teach , or start a business ; by standing up for the right of women to have their voices heard , and to run for office .
the region will never reach its full potential when more than half of its population is prevented from achieving their full potential .
now , even as we promote political reform , even as we promote human rights in the region , our efforts ca n't stop there .
so the second way that we must support positive change in the region is through our efforts to advance economic development for nations that are transitioning to democracy .
after all , politics alone has not put protesters into the streets .
the tipping point for so many people is the more constant concern of putting food on the table and providing for a family .
too many people in the region wake up with few expectations other than making it through the day , perhaps hoping that their luck will change .
throughout the region , many young people have a solid education , but closed economies leave them unable to find a job .
entrepreneurs are brimming with ideas , but corruption leaves them unable to profit from those ideas .
the greatest untapped resource in the middle east and north africa is the talent of its people .
in the recent protests , we see that talent on display , as people harness technology to move the world .
it 's no coincidence that one of the leaders of tahrir square was an executive for google .
that energy now needs to be channeled , in country after country , so that economic growth can solidify the accomplishments of the street .
for just as democratic revolutions can be triggered by a lack of individual opportunity , successful democratic transitions depend upon an expansion of growth and broad - based prosperity .
so , drawing from what we 've learned around the world , we think it 's important to focus on trade , not just aid ; on investment , not just assistance .
the goal must be a model in which protectionism gives way to openness , the reigns of commerce pass from the few to the many , and the economy generates jobs for the young .
america 's support for democracy will therefore be based on ensuring financial stability , promoting reform , and integrating competitive markets with each other and the global economy .
and we 're going to start with tunisia and egypt .
first , we 've asked the world bank and the international monetary fund to present a plan at next week 's g8 summit for what needs to be done to stabilize and modernize the economies of tunisia and egypt .
together , we must help them recover from the disruptions of their democratic upheaval , and support the governments that will be elected later this year .
and we are urging other countries to help egypt and tunisia meet its near - term financial needs .
second , we do not want a democratic egypt to be saddled by the debts of its past .
so we will relieve a democratic egypt of up to $ 1 billion in debt , and work with our egyptian partners to invest these resources to foster growth and entrepreneurship .
we will help egypt regain access to markets by guaranteeing $ 1 billion in borrowing that is needed to finance infrastructure and job creation .
and we will help newly democratic governments recover assets that were stolen .
third , we 're working with congress to create enterprise funds to invest in tunisia and egypt .
and these will be modeled on funds that supported the transitions in eastern europe after the fall of the berlin wall .
opic will soon launch a $ 2 billion facility to support private investment across the region .
and we will work with the allies to refocus the european bank for reconstruction and development so that it provides the same support for democratic transitions and economic modernization in the middle east and north africa as it has in europe .
fourth , the united states will launch a comprehensive trade and investment partnership initiative in the middle east and north africa .
if you take out oil exports , this entire region of over 400 million people exports roughly the same amount as switzerland .
so we will work with the eu to facilitate more trade within the region , build on existing agreements to promote integration with u. s. and european markets , and open the door for those countries who adopt high standards of reform and trade liberalization to construct a regional trade arrangement .
and just as eu membership served as an incentive for reform in europe , so should the vision of a modern and prosperous economy create a powerful force for reform in the middle east and north africa .
prosperity also requires tearing down walls that stand in the way of progress - -- the corruption of elites who steal from their people ; the red tape that stops an idea from becoming a business ; the patronage that distributes wealth based on tribe or sect .
we will help governments meet international obligations , and invest efforts at anti - corruption -- by working with parliamentarians who are developing reforms , and activists who use technology to increase transparency and hold government accountable .
politics and human rights ; economic reform .
let me conclude by talking about another cornerstone of our approach to the region , and that relates to the pursuit of peace .
for decades , the conflict between israelis and arabs has cast a shadow over the region .
for israelis , it has meant living with the fear that their children could be blown up on a bus or by rockets fired at their homes , as well as the pain of knowing that other children in the region are taught to hate them .
for palestinians , it has meant suffering the humiliation of occupation , and never living in a nation of their own .
moreover , this conflict has come with a larger cost to the middle east , as it impedes partnerships that could bring greater security and prosperity and empowerment to ordinary people .
for over two years , my administration has worked with the parties and the international community to end this conflict , building on decades of work by previous administrations .
yet expectations have gone unmet .
israeli settlement activity continues .
palestinians have walked away from talks .
the world looks at a conflict that has grinded on and on and on , and sees nothing but stalemate .
indeed , there are those who argue that with all the change and uncertainty in the region , it is simply not possible to move forward now .
i disagree .
at a time when the people of the middle east and north africa are casting off the burdens of the past , the drive for a lasting peace that ends the conflict and resolves all claims is more urgent than ever .
that 's certainly true for the two parties involved .
for the palestinians , efforts to delegitimize israel will end in failure .
symbolic actions to isolate israel at the united nations in september wo n't create an independent state .
palestinian leaders will not achieve peace or prosperity if hamas insists on a path of terror and rejection .
and palestinians will never realize their independence by denying the right of israel to exist .
as for israel , our friendship is rooted deeply in a shared history and shared values .
our commitment to israel 's security is unshakeable .
and we will stand against attempts to single it out for criticism in international forums .
but precisely because of our friendship , it 's important that we tell the truth : the status quo is unsustainable , and israel too must act boldly to advance a lasting peace .
the fact is , a growing number of palestinians live west of the jordan river .
technology will make it harder for israel to defend itself .
a region undergoing profound change will lead to populism in which millions of people - -- not just one or two leaders -- must believe peace is possible .
the international community is tired of an endless process that never produces an outcome .
the dream of a jewish and democratic state can not be fulfilled with permanent occupation .
now , ultimately , it is up to the israelis and palestinians to take action .
no peace can be imposed upon them -- not by the united states ; not by anybody else .
but endless delay wo n't make the problem go away .
what america and the international community can do is to state frankly what everyone knows -- a lasting peace will involve two states for two peoples : israel as a jewish state and the homeland for the jewish people , and the state of palestine as the homeland for the palestinian people , each state enjoying self - determination , mutual recognition , and peace .
so while the core issues of the conflict must be negotiated , the basis of those negotiations is clear : a viable palestine , a secure israel .
the united states believes that negotiations should result in two states , with permanent palestinian borders with israel , jordan , and egypt , and permanent israeli borders with palestine .
we believe the borders of israel and palestine should be based on the 1967 lines with mutually agreed swaps , so that secure and recognized borders are established for both states .
the palestinian people must have the right to govern themselves , and reach their full potential , in a sovereign and contiguous state .
as for security , every state has the right to self - defense , and israel must be able to defend itself - -- by itself - -- against any threat .
provisions must also be robust enough to prevent a resurgence of terrorism , to stop the infiltration of weapons , and to provide effective border security .
the full and phased withdrawal of israeli military forces should be coordinated with the assumption of palestinian security responsibility in a sovereign , non - militarized state .
and the duration of this transition period must be agreed , and the effectiveness of security arrangements must be demonstrated .
these principles provide a foundation for negotiations .
palestinians should know the territorial outlines of their state ; israelis should know that their basic security concerns will be met .
i 'm aware that these steps alone will not resolve the conflict , because two wrenching and emotional issues will remain : the future of jerusalem , and the fate of palestinian refugees .
but moving forward now on the basis of territory and security provides a foundation to resolve those two issues in a way that is just and fair , and that respects the rights and aspirations of both israelis and palestinians .
now , let me say this : recognizing that negotiations need to begin with the issues of territory and security does not mean that it will be easy to come back to the table .
in particular , the recent announcement of an agreement between fatah and hamas raises profound and legitimate questions for israel : how can one negotiate with a party that has shown itself unwilling to recognize your right to exist ?
and in the weeks and months to come , palestinian leaders will have to provide a credible answer to that question .
meanwhile , the united states , our quartet partners , and the arab states will need to continue every effort to get beyond the current impasse .
i recognize how hard this will be .
suspicion and hostility has been passed on for generations , and at times it has hardened .
but i 'm convinced that the majority of israelis and palestinians would rather look to the future than be trapped in the past .
we see that spirit in the israeli father whose son was killed by hamas , who helped start an organization that brought together israelis and palestinians who had lost loved ones .
that father said , " i gradually realized that the only hope for progress was to recognize the face of the conflict . "
we see it in the actions of a palestinian who lost three daughters to israeli shells in gaza . "
i have the right to feel angry , " he said . "
so many people were expecting me to hate .
my answer to them is i shall not hate .
let us hope , " he said , " for tomorrow . "
that is the choice that must be made - -- not simply in the israeli - palestinian conflict , but across the entire region - -- a choice between hate and hope ; between the shackles of the past and the promise of the future .
it 's a choice that must be made by leaders and by the people , and it 's a choice that will define the future of a region that served as the cradle of civilization and a crucible of strife .
for all the challenges that lie ahead , we see many reasons to be hopeful .
in egypt , we see it in the efforts of young people who led protests .
in syria , we see it in the courage of those who brave bullets while chanting , " peaceful , peaceful . "
in benghazi , a city threatened with destruction , we see it in the courthouse square where people gather to celebrate the freedoms that they had never known .
across the region , those rights that we take for granted are being claimed with joy by those who are prying loose the grip of an iron fist .
for the american people , the scenes of upheaval in the region may be unsettling , but the forces driving it are not unfamiliar .
our own nation was founded through a rebellion against an empire .
our people fought a painful civil war that extended freedom and dignity to those who were enslaved .
and i would not be standing here today unless past generations turned to the moral force of nonviolence as a way to perfect our union -- - organizing , marching , protesting peacefully together to make real those words that declared our nation : " we hold these truths to be self - evident , that all men are created equal . "
those words must guide our response to the change that is transforming the middle east and north africa - -- words which tell us that repression will fail , and that tyrants will fall , and that every man and woman is endowed with certain inalienable rights .
it will not be easy .
there 's no straight line to progress , and hardship always accompanies a season of hope .
but the united states of america was founded on the belief that people should govern themselves .
and now we can not hesitate to stand squarely on the side of those who are reaching for their rights , knowing that their success will bring about a world that is more peaceful , more stable , and more just .
thank you very much , everybody .
thank you .

good evening .
to the united states corps of cadets , to the men and women of our armed services , and to my fellow americans : i want to speak to you tonight about our effort in afghanistan -- the nature of our commitment there , the scope of our interests , and the strategy that my administration will pursue to bring this war to a successful conclusion .
it 's an extraordinary honor for me to do so here at west point -- where so many men and women have prepared to stand up for our security , and to represent what is finest about our country .
to address these important issues , it 's important to recall why america and our allies were compelled to fight a war in afghanistan in the first place .
we did not ask for this fight .
on september 11 , 2001 , 19 men hijacked four airplanes and used them to murder nearly 3,000 people .
they struck at our military and economic nerve centers .
they took the lives of innocent men , women , and children without regard to their faith or race or station .
were it not for the heroic actions of passengers onboard one of those flights , they could have also struck at one of the great symbols of our democracy in washington , and killed many more .
as we know , these men belonged to al qaeda -- a group of extremists who have distorted and defiled islam , one of the world 's great religions , to justify the slaughter of innocents .
al qaeda 's base of operations was in afghanistan , where they were harbored by the taliban -- a ruthless , repressive and radical movement that seized control of that country after it was ravaged by years of soviet occupation and civil war , and after the attention of america and our friends had turned elsewhere .
just days after 9/11 , congress authorized the use of force against al qaeda and those who harbored them -- an authorization that continues to this day .
the vote in the senate was 98 to nothing .
the vote in the house was 420 to 1 .
for the first time in its history , the north atlantic treaty organization invoked article 5 -- the commitment that says an attack on one member nation is an attack on all .
and the united nations security council endorsed the use of all necessary steps to respond to the 9/11 attacks .
america , our allies and the world were acting as one to destroy al qaeda 's terrorist network and to protect our common security .
under the banner of this domestic unity and international legitimacy -- and only after the taliban refused to turn over osama bin laden -- we sent our troops into afghanistan .
within a matter of months , al qaeda was scattered and many of its operatives were killed .
the taliban was driven from power and pushed back on its heels .
a place that had known decades of fear now had reason to hope .
at a conference convened by the u. n. , a provisional government was established under president hamid karzai .
and an international security assistance force was established to help bring a lasting peace to a war - torn country .
then , in early 2003 , the decision was made to wage a second war , in iraq .
the wrenching debate over the iraq war is well - known and need not be repeated here .
it 's enough to say that for the next six years , the iraq war drew the dominant share of our troops , our resources , our diplomacy , and our national attention -- and that the decision to go into iraq caused substantial rifts between america and much of the world .
today , after extraordinary costs , we are bringing the iraq war to a responsible end .
we will remove our combat brigades from iraq by the end of next summer , and all of our troops by the end of 2011 .
that we are doing so is a testament to the character of the men and women in uniform .
thanks to their courage , grit and perseverance , we have given iraqis a chance to shape their future , and we are successfully leaving iraq to its people .
but while we 've achieved hard - earned milestones in iraq , the situation in afghanistan has deteriorated .
after escaping across the border into pakistan in 2001 and 2002 , al qaeda 's leadership established a safe haven there .
although a legitimate government was elected by the afghan people , it 's been hampered by corruption , the drug trade , an under - developed economy , and insufficient security forces .
over the last several years , the taliban has maintained common cause with al qaeda , as they both seek an overthrow of the afghan government .
gradually , the taliban has begun to control additional swaths of territory in afghanistan , while engaging in increasingly brazen and devastating attacks of terrorism against the pakistani people .
now , throughout this period , our troop levels in afghanistan remained a fraction of what they were in iraq .
when i took office , we had just over 32,000 americans serving in afghanistan , compared to 160,000 in iraq at the peak of the war .
commanders in afghanistan repeatedly asked for support to deal with the reemergence of the taliban , but these reinforcements did not arrive .
and that 's why , shortly after taking office , i approved a longstanding request for more troops .
after consultations with our allies , i then announced a strategy recognizing the fundamental connection between our war effort in afghanistan and the extremist safe havens in pakistan .
i set a goal that was narrowly defined as disrupting , dismantling , and defeating al qaeda and its extremist allies , and pledged to better coordinate our military and civilian efforts .
since then , we 've made progress on some important objectives .
high - ranking al qaeda and taliban leaders have been killed , and we 've stepped up the pressure on al qaeda worldwide .
in pakistan , that nation 's army has gone on its largest offensive in years .
in afghanistan , we and our allies prevented the taliban from stopping a presidential election , and -- although it was marred by fraud -- that election produced a government that is consistent with afghanistan 's laws and constitution .
yet huge challenges remain .
afghanistan is not lost , but for several years it has moved backwards .
there 's no imminent threat of the government being overthrown , but the taliban has gained momentum .
al qaeda has not reemerged in afghanistan in the same numbers as before 9/11 , but they retain their safe havens along the border .
and our forces lack the full support they need to effectively train and partner with afghan security forces and better secure the population .
our new commander in afghanistan -- general mcchrystal -- has reported that the security situation is more serious than he anticipated .
in short : the status quo is not sustainable .
as cadets , you volunteered for service during this time of danger .
some of you fought in afghanistan .
some of you will deploy there .
as your commander - in - chief , i owe you a mission that is clearly defined , and worthy of your service .
and that 's why , after the afghan voting was completed , i insisted on a thorough review of our strategy .
now , let me be clear : there has never been an option before me that called for troop deployments before 2010 , so there has been no delay or denial of resources necessary for the conduct of the war during this review period .
instead , the review has allowed me to ask the hard questions , and to explore all the different options , along with my national security team , our military and civilian leadership in afghanistan , and our key partners .
and given the stakes involved , i owed the american people -- and our troops -- no less .
this review is now complete .
and as commander - in - chief , i have determined that it is in our vital national interest to send an additional 30,000 u. s. troops to afghanistan .
after 18 months , our troops will begin to come home .
these are the resources that we need to seize the initiative , while building the afghan capacity that can allow for a responsible transition of our forces out of afghanistan .
i do not make this decision lightly .
i opposed the war in iraq precisely because i believe that we must exercise restraint in the use of military force , and always consider the long - term consequences of our actions .
we have been at war now for eight years , at enormous cost in lives and resources .
years of debate over iraq and terrorism have left our unity on national security issues in tatters , and created a highly polarized and partisan backdrop for this effort .
and having just experienced the worst economic crisis since the great depression , the american people are understandably focused on rebuilding our economy and putting people to work here at home .
most of all , i know that this decision asks even more of you -- a military that , along with your families , has already borne the heaviest of all burdens .
as president , i have signed a letter of condolence to the family of each american who gives their life in these wars .
i have read the letters from the parents and spouses of those who deployed .
i visited our courageous wounded warriors at walter reed .
i 've traveled to dover to meet the flag - draped caskets of 18 americans returning home to their final resting place .
i see firsthand the terrible wages of war .
if i did not think that the security of the united states and the safety of the american people were at stake in afghanistan , i would gladly order every single one of our troops home tomorrow .
so , no , i do not make this decision lightly .
i make this decision because i am convinced that our security is at stake in afghanistan and pakistan .
this is the epicenter of violent extremism practiced by al qaeda .
it is from here that we were attacked on 9/11 , and it is from here that new attacks are being plotted as i speak .
this is no idle danger ; no hypothetical threat .
in the last few months alone , we have apprehended extremists within our borders who were sent here from the border region of afghanistan and pakistan to commit new acts of terror .
and this danger will only grow if the region slides backwards , and al qaeda can operate with impunity .
we must keep the pressure on al qaeda , and to do that , we must increase the stability and capacity of our partners in the region .
of course , this burden is not ours alone to bear .
this is not just america 's war .
since 9/11 , al qaeda 's safe havens have been the source of attacks against london and amman and bali .
the people and governments of both afghanistan and pakistan are endangered .
and the stakes are even higher within a nuclear - armed pakistan , because we know that al qaeda and other extremists seek nuclear weapons , and we have every reason to believe that they would use them .
these facts compel us to act along with our friends and allies .
our overarching goal remains the same : to disrupt , dismantle , and defeat al qaeda in afghanistan and pakistan , and to prevent its capacity to threaten america and our allies in the future .
to meet that goal , we will pursue the following objectives within afghanistan .
we must deny al qaeda a safe haven .
we must reverse the taliban 's momentum and deny it the ability to overthrow the government .
and we must strengthen the capacity of afghanistan 's security forces and government so that they can take lead responsibility for afghanistan 's future .
we will meet these objectives in three ways .
first , we will pursue a military strategy that will break the taliban 's momentum and increase afghanistan 's capacity over the next 18 months .
the 30,000 additional troops that i 'm announcing tonight will deploy in the first part of 2010 -- the fastest possible pace -- so that they can target the insurgency and secure key population centers .
they 'll increase our ability to train competent afghan security forces , and to partner with them so that more afghans can get into the fight .
and they will help create the conditions for the united states to transfer responsibility to the afghans .
because this is an international effort , i 've asked that our commitment be joined by contributions from our allies .
some have already provided additional troops , and we 're confident that there will be further contributions in the days and weeks ahead .
our friends have fought and bled and died alongside us in afghanistan .
and now , we must come together to end this war successfully .
for what 's at stake is not simply a test of nato 's credibility -- what 's at stake is the security of our allies , and the common security of the world .
but taken together , these additional american and international troops will allow us to accelerate handing over responsibility to afghan forces , and allow us to begin the transfer of our forces out of afghanistan in july of 2011 .
just as we have done in iraq , we will execute this transition responsibly , taking into account conditions on the ground .
we 'll continue to advise and assist afghanistan 's security forces to ensure that they can succeed over the long haul .
but it will be clear to the afghan government -- and , more importantly , to the afghan people -- that they will ultimately be responsible for their own country .
second , we will work with our partners , the united nations , and the afghan people to pursue a more effective civilian strategy , so that the government can take advantage of improved security .
this effort must be based on performance .
the days of providing a blank check are over .
president karzai 's inauguration speech sent the right message about moving in a new direction .
and going forward , we will be clear about what we expect from those who receive our assistance .
we 'll support afghan ministries , governors , and local leaders that combat corruption and deliver for the people .
we expect those who are ineffective or corrupt to be held accountable .
and we will also focus our assistance in areas -- such as agriculture -- that can make an immediate impact in the lives of the afghan people .
the people of afghanistan have endured violence for decades .
they 've been confronted with occupation -- by the soviet union , and then by foreign al qaeda fighters who used afghan land for their own purposes .
so tonight , i want the afghan people to understand -- america seeks an end to this era of war and suffering .
we have no interest in occupying your country .
we will support efforts by the afghan government to open the door to those taliban who abandon violence and respect the human rights of their fellow citizens .
and we will seek a partnership with afghanistan grounded in mutual respect -- to isolate those who destroy ; to strengthen those who build ; to hasten the day when our troops will leave ; and to forge a lasting friendship in which america is your partner , and never your patron .
third , we will act with the full recognition that our success in afghanistan is inextricably linked to our partnership with pakistan .
we 're in afghanistan to prevent a cancer from once again spreading through that country .
but this same cancer has also taken root in the border region of pakistan .
that 's why we need a strategy that works on both sides of the border .
in the past , there have been those in pakistan who 've argued that the struggle against extremism is not their fight , and that pakistan is better off doing little or seeking accommodation with those who use violence .
but in recent years , as innocents have been killed from karachi to islamabad , it has become clear that it is the pakistani people who are the most endangered by extremism .
public opinion has turned .
the pakistani army has waged an offensive in swat and south waziristan .
and there is no doubt that the united states and pakistan share a common enemy .
in the past , we too often defined our relationship with pakistan narrowly .
those days are over .
moving forward , we are committed to a partnership with pakistan that is built on a foundation of mutual interest , mutual respect , and mutual trust .
we will strengthen pakistan 's capacity to target those groups that threaten our countries , and have made it clear that we can not tolerate a safe haven for terrorists whose location is known and whose intentions are clear .
america is also providing substantial resources to support pakistan 's democracy and development .
we are the largest international supporter for those pakistanis displaced by the fighting .
and going forward , the pakistan people must know america will remain a strong supporter of pakistan 's security and prosperity long after the guns have fallen silent , so that the great potential of its people can be unleashed .
these are the three core elements of our strategy : a military effort to create the conditions for a transition ; a civilian surge that reinforces positive action ; and an effective partnership with pakistan .
i recognize there are a range of concerns about our approach .
so let me briefly address a few of the more prominent arguments that i 've heard , and which i take very seriously .
first , there are those who suggest that afghanistan is another vietnam .
they argue that it can not be stabilized , and we 're better off cutting our losses and rapidly withdrawing .
i believe this argument depends on a false reading of history .
unlike vietnam , we are joined by a broad coalition of 43 nations that recognizes the legitimacy of our action .
unlike vietnam , we are not facing a broad - based popular insurgency .
and most importantly , unlike vietnam , the american people were viciously attacked from afghanistan , and remain a target for those same extremists who are plotting along its border .
to abandon this area now -- and to rely only on efforts against al qaeda from a distance -- would significantly hamper our ability to keep the pressure on al qaeda , and create an unacceptable risk of additional attacks on our homeland and our allies .
second , there are those who acknowledge that we ca n't leave afghanistan in its current state , but suggest that we go forward with the troops that we already have .
but this would simply maintain a status quo in which we muddle through , and permit a slow deterioration of conditions there .
it would ultimately prove more costly and prolong our stay in afghanistan , because we would never be able to generate the conditions needed to train afghan security forces and give them the space to take over .
finally , there are those who oppose identifying a time frame for our transition to afghan responsibility .
indeed , some call for a more dramatic and open - ended escalation of our war effort -- one that would commit us to a nation - building project of up to a decade .
i reject this course because it sets goals that are beyond what can be achieved at a reasonable cost , and what we need to achieve to secure our interests .
furthermore , the absence of a time frame for transition would deny us any sense of urgency in working with the afghan government .
it must be clear that afghans will have to take responsibility for their security , and that america has no interest in fighting an endless war in afghanistan .
as president , i refuse to set goals that go beyond our responsibility , our means , or our interests .
and i must weigh all of the challenges that our nation faces .
i do n't have the luxury of committing to just one .
indeed , i 'm mindful of the words of president eisenhower , who -- in discussing our national security -- said , " each proposal must be weighed in the light of a broader consideration : the need to maintain balance in and among national programs . "
over the past several years , we have lost that balance .
we 've failed to appreciate the connection between our national security and our economy .
in the wake of an economic crisis , too many of our neighbors and friends are out of work and struggle to pay the bills .
too many americans are worried about the future facing our children .
meanwhile , competition within the global economy has grown more fierce .
so we ca n't simply afford to ignore the price of these wars .
all told , by the time i took office the cost of the wars in iraq and afghanistan approached a trillion dollars .
going forward , i am committed to addressing these costs openly and honestly .
our new approach in afghanistan is likely to cost us roughly $ 30 billion for the military this year , and i 'll work closely with congress to address these costs as we work to bring down our deficit .
but as we end the war in iraq and transition to afghan responsibility , we must rebuild our strength here at home .
our prosperity provides a foundation for our power .
it pays for our military .
it underwrites our diplomacy .
it taps the potential of our people , and allows investment in new industry .
and it will allow us to compete in this century as successfully as we did in the last .
that 's why our troop commitment in afghanistan can not be open - ended -- because the nation that i 'm most interested in building is our own .
now , let me be clear : none of this will be easy .
the struggle against violent extremism will not be finished quickly , and it extends well beyond afghanistan and pakistan .
it will be an enduring test of our free society , and our leadership in the world .
and unlike the great power conflicts and clear lines of division that defined the 20th century , our effort will involve disorderly regions , failed states , diffuse enemies .
so as a result , america will have to show our strength in the way that we end wars and prevent conflict -- not just how we wage wars .
we 'll have to be nimble and precise in our use of military power .
where al qaeda and its allies attempt to establish a foothold -- whether in somalia or yemen or elsewhere -- they must be confronted by growing pressure and strong partnerships .
and we ca n't count on military might alone .
we have to invest in our homeland security , because we ca n't capture or kill every violent extremist abroad .
we have to improve and better coordinate our intelligence , so that we stay one step ahead of shadowy networks .
we will have to take away the tools of mass destruction .
and that 's why i 've made it a central pillar of my foreign policy to secure loose nuclear materials from terrorists , to stop the spread of nuclear weapons , and to pursue the goal of a world without them -- because every nation must understand that true security will never come from an endless race for ever more destructive weapons ; true security will come for those who reject them .
we 'll have to use diplomacy , because no one nation can meet the challenges of an interconnected world acting alone .
i 've spent this year renewing our alliances and forging new partnerships .
and we have forged a new beginning between america and the muslim world -- one that recognizes our mutual interest in breaking a cycle of conflict , and that promises a future in which those who kill innocents are isolated by those who stand up for peace and prosperity and human dignity .
and finally , we must draw on the strength of our values -- for the challenges that we face may have changed , but the things that we believe in must not .
that 's why we must promote our values by living them at home -- which is why i have prohibited torture and will close the prison at guantanamo bay .
and we must make it clear to every man , woman and child around the world who lives under the dark cloud of tyranny that america will speak out on behalf of their human rights , and tend to the light of freedom and justice and opportunity and respect for the dignity of all peoples .
that is who we are .
that is the source , the moral source , of america 's authority .
since the days of franklin roosevelt , and the service and sacrifice of our grandparents and great - grandparents , our country has borne a special burden in global affairs .
we have spilled american blood in many countries on multiple continents .
we have spent our revenue to help others rebuild from rubble and develop their own economies .
we have joined with others to develop an architecture of institutions -- from the united nations to nato to the world bank -- that provide for the common security and prosperity of human beings .
we have not always been thanked for these efforts , and we have at times made mistakes .
but more than any other nation , the united states of america has underwritten global security for over six decades -- a time that , for all its problems , has seen walls come down , and markets open , and billions lifted from poverty , unparalleled scientific progress and advancing frontiers of human liberty .
for unlike the great powers of old , we have not sought world domination .
our union was founded in resistance to oppression .
we do not seek to occupy other nations .
we will not claim another nation 's resources or target other peoples because their faith or ethnicity is different from ours .
what we have fought for -- what we continue to fight for -- is a better future for our children and grandchildren .
and we believe that their lives will be better if other peoples ' children and grandchildren can live in freedom and access opportunity .
as a country , we 're not as young -- and perhaps not as innocent -- as we were when roosevelt was president .
yet we are still heirs to a noble struggle for freedom .
and now we must summon all of our might and moral suasion to meet the challenges of a new age .
in the end , our security and leadership does not come solely from the strength of our arms .
it derives from our people -- from the workers and businesses who will rebuild our economy ; from the entrepreneurs and researchers who will pioneer new industries ; from the teachers that will educate our children , and the service of those who work in our communities at home ; from the diplomats and peace corps volunteers who spread hope abroad ; and from the men and women in uniform who are part of an unbroken line of sacrifice that has made government of the people , by the people , and for the people a reality on this earth .
this vast and diverse citizenry will not always agree on every issue -- nor should we .
but i also know that we , as a country , can not sustain our leadership , nor navigate the momentous challenges of our time , if we allow ourselves to be split asunder by the same rancor and cynicism and partisanship that has in recent times poisoned our national discourse .
it 's easy to forget that when this war began , we were united -- bound together by the fresh memory of a horrific attack , and by the determination to defend our homeland and the values we hold dear .
i refuse to accept the notion that we can not summon that unity again .
i believe with every fiber of my being that we -- as americans -- can still come together behind a common purpose .
for our values are not simply words written into parchment -- they are a creed that calls us together , and that has carried us through the darkest of storms as one nation , as one people .
america -- we are passing through a time of great trial .
and the message that we send in the midst of these storms must be clear : that our cause is just , our resolve unwavering .
we will go forward with the confidence that right makes might , and with the commitment to forge an america that is safer , a world that is more secure , and a future that represents not the deepest of fears but the highest of hopes .
thank you .
god bless you .
may god bless the united states of america .
thank you very much .
thank you .

well , you know i love you back .
it is a rare honor in this life to follow one of your heroes .
and john lewis is one of my heroes .
now , i have to imagine that when a younger john lewis woke up that morning 50 years ago and made his way to brown chapel , heroics were not on his mind .
a day like this was not on his mind .
young folks with bedrolls and backpacks were milling about .
veterans of the movement trained newcomers in the tactics of non - violence ; the right way to protect yourself when attacked .
a doctor described what tear gas does to the body , while marchers scribbled down instructions for contacting their loved ones .
the air was thick with doubt , anticipation and fear .
and they comforted themselves with the final verse of the final hymn they sung : 
 " no matter what may be the test , god will take care of you ; 
 lean , weary one , upon his breast , god will take care of you . "
and then , his knapsack stocked with an apple , a toothbrush , and a book on government -- all you need for a night behind bars -- john lewis led them out of the church on a mission to change america .
president and mrs. bush , governor bentley , mayor evans , sewell , reverend strong , members of congress , elected officials , foot soldiers , friends , fellow americans : 
 as john noted , there are places and moments in america where this nation 's destiny has been decided .
many are sites of war -- concord and lexington , appomattox , gettysburg .
others are sites that symbolize the daring of america 's character -- independence hall and seneca falls , kitty hawk and cape canaveral .
selma is such a place .
in one afternoon 50 years ago , so much of our turbulent history -- the stain of slavery and anguish of civil war ; the yoke of segregation and tyranny of jim crow ; the death of four little girls in birmingham ; and the dream of a baptist preacher -- all that history met on this bridge .
it was not a clash of armies , but a clash of wills ; a contest to determine the true meaning of america .
and because of men and women like john lewis , joseph lowery , hosea williams , amelia boynton , diane nash , ralph abernathy , c. t. vivian , andrew young , fred shuttlesworth , dr. martin luther king , jr. , and so many others , the idea of a just america and a fair america , an inclusive america , and a generous america -- that idea ultimately triumphed .
as is true across the landscape of american history , we can not examine this moment in isolation .
the march on selma was part of a broader campaign that spanned generations ; the leaders that day part of a long line of heroes .
we gather here to celebrate them .
we gather here to honor the courage of ordinary americans willing to endure billy clubs and the chastening rod ; tear gas and the trampling hoof ; men and women who despite the gush of blood and splintered bone would stay true to their north star and keep marching towards justice .
they did as scripture instructed : " rejoice in hope , be patient in tribulation , be constant in prayer . "
and in the days to come , they went back again and again .
when the trumpet call sounded for more to join , the people came -- - black and white , young and old , christian and jew , waving the american flag and singing the same anthems full of faith and hope .
a white newsman , bill plante , who covered the marches then and who is with us here today , quipped that the growing number of white people lowered the quality of the singing .
to those who marched , though , those old gospel songs must have never sounded so sweet .
in time , their chorus would well up and reach president johnson .
and he would send them protection , and speak to the nation , echoing their call for america and the world to hear : " we shall overcome . "
what enormous faith these men and women had .
faith in god , but also faith in america .
the americans who crossed this bridge , they were not physically imposing .
but they gave courage to millions .
they held no elected office .
but they led a nation .
they marched as americans who had endured hundreds of years of brutal violence , countless daily indignities -- - but they did n't seek special treatment , just the equal treatment promised to them almost a century before .
what they did here will reverberate through the ages .
not because the change they won was preordained ; not because their victory was complete ; but because they proved that nonviolent change is possible , that love and hope can conquer hate .
as we commemorate their achievement , we are well - served to remember that at the time of the marches , many in power condemned rather than praised them .
back then , they were called communists , or half - breeds , or outside agitators , sexual and moral degenerates , and worse -- - they were called everything but the name their parents gave them .
their faith was questioned .
their lives were threatened .
their patriotism challenged .
and yet , what could be more american than what happened in this place ?
what could more profoundly vindicate the idea of america than plain and humble people -- - unsung , the downtrodden , the dreamers not of high station , not born to wealth or privilege , not of one religious tradition but many , coming together to shape their country 's course ?
what greater expression of faith in the american experiment than this , what greater form of patriotism is there than the belief that america is not yet finished , that we are strong enough to be self - critical , that each successive generation can look upon our imperfections and decide that it is in our power to remake this nation to more closely align with our highest ideals ?
that 's why selma is not some outlier in the american experience .
that 's why it 's not a museum or a static monument to behold from a distance .
it is instead the manifestation of a creed written into our founding documents : " we the people&hellip;in order to form a more perfect union . " "
we hold these truths to be self - evident , that all men are created equal . "
these are not just words .
they 're a living thing , a call to action , a roadmap for citizenship and an insistence in the capacity of free men and women to shape our own destiny .
for founders like franklin and jefferson , for leaders like lincoln and fdr , the success of our experiment in self - government rested on engaging all of our citizens in this work .
and that 's what we celebrate here in selma .
that 's what this movement was all about , one leg in our long journey toward freedom .
the american instinct that led these young men and women to pick up the torch and cross this bridge , that 's the same instinct that moved patriots to choose revolution over tyranny .
it 's the same instinct that drew immigrants from across oceans and the rio grande ; the same instinct that led women to reach for the ballot , workers to organize against an unjust status quo ; the same instinct that led us to plant a flag at iwo jima and on the surface of the moon .
it 's the idea held by generations of citizens who believed that america is a constant work in progress ; who believed that loving this country requires more than singing its praises or avoiding uncomfortable truths .
it requires the occasional disruption , the willingness to speak out for what is right , to shake up the status quo .
that 's america .
that 's what makes us unique .
that 's what cements our reputation as a beacon of opportunity .
young people behind the iron curtain would see selma and eventually tear down that wall .
young people in soweto would hear bobby kennedy talk about ripples of hope and eventually banish the scourge of apartheid .
young people in burma went to prison rather than submit to military rule .
they saw what john lewis had done .
from the streets of tunis to the maidan in ukraine , this generation of young people can draw strength from this place , where the powerless could change the world 's greatest power and push their leaders to expand the boundaries of freedom .
they saw that idea made real right here in selma , alabama .
they saw that idea manifest itself here in america .
because of campaigns like this , a voting rights act was passed .
political and economic and social barriers came down .
and the change these men and women wrought is visible here today in the presence of african americans who run boardrooms , who sit on the bench , who serve in elected office from small towns to big cities ; from the congressional black caucus all the way to the oval office .
because of what they did , the doors of opportunity swung open not just for black folks , but for every american .
women marched through those doors .
latinos marched through those doors .
asian americans , gay americans , americans with disabilities -- they all came through those doors .
their endeavors gave the entire south the chance to rise again , not by reasserting the past , but by transcending the past .
what a glorious thing , dr. king might say .
and what a solemn debt we owe .
which leads us to ask , just how might we repay that debt ?
first and foremost , we have to recognize that one day 's commemoration , no matter how special , is not enough .
if selma taught us anything , it 's that our work is never done .
the american experiment in self - government gives work and purpose to each generation .
selma teaches us , as well , that action requires that we shed our cynicism .
for when it comes to the pursuit of justice , we can afford neither complacency nor despair .
just this week , i was asked whether i thought the department of justice 's ferguson report shows that , with respect to race , little has changed in this country .
and i understood the question ; the report 's narrative was sadly familiar .
it evoked the kind of abuse and disregard for citizens that spawned the civil rights movement .
but i rejected the notion that nothing 's changed .
what happened in ferguson may not be unique , but it 's no longer endemic .
it 's no longer sanctioned by law or by custom .
and before the civil rights movement , it most surely was .
we do a disservice to the cause of justice by intimating that bias and discrimination are immutable , that racial division is inherent to america .
if you think nothing 's changed in the past 50 years , ask somebody who lived through the selma or chicago or los angeles of the 1950s .
ask the female ceo who once might have been assigned to the secretarial pool if nothing 's changed .
ask your gay friend if it 's easier to be out and proud in america now than it was thirty years ago .
to deny this progress , this hard - won progress - -- our progress -- - would be to rob us of our own agency , our own capacity , our responsibility to do what we can to make america better .
of course , a more common mistake is to suggest that ferguson is an isolated incident ; that racism is banished ; that the work that drew men and women to selma is now complete , and that whatever racial tensions remain are a consequence of those seeking to play the " race card " for their own purposes .
we do n't need the ferguson report to know that 's not true .
we just need to open our eyes , and our ears , and our hearts to know that this nation 's racial history still casts its long shadow upon us .
we know the march is not yet over .
we know the race is not yet won .
we know that reaching that blessed destination where we are judged , all of us , by the content of our character requires admitting as much , facing up to the truth . "
we are capable of bearing a great burden , " james baldwin once wrote , " once we discover that the burden is reality and arrive where reality is . "
there 's nothing america ca n't handle if we actually look squarely at the problem .
and this is work for all americans , not just some .
not just whites .
not just blacks .
if we want to honor the courage of those who marched that day , then all of us are called to possess their moral imagination .
all of us will need to feel as they did the fierce urgency of now .
all of us need to recognize as they did that change depends on our actions , on our attitudes , the things we teach our children .
and if we make such an effort , no matter how hard it may sometimes seem , laws can be passed , and consciences can be stirred , and consensus can be built .
with such an effort , we can make sure our criminal justice system serves all and not just some .
together , we can raise the level of mutual trust that policing is built on -- - the idea that police officers are members of the community they risk their lives to protect , and citizens in ferguson and new york and cleveland , they just want the same thing young people here marched for 50 years ago - -- the protection of the law .
together , we can address unfair sentencing and overcrowded prisons , and the stunted circumstances that rob too many boys of the chance to become men , and rob the nation of too many men who could be good dads , and good workers , and good neighbors .
with effort , we can roll back poverty and the roadblocks to opportunity .
americans do n't accept a free ride for anybody , nor do we believe in equality of outcomes .
but we do expect equal opportunity .
and if we really mean it , if we 're not just giving lip service to it , but if we really mean it and are willing to sacrifice for it , then , yes , we can make sure every child gets an education suitable to this new century , one that expands imaginations and lifts sights and gives those children the skills they need .
we can make sure every person willing to work has the dignity of a job , and a fair wage , and a real voice , and sturdier rungs on that ladder into the middle class .
and with effort , we can protect the foundation stone of our democracy for which so many marched across this bridge -- - and that is the right to vote .
right now , in 2015 , 50 years after selma , there are laws across this country designed to make it harder for people to vote .
as we speak , more of such laws are being proposed .
meanwhile , the voting rights act , the culmination of so much blood , so much sweat and tears , the product of so much sacrifice in the face of wanton violence , the voting rights act stands weakened , its future subject to political rancor .
how can that be ?
the voting rights act was one of the crowning achievements of our democracy , the result of republican and democratic efforts .
president reagan signed its renewal when he was in office .
president george w. bush signed its renewal when he was in office .
one hundred members of congress have come here today to honor people who were willing to die for the right to protect it .
if we want to honor this day , let that hundred go back to washington and gather four hundred more , and together , pledge to make it their mission to restore that law this year .
that 's how we honor those on this bridge .
of course , our democracy is not the task of congress alone , or the courts alone , or even the president alone .
if every new voter - suppression law was struck down today , we would still have , here in america , one of the lowest voting rates among free peoples .
fifty years ago , registering to vote here in selma and much of the south meant guessing the number of jellybeans in a jar , the number of bubbles on a bar of soap .
it meant risking your dignity , and sometimes , your life .
what 's our excuse today for not voting ?
how do we so casually discard the right for which so many fought ?
how do we so fully give away our power , our voice , in shaping america 's future ?
why are we pointing to somebody else when we could take the time just to go to the polling places ?
we give away our power .
fellow marchers , so much has changed in 50 years .
we have endured war and we 've fashioned peace .
we 've seen technological wonders that touch every aspect of our lives .
we take for granted conveniences that our parents could have scarcely imagined .
but what has not changed is the imperative of citizenship ; that willingness of a 26-year - old deacon , or a unitarian minister , or a young mother of five to decide they loved this country so much that they 'd risk everything to realize its promise .
that 's what it means to love america .
that 's what it means to believe in america .
that 's what it means when we say america is exceptional .
for we were born of change .
we broke the old aristocracies , declaring ourselves entitled not by bloodline , but endowed by our creator with certain inalienable rights .
we secure our rights and responsibilities through a system of self - government , of and by and for the people .
that 's why we argue and fight with so much passion and conviction -- because we know our efforts matter .
we know america is what we make of it .
look at our history .
we are lewis and clark and sacajawea , pioneers who braved the unfamiliar , followed by a stampede of farmers and miners , and entrepreneurs and hucksters .
that 's our spirit .
that 's who we are .
we are sojourner truth and fannie lou hamer , women who could do as much as any man and then some .
and we 're susan b. anthony , who shook the system until the law reflected that truth .
that is our character .
we 're the immigrants who stowed away on ships to reach these shores , the huddled masses yearning to breathe free -- - holocaust survivors , soviet defectors , the lost boys of sudan .
we 're the hopeful strivers who cross the rio grande because we want our kids to know a better life .
that 's how we came to be .
we 're the slaves who built the white house and the economy of the south .
we 're the ranch hands and cowboys who opened up the west , and countless laborers who laid rail , and raised skyscrapers , and organized for workers ' rights .
we 're the fresh - faced gis who fought to liberate a continent .
and we 're the tuskeegee airmen , and the navajo code - talkers , and the japanese americans who fought for this country even as their own liberty had been denied .
we 're the firefighters who rushed into those buildings on 9/11 , the volunteers who signed up to fight in afghanistan and iraq .
we 're the gay americans whose blood ran in the streets of san francisco and new york , just as blood ran down this bridge .
we are storytellers , writers , poets , artists who abhor unfairness , and despise hypocrisy , and give voice to the voiceless , and tell truths that need to be told .
we 're the inventors of gospel and jazz and blues , bluegrass and country , and hip - hop and rock and roll , and our very own sound with all the sweet sorrow and reckless joy of freedom .
we are jackie robinson , enduring scorn and spiked cleats and pitches coming straight to his head , and stealing home in the world series anyway .
we are the people langston hughes wrote of who " build our temples for tomorrow , strong as we know how . "
we are the people emerson wrote of , " who for truth and honor 's sake stand fast and suffer long ; " who are " never tired , so long as we can see far enough . "
that 's what america is .
not stock photos or airbrushed history , or feeble attempts to define some of us as more american than others .
we respect the past , but we do n't pine for the past .
we do n't fear the future ; we grab for it .
america is not some fragile thing .
we are large , in the words of whitman , containing multitudes .
we are boisterous and diverse and full of energy , perpetually young in spirit .
that 's why someone like john lewis at the ripe old age of 25 could lead a mighty march .
and that 's what the young people here today and listening all across the country must take away from this day .
you are america .
unconstrained by habit and convention .
unencumbered by what is , because you 're ready to seize what ought to be .
for everywhere in this country , there are first steps to be taken , there 's new ground to cover , there are more bridges to be crossed .
and it is you , the young and fearless at heart , the most diverse and educated generation in our history , who the nation is waiting to follow .
because selma shows us that america is not the project of any one person .
because the single - most powerful word in our democracy is the word " we . " "
we the people . " "
we shall overcome . " "
yes we can . "
that word is owned by no one .
it belongs to everyone .
oh , what a glorious task we are given , to continually try to improve this great nation of ours .
fifty years from bloody sunday , our march is not yet finished , but we 're getting closer .
two hundred and thirty - nine years after this nation 's founding our union is not yet perfect , but we are getting closer .
our job 's easier because somebody already got us through that first mile .
somebody already got us over that bridge .
when it feels the road is too hard , when the torch we 've been passed feels too heavy , we will remember these early travelers , and draw strength from their example , and hold firmly the words of the prophet isaiah : " those who hope in the lord will renew their strength .
they will soar on   wings like eagles .
they will run and not grow weary .
they will walk and not be faint . "
we honor those who walked so we could run .
we must run so our children soar .
and we will not grow weary .
for we believe in the power of an awesome god , and we believe in this country 's sacred promise .
may he bless those warriors of justice no longer with us , and bless the united states of america .
thank you , everybody .

good evening .
tonight , i 'd like to talk to you about the end of our combat mission in iraq , the ongoing security challenges we face , and the need to rebuild our nation here at home .
i know this historic moment comes at a time of great uncertainty for many americans .
we 've now been through nearly a decade of war .
we 've endured a long and painful recession .
and sometimes in the midst of these storms , the future that we 're trying to build for our nation -- a future of lasting peace and long - term prosperity -- may seem beyond our reach .
but this milestone should serve as a reminder to all americans that the future is ours to shape if we move forward with confidence and commitment .
it should also serve as a message to the world that the united states of america intends to sustain and strengthen our leadership in this young century .
from this desk , seven and a half years ago , president bush announced the beginning of military operations in iraq .
much has changed since that night .
a war to disarm a state became a fight against an insurgency .
terrorism and sectarian warfare threatened to tear iraq apart .
thousands of americans gave their lives ; tens of thousands have been wounded .
our relations abroad were strained .
our unity at home was tested .
these are the rough waters encountered during the course of one of america 's longest wars .
yet there has been one constant amidst these shifting tides .
at every turn , america 's men and women in uniform have served with courage and resolve .
as commander - in - chief , i am incredibly proud of their service .
and like all americans , i 'm awed by their sacrifice , and by the sacrifices of their families .
the americans who have served in iraq completed every mission they were given .
they defeated a regime that had terrorized its people .
together with iraqis and coalition partners who made huge sacrifices of their own , our troops fought block by block to help iraq seize the chance for a better future .
they shifted tactics to protect the iraqi people , trained iraqi security forces , and took out terrorist leaders .
because of our troops and civilians -- and because of the resilience of the iraqi people -- iraq has the opportunity to embrace a new destiny , even though many challenges remain .
so tonight , i am announcing that the american combat mission in iraq has ended .
operation iraqi freedom is over , and the iraqi people now have lead responsibility for the security of their country .
this was my pledge to the american people as a candidate for this office .
last february , i announced a plan that would bring our combat brigades out of iraq , while redoubling our efforts to strengthen iraq 's security forces and support its government and people .
that 's what we 've done .
we 've removed nearly 100,000 u. s. troops from iraq .
we 've closed or transferred to the iraqis hundreds of bases .
and we have moved millions of pieces of equipment out of iraq .
this completes a transition to iraqi responsibility for their own security .
u. s. troops pulled out of iraq 's cities last summer , and iraqi forces have moved into the lead with considerable skill and commitment to their fellow citizens .
even as iraq continues to suffer terrorist attacks , security incidents have been near the lowest on record since the war began .
and iraqi forces have taken the fight to al qaeda , removing much of its leadership in iraqi - led operations .
this year also saw iraq hold credible elections that drew a strong turnout .
a caretaker administration is in place as iraqis form a government based on the results of that election .
tonight , i encourage iraq 's leaders to move forward with a sense of urgency to form an inclusive government that is just , representative , and accountable to the iraqi people .
and when that government is in place , there should be no doubt : the iraqi people will have a strong partner in the united states .
our combat mission is ending , but our commitment to iraq 's future is not .
going forward , a transitional force of u. s. troops will remain in iraq with a different mission : advising and assisting iraq 's security forces , supporting iraqi troops in targeted counterterrorism missions , and protecting our civilians .
consistent with our agreement with the iraqi government , all u. s. troops will leave by the end of next year .
as our military draws down , our dedicated civilians -- diplomats , aid workers , and advisors -- are moving into the lead to support iraq as it strengthens its government , resolves political disputes , resettles those displaced by war , and builds ties with the region and the world .
that 's a message that vice president biden is delivering to the iraqi people through his visit there today .
this new approach reflects our long - term partnership with iraq -- one based upon mutual interest and mutual respect .
of course , violence will not end with our combat mission .
extremists will continue to set off bombs , attack iraqi civilians and try to spark sectarian strife .
but ultimately , these terrorists will fail to achieve their goals .
iraqis are a proud people .
they have rejected sectarian war , and they have no interest in endless destruction .
they understand that , in the end , only iraqis can resolve their differences and police their streets .
only iraqis can build a democracy within their borders .
what america can do , and will do , is provide support for the iraqi people as both a friend and a partner .
ending this war is not only in iraq 's interest -- it 's in our own .
the united states has paid a huge price to put the future of iraq in the hands of its people .
we have sent our young men and women to make enormous sacrifices in iraq , and spent vast resources abroad at a time of tight budgets at home .
we 've persevered because of a belief we share with the iraqi people -- a belief that out of the ashes of war , a new beginning could be born in this cradle of civilization .
through this remarkable chapter in the history of the united states and iraq , we have met our responsibility .
now , it 's time to turn the page .
as we do , i 'm mindful that the iraq war has been a contentious issue at home .
here , too , it 's time to turn the page .
this afternoon , i spoke to former president george w. bush .
it 's well known that he and i disagreed about the war from its outset .
yet no one can doubt president bush 's support for our troops , or his love of country and commitment to our security .
as i 've said , there were patriots who supported this war , and patriots who opposed it .
and all of us are united in appreciation for our servicemen and women , and our hopes for iraqis ' future .
the greatness of our democracy is grounded in our ability to move beyond our differences , and to learn from our experience as we confront the many challenges ahead .
and no challenge is more essential to our security than our fight against al qaeda .
americans across the political spectrum supported the use of force against those who attacked us on 9/11 .
now , as we approach our 10th year of combat in afghanistan , there are those who are understandably asking tough questions about our mission there .
but we must never lose sight of what 's at stake .
as we speak , al qaeda continues to plot against us , and its leadership remains anchored in the border regions of afghanistan and pakistan .
we will disrupt , dismantle and defeat al qaeda , while preventing afghanistan from again serving as a base for terrorists .
and because of our drawdown in iraq , we are now able to apply the resources necessary to go on offense .
in fact , over the last 19 months , nearly a dozen al qaeda leaders -- and hundreds of al qaeda 's extremist allies -- have been killed or captured around the world .
within afghanistan , i 've ordered the deployment of additional troops who -- under the command of general david petraeus -- are fighting to break the taliban 's momentum .
as with the surge in iraq , these forces will be in place for a limited time to provide space for the afghans to build their capacity and secure their own future .
but , as was the case in iraq , we ca n't do for afghans what they must ultimately do for themselves .
that 's why we 're training afghan security forces and supporting a political resolution to afghanistan 's problems .
and next august , we will begin a transition to afghan responsibility .
the pace of our troop reductions will be determined by conditions on the ground , and our support for afghanistan will endure .
but make no mistake : this transition will begin -- because open - ended war serves neither our interests nor the afghan people 's .
indeed , one of the lessons of our effort in iraq is that american influence around the world is not a function of military force alone .
we must use all elements of our power -- including our diplomacy , our economic strength , and the power of america 's example -- to secure our interests and stand by our allies .
and we must project a vision of the future that 's based not just on our fears , but also on our hopes -- a vision that recognizes the real dangers that exist around the world , 
 but also the limitless possibilities of our time .
today , old adversaries are at peace , and emerging democracies are potential partners .
new markets for our goods stretch from asia to the americas .
a new push for peace in the middle east will begin here tomorrow .
billions of young people want to move beyond the shackles of poverty and conflict .
as the leader of the free world , america will do more than just defeat on the battlefield those who offer hatred and destruction -- we will also lead among those who are willing to work together to expand freedom and opportunity for all people .
now , that effort must begin within our own borders .
throughout our history , america has been willing to bear the burden of promoting liberty and human dignity overseas , understanding its links to our own liberty and security .
but we have also understood that our nation 's strength and influence abroad must be firmly anchored in our prosperity at home .
and the bedrock of that prosperity must be a growing middle class .
unfortunately , over the last decade , we 've not done what 's necessary to shore up the foundations of our own prosperity .
we spent a trillion dollars at war , often financed by borrowing from overseas .
this , in turn , has short - changed investments in our own people , and contributed to record deficits .
for too long , we have put off tough decisions on everything from our manufacturing base to our energy policy to education reform .
as a result , too many middle - class families find themselves working harder for less , while our nation 's long - term competitiveness is put at risk .
and so at this moment , as we wind down the war in iraq , we must tackle those challenges at home with as much energy , and grit , and sense of common purpose as our men and women in uniform who have served abroad .
they have met every test that they faced .
now , it 's our turn .
now , it 's our responsibility to honor them by coming together , all of us , and working to secure the dream that so many generations have fought for -- the dream that a better life awaits anyone who is willing to work for it and reach for it .
our most urgent task is to restore our economy , and put the millions of americans who have lost their jobs back to work .
to strengthen our middle class , we must give all our children the education they deserve , and all our workers the skills that they need to compete in a global economy .
we must jumpstart industries that create jobs , and end our dependence on foreign oil .
we must unleash the innovation that allows new products to roll off our assembly lines , and nurture the ideas that spring from our entrepreneurs .
this will be difficult .
but in the days to come , it must be our central mission as a people , and my central responsibility as president .
part of that responsibility is making sure that we honor our commitments to those who have served our country with such valor .
as long as i am president , we will maintain the finest fighting force that the world has ever known , and we will do whatever it takes to serve our veterans as well as they have served us .
this is a sacred trust .
that 's why we 've already made one of the largest increases in funding for veterans in decades .
we 're treating the signature wounds of today 's wars -- post - traumatic stress disorder and traumatic brain injury -- while providing the health care and benefits that all of our veterans have earned .
and we 're funding a post-9/11 gi bill that helps our veterans and their families pursue the dream of a college education .
just as the gi bill helped those who fought world war ii -- including my grandfather -- become the backbone of our middle class , so today 's servicemen and women must have the chance to apply their gifts to expand the american economy .
because part of ending a war responsibly is standing by those who have fought it .
two weeks ago , america 's final combat brigade in iraq -- the army 's fourth stryker brigade -- journeyed home in the pre - dawn darkness .
thousands of soldiers and hundreds of vehicles made the trip from baghdad , the last of them passing into kuwait in the early morning hours .
over seven years before , american troops and coalition partners had fought their way across similar highways , but this time no shots were fired .
it was just a convoy of brave americans , making their way home .
of course , the soldiers left much behind .
some were teenagers when the war began .
many have served multiple tours of duty , far from families who bore a heroic burden of their own , enduring the absence of a husband 's embrace or a mother 's kiss .
most painfully , since the war began , 55 members of the fourth stryker brigade made the ultimate sacrifice -- part of over 4,400 americans who have given their lives in iraq .
as one staff sergeant said , " i know that to my brothers in arms who fought and died , this day would probably mean a lot . "
those americans gave their lives for the values that have lived in the hearts of our people for over two centuries .
along with nearly 1.5 million americans who have served in iraq , they fought in a faraway place for people they never knew .
they stared into the darkest of human creations -- war -- and helped the iraqi people seek the light of peace .
in an age without surrender ceremonies , we must earn victory through the success of our partners and the strength of our own nation .
every american who serves joins an unbroken line of heroes that stretches from lexington to gettysburg ; from iwo jima to inchon ; from khe sanh to kandahar -- americans who have fought to see that the lives of our children are better than our own .
our troops are the steel in our ship of state .
and though our nation may be travelling through rough waters , they give us confidence that our course is true , and that beyond the pre - dawn darkness , better days lie ahead .
thank you .
may god bless you .
and may god bless the united states of america , and all who serve her .

thank you .
well , i 'm excited , too .
of the many responsibilities granted to a president by our constitution , few are more serious or more consequential than selecting a supreme court justice .
the members of our highest court are granted life tenure , often serving long after the presidents who appointed them .
and they are charged with the vital task of applying principles put to paper more than 20   centuries ago to some of the most difficult questions of our time .
so i do n't take this decision lightly .
i 've made it only after deep reflection and careful deliberation .
while there are many qualities that i admire in judges across the spectrum of judicial philosophy , and that i seek in my own nominee , there are few that stand out that i just want to mention .
first and foremost is a rigorous intellect -- a mastery of the law , an ability to hone in on the key issues and provide clear answers to complex legal questions .
second is a recognition of the limits of the judicial role , an understanding that a judge 's job is to interpret , not make , law ; to approach decisions without any particular ideology or agenda , but rather a commitment to impartial justice ; a respect for precedent and a determination to faithfully apply the law to the facts at hand .
these two qualities are essential , i believe , for anyone who would sit on our nation 's highest court .
and yet , these qualities alone are insufficient .
we need something more .
for as supreme court justice oliver wendell holmes once said , " the life of the law has not been logic ; it has been experience . "
experience being tested by obstacles and barriers , by hardship and misfortune ; experience insisting , persisting , and ultimately overcoming those barriers .
it is experience that can give a person a common touch and a sense of compassion ; an understanding of how the world works and how ordinary people live .
and that is why it is a necessary ingredient in the kind of justice we need on the supreme court .
the process of reviewing and selecting a successor to justice souter has been rigorous and comprehensive , not least because of the standard that justice souter himself has set with his formidable intellect and fair - mindedness and decency .
i 've sought the advice of members of congress on both sides of the aisle , including every member of the senate judiciary committee .
my team has reached out to constitutional scholars , advocacy organizations , and bar associations representing an array of interests and opinions .
and i want to thank members of my staff and administration who 've worked so hard and given so much of their time as part of this effort .
after completing this exhaustive process , i have decided to nominate an inspiring woman who i believe will make a great justice : judge sonia sotomayor of the great state of new york .
over a distinguished career that spans three decades , judge sotomayor has worked at almost every level of our judicial system , providing her with a depth of experience and a breadth of perspective that will be invaluable as a supreme court justice .
it 's a measure of her qualities and her qualifications that judge sotomayor was nominated to the u. s. district court by a republican president , george h. w. bush , and promoted to the federal court of appeals by a democrat , bill clinton .
walking in the door she would bring more experience on the bench , and more varied experience on the bench , than anyone currently serving on the united states supreme court had when they were appointed .
judge sotomayor is a distinguished graduate of two of america 's leading universities .
she 's been a big - city prosecutor and a corporate litigator .
she spent six years as a trial judge on the u. s. district court , and would replace justice souter as the only justice with experience as a trial judge , a perspective that would enrich the judgments of the court .
for the past 11 years she has been a judge on the court of appeals for the second circuit of new york , one of the most demanding circuits in the country .
there she has handed down decisions on a range of constitutional and legal questions that are notable for their careful reasoning , earning the respect of colleagues on the bench , the admiration of many lawyers who argue cases in her court , and the adoration of her clerks who look to her as a mentor .
during her tenure on the district court , she presided over roughly 450 cases .
one case in particular involved a matter of enormous concern to many americans , including me : the baseball strike of 1994 - 1995 .
in a decision that reportedly took her just 15 minutes to announce , a swiftness much appreciated by baseball fans everywhere --   -- she issued an injunction that helped end the strike .
some say that judge sotomayor saved baseball .
judge sotomayor came to the district court from a law firm where she was a partner focused on complex commercial litigation , gaining insight into the workings of a global economy .
before that she was a prosecutor in the manhattan da 's office , serving under the legendary robert morgenthau , an early mentor of sonia 's who still sings her praises today .
there , sonia learned what crime can do to a family and a community , and what it takes to fight it .
it 's a career that has given her not only a sweeping overview of the american judicial system , but a practical understanding of how the law works in the everyday lives of the american people .
but as impressive and meaningful as judge sotomayor 's sterling credentials in the law is her own extraordinary journey .
born in the south bronx , she was raised in a housing project not far from yankee stadium , making her a lifelong yankee 's fan .
i hope this will not disqualify her --   -- in the eyes of the new englanders in the senate .
sonia 's parents came to new york from puerto rico during the second world war , her mother as part of the women 's army corps .
and , in fact , her mother is here today and i 'd like us all to acknowledge sonia 's mom .
sonia 's mom has been a little choked up .
but she , sonia 's mother , began a family tradition of giving back to this country .
sonia 's father was a factory worker with a 3rd - grade education who did n't speak english .
but like sonia 's mother , he had a willingness to work hard , a strong sense of family , and a belief in the american dream .
when sonia was nine , her father passed away .
and her mother worked six days a week as a nurse to provide for sonia and her brother -- who is also here today , is a doctor and a terrific success in his own right .
but sonia 's mom bought the only set of encyclopedias in the neighborhood , sent her children to a catholic school called cardinal spellman out of the belief that with a good education here in america all things are possible .
with the support of family , friends , and teachers , sonia earned scholarships to princeton , where she graduated at the top of her class , and yale law school , where she was an editor of the yale law journal , stepping onto the path that led her here today .
along the way she 's faced down barriers , overcome the odds , lived out the american dream that brought her parents here so long ago .
and even as she has accomplished so much in her life , she has never forgotten where she began , never lost touch with the community that supported her .
what sonia will bring to the court , then , is not only the knowledge and experience acquired over a course of a brilliant legal career , but the wisdom accumulated from an inspiring life 's journey .
it 's my understanding that judge sotomayor 's interest in the law was sparked as a young girl by reading the nancy drew series --   -- and that when she was diagnosed with diabetes at the age of eight , she was informed that people with diabetes ca n't grow up to be police officers or private investigators like nancy drew .
and that 's when she was told she 'd have to scale back her dreams .
well , sonia , what you 've shown in your life is that it does n't matter where you come from , what you look like , or what challenges life throws your way -- no dream is beyond reach in the united states of america .
and when sonia sotomayor ascends those marble steps to assume her seat on the highest court of the land , america will have taken another important step towards realizing the ideal that is etched above its entrance : equal justice under the law .
i hope the senate acts in a bipartisan fashion , as it has in confirming judge sotomayor twice before , and as swiftly as possible so that she can take her seat on the court in september and participate in deliberations as the court chooses which cases it will hear this coming year .
and with that , i 'd like all of you to give a warm greeting as i invite judge sotomayor to say a few words .

thank you .
thank you , everybody .
thank you so much .
please , please have a seat .
thank you so much .
well , thank you , neera , for the wonderful introduction and sharing a story that resonated with me .
there were a lot of parallels in my life and probably resonated with some of you .
over the past 10 years , the center for american progress has done incredible work to shape the debate over expanding opportunity for all americans .
and i could not be more grateful to cap not only for giving me a lot of good policy ideas , but also giving me a lot of staff .
my friend , john podesta , ran my transition ; my chief of staff , denis mcdonough , did a stint at cap .
so you guys are obviously doing a good job training folks .
i also want to thank all the members of congress and my administration who are here today for the wonderful work that they do .
i want to thank mayor gray and everyone here at thearc for having me .
this center , which i 've been to quite a bit , have had a chance to see some of the great work that 's done here .
and all the nonprofits that call thearc home offer access to everything from education , to health care , to a safe shelter from the streets , which means that you 're harnessing the power of community to expand opportunity for folks here in d. c. and your work reflects a tradition that runs through our history -- a belief that we 're greater together than we are on our own .
and that 's what i 've come here to talk about today .
over the last two months , washington has been dominated by some pretty contentious debates -- i think that 's fair to say .
and between a reckless shutdown by congressional republicans in an effort to repeal the affordable care act , and admittedly poor execution on my administration 's part in implementing the latest stage of the new law , nobody has acquitted themselves very well these past few months .
so it 's not surprising that the american people 's frustrations with washington are at an all - time high .
but we know that people 's frustrations run deeper than these most recent political battles .
their frustration is rooted in their own daily battles -- to make ends meet , to pay for college , buy a home , save for retirement .
it 's rooted in the nagging sense that no matter how hard they work , the deck is stacked against them .
and it 's rooted in the fear that their kids wo n't be better off than they were .
they may not follow the constant back - and - forth in washington or all the policy details , but they experience in a very personal way the relentless , decades - long trend that i want to spend some time talking about today .
and that is a dangerous and growing inequality and lack of upward mobility that has jeopardized middle - class america 's basic bargain -- that if you work hard , you have a chance to get ahead .
i believe this is the defining challenge of our time : making sure our economy works for every working american .
it 's why i ran for president .
it was at the center of last year 's campaign .
it drives everything i do in this office .
and i know i 've raised this issue before , and some will ask why i raise the issue again right now .
i do it because the outcomes of the debates we 're having right now -- whether it 's health care , or the budget , or reforming our housing and financial systems -- all these things will have real , practical implications for every american .
and i am convinced that the decisions we make on these issues over the next few years will determine whether or not our children will grow up in an america where opportunity is real .
now , the premise that we 're all created equal is the opening line in the american story .
and while we do n't promise equal outcomes , we have strived to deliver equal opportunity -- the idea that success does n't depend on being born into wealth or privilege , it depends on effort and merit .
and with every chapter we 've added to that story , we 've worked hard to put those words into practice .
it was abraham lincoln , a self - described " poor man 's son , " who started a system of land grant colleges all over this country so that any poor man 's son could go learn something new .
when farms gave way to factories , a rich man 's son named teddy roosevelt fought for an eight - hour workday , protections for workers , and busted monopolies that kept prices high and wages low .
when millions lived in poverty , fdr fought for social security , and insurance for the unemployed , and a minimum wage .
when millions died without health insurance , lbj fought for medicare and medicaid .
together , we forged a new deal , declared a war on poverty in a great society .
we built a ladder of opportunity to climb , and stretched out a safety net beneath so that if we fell , it would n't be too far , and we could bounce back .
and as a result , america built the largest middle class the world has ever known .
and for the three decades after world war ii , it was the engine of our prosperity .
now , we ca n't look at the past through rose - colored glasses .
the economy did n't always work for everyone .
racial discrimination locked millions out of poverty -- or out of opportunity .
women were too often confined to a handful of often poorly paid professions .
and it was only through painstaking struggle that more women , and minorities , and americans with disabilities began to win the right to more fairly and fully participate in the economy .
nevertheless , during the post - world war ii years , the economic ground felt stable and secure for most americans , and the future looked brighter than the past .
and for some , that meant following in your old man 's footsteps at the local plant , and you knew that a blue - collar job would let you buy a home , and a car , maybe a vacation once in a while , health care , a reliable pension .
for others , it meant going to college -- in some cases , maybe the first in your family to go to college .
and it meant graduating without taking on loads of debt , and being able to count on advancement through a vibrant job market .
now , it 's true that those at the top , even in those years , claimed a much larger share of income than the rest : the top 10 percent consistently took home about one - third of our national income .
but that kind of inequality took place in a dynamic market economy where everyone 's wages and incomes were growing .
and because of upward mobility , the guy on the factory floor could picture his kid running the company some day .
but starting in the late ' 70s , this social compact began to unravel .
technology made it easier for companies to do more with less , eliminating certain job occupations .
a more competitive world lets companies ship jobs anywhere .
and as good manufacturing jobs automated or headed offshore , workers lost their leverage , jobs paid less and offered fewer benefits .
as values of community broke down , and competitive pressure increased , businesses lobbied washington to weaken unions and the value of the minimum wage .
as a trickle - down ideology became more prominent , taxes were slashed for the wealthiest , while investments in things that make us all richer , like schools and infrastructure , were allowed to wither .
and for a certain period of time , we could ignore this weakening economic foundation , in part because more families were relying on two earners as women entered the workforce .
we took on more debt financed by a juiced - up housing market .
but when the music stopped , and the crisis hit , millions of families were stripped of whatever cushion they had left .
and the result is an economy that 's become profoundly unequal , and families that are more insecure .
i 'll just give you a few statistics .
since 1979 , when i graduated from high school , our productivity is up by more than 90 percent , but the income of the typical family has increased by less than eight percent .
since 1979 , our economy has more than doubled in size , but most of that growth has flowed to a fortunate few .
the top 10 percent no longer takes in one - third of our income -- it now takes half .
whereas in the past , the average ceo made about 20 to 30 times the income of the average worker , today 's ceo now makes 273 times more .
and meanwhile , a family in the top 1 percent has a net worth 288 times higher than the typical family , which is a record for this country .
so the basic bargain at the heart of our economy has frayed .
in fact , this trend towards growing inequality is not unique to america 's market economy .
across the developed world , inequality has increased .
some of you may have seen just last week , the pope himself spoke about this at eloquent length . "
how can it be , " he wrote , " that it is not a news item when an elderly homeless person dies of exposure , but it is news when the stock market loses two points ? "
but this increasing inequality is most pronounced in our country , and it challenges the very essence of who we are as a people .
understand we 've never begrudged success in america .
we aspire to it .
we admire folks who start new businesses , create jobs , and invent the products that enrich our lives .
and we expect them to be rewarded handsomely for it .
in fact , we 've often accepted more income inequality than many other nations for one big reason -- because we were convinced that america is a place where even if you 're born with nothing , with a little hard work you can improve your own situation over time and build something better to leave your kids .
as lincoln once said , " while we do not propose any war upon capital , we do wish to allow the humblest man an equal chance to get rich with everybody else . "
the problem is that alongside increased inequality , we 've seen diminished levels of upward mobility in recent years .
a child born in the top 20 percent has about a 2-in-3 chance of staying at or near the top .
a child born into the bottom 20 percent has a less than 1-in-20 shot at making it to the top .
he 's 10 times likelier to stay where he is .
in fact , statistics show not only that our levels of income inequality rank near countries like jamaica and argentina , but that it is harder today for a child born here in america to improve her station in life than it is for children in most of our wealthy allies -- countries like canada or germany or france .
they have greater mobility than we do , not less .
the idea that so many children are born into poverty in the wealthiest nation on earth is heartbreaking enough .
but the idea that a child may never be able to escape that poverty because she lacks a decent education or health care , or a community that views her future as their own , that should offend all of us and it should compel us to action .
we are a better country than this .
so let me repeat : the combined trends of increased inequality and decreasing mobility pose a fundamental threat to the american dream , our way of life , and what we stand for around the globe .
and it is not simply a moral claim that i 'm making here .
there are practical consequences to rising inequality and reduced mobility .
for one thing , these trends are bad for our economy .
one study finds that growth is more fragile and recessions are more frequent in countries with greater inequality .
and that makes sense .
when families have less to spend , that means businesses have fewer customers , and households rack up greater mortgage and credit card debt ; meanwhile , concentrated wealth at the top is less likely to result in the kind of broadly based consumer spending that drives our economy , and together with lax regulation , may contribute to risky speculative bubbles .
and rising inequality and declining mobility are also bad for our families and social cohesion -- not just because we tend to trust our institutions less , but studies show we actually tend to trust each other less when there 's greater inequality .
and greater inequality is associated with less mobility between generations .
that means it 's not just temporary ; the effects last .
it creates a vicious cycle .
for example , by the time she turns three years old , a child born into a low - income home hears 30 million fewer words than a child from a well - off family , which means by the time she starts school she 's already behind , and that deficit can compound itself over time .
and finally , rising inequality and declining mobility are bad for our democracy .
ordinary folks ca n't write massive campaign checks or hire high - priced lobbyists and lawyers to secure policies that tilt the playing field in their favor at everyone else 's expense .
and so people get the bad taste that the system is rigged , and that increases cynicism and polarization , and it decreases the political participation that is a requisite part of our system of self - government .
so this is an issue that we have to tackle head on .
and if , in fact , the majority of americans agree that our number - one priority is to restore opportunity and broad - based growth for all americans , the question is why has washington consistently failed to act ?
and i think a big reason is the myths that have developed around the issue of inequality .
first , there is the myth that this is a problem restricted to a small share of predominantly minority poor -- that this is n't a broad - based problem , this is a black problem or a hispanic problem or a native american problem .
now , it 's true that the painful legacy of discrimination means that african americans , latinos , native americans are far more likely to suffer from a lack of opportunity -- higher unemployment , higher poverty rates .
it 's also true that women still make 77 cents on the dollar compared to men .
so we 're going to need strong application of antidiscrimination laws .
we 're going to need immigration reform that grows the economy and takes people out of the shadows .
we 're going to need targeted initiatives to close those gaps .
but here 's an important point .
the decades - long shifts in the economy have hurt all groups : poor and middle class ; inner city and rural folks ; men and women ; and americans of all races .
and as a consequence , some of the social patterns that contribute to declining mobility that were once attributed to the urban poor -- that 's a particular problem for the inner city : single - parent households or drug abuse -- it turns out now we 're seeing that pop up everywhere .
a new study shows that disparities in education , mental health , obesity , absent fathers , isolation from church , isolation from community groups -- these gaps are now as much about growing up rich or poor as they are about anything else .
the gap in test scores between poor kids and wealthy kids is now nearly twice what it is between white kids and black kids .
kids with working - class parents are 10 times likelier than kids with middle- or upper - class parents to go through a time when their parents have no income .
so the fact is this : the opportunity gap in america is now as much about class as it is about race , and that gap is growing .
so if we 're going to take on growing inequality and try to improve upward mobility for all people , we 've got to move beyond the false notion that this is an issue exclusively of minority concern .
and we have to reject a politics that suggests any effort to address it in a meaningful way somehow pits the interests of a deserving middle class against those of an undeserving poor in search of handouts .
second , we need to dispel the myth that the goals of growing the economy and reducing inequality are necessarily in conflict , when they should actually work in concert .
we know from our history that our economy grows best from the middle out , when growth is more widely shared .
and we know that beyond a certain level of inequality , growth actually slows altogether .
third , we need to set aside the belief that government can not do anything about reducing inequality .
it 's true that government can not prevent all the downsides of the technological change and global competition that are out there right now , and some of those forces are also some of the things that are helping us grow .
and it 's also true that some programs in the past , like welfare before it was reformed , were sometimes poorly designed , created disincentives to work .
but we 've also seen how government action time and again can make an enormous difference in increasing opportunity and bolstering ladders into the middle class .
investments in education , laws establishing collective bargaining , and a minimum wage -- these all contributed to rising standards of living for massive numbers of americans .
likewise , when previous generations declared that every citizen of this country deserved a basic measure of security -- a floor through which they could not fall -- we helped millions of americans live in dignity , and gave millions more the confidence to aspire to something better , by taking a risk on a great idea .
without social security , nearly half of seniors would be living in poverty -- half .
today , fewer than 1 in 10 do .
before medicare , only half of all seniors had some form of health insurance .
today , virtually all do .
and because we 've strengthened that safety net , and expanded pro - work and pro - family tax credits like the earned income tax credit , a recent study found that the poverty rate has fallen by 40 percent since the 1960s .
and these endeavors did n't just make us a better country ; they reaffirmed that we are a great country .
so we can make a difference on this .
in fact , that 's our generation 's task -- to rebuild america 's economic and civic foundation to continue the expansion of opportunity for this generation and the next generation .
and like neera , i take this personally .
i 'm only here because this country educated my grandfather on the gi bill .
when my father left and my mom hit hard times trying to raise my sister and me while she was going to school , this country helped make sure we did n't go hungry .
when michelle , the daughter of a shift worker at a water plant and a secretary , wanted to go to college , just like me , this country helped us afford it until we could pay it back .
so what drives me as a grandson , a son , a father -- as an american -- is to make sure that every striving , hardworking , optimistic kid in america has the same incredible chance that this country gave me .
it has been the driving force between everything we 've done these past five years .
and over the course of the next year , and for the rest of my presidency , that 's where you should expect my administration to focus all our efforts .
now , you 'll be pleased to know this is not a state of the union address .
and many of the ideas that can make the biggest difference in expanding opportunity i 've presented before .
but let me offer a few key principles , just a roadmap that i believe should guide us in both our legislative agenda and our administrative efforts .
to begin with , we have to continue to relentlessly push a growth agenda .
it may be true that in today 's economy , growth alone does not guarantee higher wages and incomes .
we 've seen that .
but what 's also true is we ca n't tackle inequality if the economic pie is shrinking or stagnant .
the fact is if you 're a progressive and you want to help the middle class and the working poor , you 've still got to be concerned about competitiveness and productivity and business confidence that spurs private sector investment .
and that 's why from day one we 've worked to get the economy growing and help our businesses hire .
and thanks to their resilience and innovation , they 've created nearly 8 million new jobs over the past 44 months .
and now we 've got to grow the economy even faster .
and we 've got to keep working to make america a magnet for good , middle - class jobs to replace the ones that we 've lost in recent decades -- jobs in manufacturing and energy and infrastructure and technology .
and that means simplifying our corporate tax code in a way that closes wasteful loopholes and ends incentives to ship jobs overseas .
and by broadening the base , we can actually lower rates to encourage more companies to hire here and use some of the money we save to create good jobs rebuilding our roads and our bridges and our airports , and all the infrastructure our businesses need .
it means a trade agenda that grows exports and works for the middle class .
it means streamlining regulations that are outdated or unnecessary or too costly .
and it means coming together around a responsible budget -- one that grows our economy faster right now and shrinks our long - term deficits , one that unwinds the harmful sequester cuts that have n't made a lot of sense --   -- and then frees up resources to invest in things like the scientific research that 's always unleashed new innovation and new industries .
when it comes to our budget , we should not be stuck in a stale debate from two years ago or three years ago .
a relentlessly growing deficit of opportunity is a bigger threat to our future than our rapidly shrinking fiscal deficit .
so that 's step one towards restoring mobility : making sure our economy is growing faster .
step two is making sure we empower more americans with the skills and education they need to compete in a highly competitive global economy .
we know that education is the most important predictor of income today , so we launched a race to the top in our schools .
we 're supporting states that have raised standards for teaching and learning .
we 're pushing for redesigned high schools that graduate more kids with the technical training and apprenticeships , and in - demand , high - tech skills that can lead directly to a good job and a middle - class life .
we know it 's harder to find a job today without some higher education , so we 've helped more students go to college with grants and loans that go farther than before .
we 've made it more practical to repay those loans .
and today , more students are graduating from college than ever before .
we 're also pursuing an aggressive strategy to promote innovation that reins in tuition costs .
we 've got lower costs so that young people are not burdened by enormous debt when they make the right decision to get higher education .
and next week , michelle and i will bring together college presidents and non - profits to lead a campaign to help more low - income students attend and succeed in college .
but while higher education may be the surest path to the middle class , it 's not the only one .
so we should offer our people the best technical education in the world .
that 's why we 've worked to connect local businesses with community colleges , so that workers young and old can earn the new skills that earn them more money .
and i 've also embraced an idea that i know all of you at the center for american progress have championed -- and , by the way , republican governors in a couple of states have championed -- and that 's making high - quality preschool available to every child in america .
we know that kids in these programs grow up likelier to get more education , earn higher wages , form more stable families of their own .
it starts a virtuous cycle , not a vicious one .
and we should invest in that .
we should give all of our children that chance .
and as we empower our young people for future success , the third part of this middle - class economics is empowering our workers .
it 's time to ensure our collective bargaining laws function as they 're supposed to --   -- so unions have a level playing field to organize for a better deal for workers and better wages for the middle class .
it 's time to pass the paycheck fairness act so that women will have more tools to fight pay discrimination .
it 's time to pass the employment non - discrimination act so workers ca n't be fired for who they are or who they love .
and even though we 're bringing manufacturing jobs back to america , we 're creating more good - paying jobs in education and health care and business services ; we know that we 're going to have a greater and greater portion of our people in the service sector .
and we know that there are airport workers , and fast - food workers , and nurse assistants , and retail salespeople who work their tails off and are still living at or barely above poverty .
and that 's why it 's well past the time to raise a minimum wage that in real terms right now is below where it was when harry truman was in office .
this should n't be an ideological question .
it was adam smith , the father of free - market economics , who once said , " they who feed , clothe , and lodge the whole body of the people should have such a share of the produce of their own labor as to be themselves tolerably well fed , clothed , and lodged . "
and for those of you who do n't speak old - english --   -- let me translate .
it means if you work hard , you should make a decent living .
if you work hard , you should be able to support a family .
now , we all know the arguments that have been used against a higher minimum wage .
some say it actually hurts low - wage workers -- businesses will be less likely to hire them .
but there 's no solid evidence that a higher minimum wage costs jobs , and research shows it raises incomes for low - wage workers and boosts short - term economic growth .
others argue that if we raise the minimum wage , companies will just pass those costs on to consumers .
but a growing chorus of businesses , small and large , argue differently .
and already , there are extraordinary companies in america that provide decent wages , salaries , and benefits , and training for their workers , and deliver a great product to consumers .
sas in north carolina offers childcare and sick leave .
rei , a company my secretary of the interior used to run , offers retirement plans and strives to cultivate a good work balance .
there are companies out there that do right by their workers .
they recognize that paying a decent wage actually helps their bottom line , reduces turnover .
it means workers have more money to spend , to save , maybe eventually start a business of their own .
a broad majority of americans agree we should raise the minimum wage .
that 's why , last month , voters in new jersey decided to become the 20th state to raise theirs even higher .
that 's why , yesterday , the d. c. council voted to do it , too .
i agree with those voters .
i agree with those voters , and i 'm going to keep pushing until we get a higher minimum wage for hard - working americans across the entire country .
it will be good for our economy .
it will be good for our families .
number four , as i alluded to earlier , we still need targeted programs for the communities and workers that have been hit hardest by economic change and the great recession .
these communities are no longer limited to the inner city .
they 're found in neighborhoods hammered by the housing crisis , manufacturing towns hit hard by years of plants packing up , landlocked rural areas where young folks oftentimes feel like they 've got to leave just to find a job .
there are communities that just are n't generating enough jobs anymore .
so we 've put forward new plans to help these communities and their residents , because we 've watched cities like pittsburgh or my hometown of chicago revamp themselves .
and if we give more cities the tools to do it -- not handouts , but a hand up -- cities like detroit can do it , too .
so in a few weeks , we 'll announce the first of these promise zones , urban and rural communities where we 're going to support local efforts focused on a national goal -- and that is a child 's course in life should not be determined by the zip code he 's born in , but by the strength of his work ethic and the scope of his dreams .
and we 're also going to have to do more for the long - term unemployed .
for people who have been out of work for more than six months , often through no fault of their own , life is a catch-22 .
companies wo n't give their r&eacute;sum&eacute ; an honest look because they 've been laid off so long -- but they 've been laid off so long because companies wo n't give their r&eacute;sum&eacute ; an honest look .
and that 's why earlier this year , i challenged ceos from some of america 's best companies to give these americans a fair shot .
and next month , many of them will join us at the white house for an announcement about this .
fifth , we 've got to revamp retirement to protect americans in their golden years , to make sure another housing collapse does n't steal the savings in their homes .
we 've also got to strengthen our safety net for a new age , so it does n't just protect people who hit a run of bad luck from falling into poverty , but also propels them back out of poverty .
today , nearly half of full - time workers and 80 percent of part - time workers do n't have a pension or retirement account at their job .
about half of all households do n't have any retirement savings .
so we 're going to have to do more to encourage private savings and shore up the promise of social security for future generations .
and remember , these are promises we make to one another .
we do n't do it to replace the free market , but we do it to reduce risk in our society by giving people the ability to take a chance and catch them if they fall .
one study shows that more than half of americans will experience poverty at some point during their adult lives .
think about that .
this is not an isolated situation .
more than half of americans at some point in their lives will experience poverty .
that 's why we have nutrition assistance or the program known as snap , because it makes a difference for a mother who 's working , but is just having a hard time putting food on the table for her kids .
that 's why we have unemployment insurance , because it makes a difference for a father who lost his job and is out there looking for a new one that he can keep a roof over his kids ' heads .
by the way , christmastime is no time for congress to tell more than 1 million of these americans that they have lost their unemployment insurance , which is what will happen if congress does not act before they leave on their holiday vacation .
the point is these programs are not typically hammocks for people to just lie back and relax .
these programs are almost always temporary means for hardworking people to stay afloat while they try to find a new job or go into school to retrain themselves for the jobs that are out there , or sometimes just to cope with a bout of bad luck .
progressives should be open to reforms that actually strengthen these programs and make them more responsive to a 21st century economy .
for example , we should be willing to look at fresh ideas to revamp unemployment and disability programs to encourage faster and higher rates of re - employment without cutting benefits .
we should n't weaken fundamental protections built over generations , because given the constant churn in today 's economy and the disabilities that many of our friends and neighbors live with , they 're needed more than ever .
we should strengthen them and adapt them to new circumstances so they work even better .
but understand that these programs of social insurance benefit all of us , because we do n't know when we might have a run of bad luck .
we do n't know when we might lose a job .
of course , for decades , there was one yawning gap in the safety net that did more than anything else to expose working families to the insecurities of today 's economy -- namely , our broken health care system .
that 's why we fought for the affordable care act --   -- because 14,000 americans lost their health insurance every single day , and even more died each year because they did n't have health insurance at all .
we did it because millions of families who thought they had coverage were driven into bankruptcy by out - of - pocket costs that they did n't realize would be there .
tens of millions of our fellow citizens could n't get any coverage at all .
and dr. king once said , " of all the forms of inequality , injustice in health care is the most shocking and inhumane . "
well , not anymore .
because in the three years since we passed this law , the share of americans with insurance is up , the growth of health care costs are down to their slowest rate in 50 years .
more people have insurance , and more have new benefits and protections -- 100 million americans who have gained the right for free preventive care like mammograms and contraception ; the more than 7 million americans who have saved an average of $ 1,200 on their prescription medicine ; every american who wo n't go broke when they get sick because their insurance ca n't limit their care anymore .
more people without insurance have gained insurance -- more than 3 million young americans who have been able to stay on their parents ' plan , the more than half a million americans and counting who are poised to get covered starting on january 1st , some for the very first time .
and it is these numbers -- not the ones in any poll -- that will ultimately determine the fate of this law .
it 's the measurable outcomes in reduced bankruptcies and reduced hours that have been lost because somebody could n't make it to work , and healthier kids with better performance in schools , and young entrepreneurs who have the freedom to go out there and try a new idea -- those are the things that will ultimately reduce a major source of inequality and help ensure more americans get the start that they need to succeed in the future .
i have acknowledged more than once that we did n't roll out parts of this law as well as we should have .
but the law is already working in major ways that benefit millions of americans right now , even as we 've begun to slow the rise in health care costs , which is good for family budgets , good for federal and state budgets , and good for the budgets of businesses small and large .
so this law is going to work .
and for the sake of our economic security , it needs to work .
and as people in states as different as california and kentucky sign up every single day for health insurance , signing up in droves , they 're proving they want that economic security .
if the senate republican leader still thinks he is going to be able to repeal this someday , he might want to check with the more than 60,000 people in his home state who are already set to finally have coverage that frees them from the fear of financial ruin , and lets them afford to take their kids to see a doctor .
so let me end by addressing the elephant in the room here , which is the seeming inability to get anything done in washington these days .
i realize we are not going to resolve all of our political debates over the best ways to reduce inequality and increase upward mobility this year , or next year , or in the next five years .
but it is important that we have a serious debate about these issues .
for the longer that current trends are allowed to continue , the more it will feed the cynicism and fear that many americans are feeling right now -- that they 'll never be able to repay the debt they took on to go to college , they 'll never be able to save enough to retire , they 'll never see their own children land a good job that supports a family .
and that 's why , even as i will keep on offering my own ideas for expanding opportunity , i 'll also keep challenging and welcoming those who oppose my ideas to offer their own .
if republicans have concrete plans that will actually reduce inequality , build the middle class , provide more ladders of opportunity to the poor , let 's hear them .
i want to know what they are .
if you do n't think we should raise the minimum wage , let 's hear your idea to increase people 's earnings .
if you do n't think every child should have access to preschool , tell us what you 'd do differently to give them a better shot .
if you still do n't like obamacare -- and i know you do n't --   -- even though it 's built on market - based ideas of choice and competition in the private sector , then you should explain how , exactly , you 'd cut costs , and cover more people , and make insurance more secure .
you owe it to the american people to tell us what you are for , not just what you 're against .
that way we can have a vigorous and meaningful debate .
that 's what the american people deserve .
that 's what the times demand .
it 's not enough anymore to just say we should just get our government out of the way and let the unfettered market take care of it -- for our experience tells us that 's just not true .
look , i 've never believed that government can solve every problem or should -- and neither do you .
we know that ultimately our strength is grounded in our people -- individuals out there , striving , working , making things happen .
it depends on community , a rich and generous sense of community -- that 's at the core of what happens at thearc here every day .
you understand that turning back rising inequality and expanding opportunity requires parents taking responsibility for their kids , kids taking responsibility to work hard .
it requires religious leaders who mobilize their congregations to rebuild neighborhoods block by block , requires civic organizations that can help train the unemployed , link them with businesses for the jobs of the future .
it requires companies and ceos to set an example by providing decent wages , and salaries , and benefits for their workers , and a shot for somebody who is down on his or her luck .
we know that 's our strength -- our people , our communities , our businesses .
but government ca n't stand on the sidelines in our efforts .
because government is us .
it can and should reflect our deepest values and commitments .
and if we refocus our energies on building an economy that grows for everybody , and gives every child in this country a fair chance at success , then i remain confident that the future still looks brighter than the past , and that the best days for this country we love are still ahead .
thank you , everybody .
god bless you .
god bless america .

your majesties , your royal highnesses , distinguished members of the norwegian nobel committee , citizens of america , and citizens of the world : 
 i receive this honor with deep gratitude and great humility .
it is an award that speaks to our highest aspirations -- that for all the cruelty and hardship of our world , we are not mere prisoners of fate .
our actions matter , and can bend history in the direction of justice .
and yet i would be remiss if i did not acknowledge the considerable controversy that your generous decision has generated .
in part , this is because i am at the beginning , and not the end , of my labors on the world stage .
compared to some of the giants of history who 've received this prize -- schweitzer and king ; marshall and mandela -- my accomplishments are slight .
and then there are the men and women around the world who have been jailed and beaten in the pursuit of justice ; those who toil in humanitarian organizations to relieve suffering ; the unrecognized millions whose quiet acts of courage and compassion inspire even the most hardened cynics .
i can not argue with those who find these men and women -- some known , some obscure to all but those they help -- to be far more deserving of this honor than i. 
 but perhaps the most profound issue surrounding my receipt of this prize is the fact that i am the commander - in - chief of the military of a nation in the midst of two wars .
one of these wars is winding down .
the other is a conflict that america did not seek ; one in which we are joined by 42 other countries -- including norway -- in an effort to defend ourselves and all nations from further attacks .
still , we are at war , and i 'm responsible for the deployment of thousands of young americans to battle in a distant land .
some will kill , and some will be killed .
and so i come here with an acute sense of the costs of armed conflict -- filled with difficult questions about the relationship between war and peace , and our effort to replace one with the other .
now these questions are not new .
war , in one form or another , appeared with the first man .
at the dawn of history , its morality was not questioned ; it was simply a fact , like drought or disease -- the manner in which tribes and then civilizations sought power and settled their differences .
and over time , as codes of law sought to control violence within groups , so did philosophers and clerics and statesmen seek to regulate the destructive power of war .
the concept of a " just war " emerged , suggesting that war is justified only when certain conditions were met : if it is waged as a last resort or in self - defense ; if the force used is proportional ; and if , whenever possible , civilians are spared from violence .
of course , we know that for most of history , this concept of " just war " was rarely observed .
the capacity of human beings to think up new ways to kill one another proved inexhaustible , as did our capacity to exempt from mercy those who look different or pray to a different god .
wars between armies gave way to wars between nations -- total wars in which the distinction between combatant and civilian became blurred .
in the span of 30 years , such carnage would twice engulf this continent .
and while it 's hard to conceive of a cause more just than the defeat of the third reich and the axis powers , world war ii was a conflict in which the total number of civilians who died exceeded the number of soldiers who perished .
in the wake of such destruction , and with the advent of the nuclear age , it became clear to victor and vanquished alike that the world needed institutions to prevent another world war .
and so , a quarter century after the united states senate rejected the league of nations -- an idea for which woodrow wilson received this prize -- america led the world in constructing an architecture to keep the peace : a marshall plan and a united nations , mechanisms to govern the waging of war , treaties to protect human rights , prevent genocide , restrict the most dangerous weapons .
in many ways , these efforts succeeded .
yes , terrible wars have been fought , and atrocities committed .
but there has been no third world war .
the cold war ended with jubilant crowds dismantling a wall .
commerce has stitched much of the world together .
billions have been lifted from poverty .
the ideals of liberty and self - determination , equality and the rule of law have haltingly advanced .
we are the heirs of the fortitude and foresight of generations past , and it is a legacy for which my own country is rightfully proud .
and yet , a decade into a new century , this old architecture is buckling under the weight of new threats .
the world may no longer shudder at the prospect of war between two nuclear superpowers , but proliferation may increase the risk of catastrophe .
terrorism has long been a tactic , but modern technology allows a few small men with outsized rage to murder innocents on a horrific scale .
moreover , wars between nations have increasingly given way to wars within nations .
the resurgence of ethnic or sectarian conflicts ; the growth of secessionist movements , insurgencies , and failed states -- all these things have increasingly trapped civilians in unending chaos .
in today 's wars , many more civilians are killed than soldiers ; the seeds of future conflict are sown , economies are wrecked , civil societies torn asunder , refugees amassed , children scarred .
i do not bring with me today a definitive solution to the problems of war .
what i do know is that meeting these challenges will require the same vision , hard work , and persistence of those men and women who acted so boldly decades ago .
and it will require us to think in new ways about the notions of just war and the imperatives of a just peace .
we must begin by acknowledging the hard truth : we will not eradicate violent conflict in our lifetimes .
there will be times when nations -- acting individually or in concert -- will find the use of force not only necessary but morally justified .
i make this statement mindful of what martin luther king jr. said in this same ceremony years ago : " violence never brings permanent peace .
it solves no social problem : it merely creates new and more complicated ones . "
as someone who stands here as a direct consequence of dr. king 's life work , i am living testimony to the moral force of non - violence .
i know there 's nothing weak -- nothing passive -- nothing na&iuml;ve -- in the creed and lives of gandhi and king .
but as a head of state sworn to protect and defend my nation , i can not be guided by their examples alone .
i face the world as it is , and can not stand idle in the face of threats to the american people .
for make no mistake : evil does exist in the world .
a non - violent movement could not have halted hitler 's armies .
negotiations can not convince al qaeda 's leaders to lay down their arms .
to say that force may sometimes be necessary is not a call to cynicism -- it is a recognition of history ; the imperfections of man and the limits of reason .
i raise this point , i begin with this point because in many countries there is a deep ambivalence about military action today , no matter what the cause .
and at times , this is joined by a reflexive suspicion of america , the world 's sole military superpower .
but the world must remember that it was not simply international institutions -- not just treaties and declarations -- that brought stability to a post - world war ii world .
whatever mistakes we have made , the plain fact is this : the united states of america has helped underwrite global security for more than six decades with the blood of our citizens and the strength of our arms .
the service and sacrifice of our men and women in uniform has promoted peace and prosperity from germany to korea , and enabled democracy to take hold in places like the balkans .
we have borne this burden not because we seek to impose our will .
we have done so out of enlightened self - interest -- because we seek a better future for our children and grandchildren , and we believe that their lives will be better if others ' children and grandchildren can live in freedom and prosperity .
so yes , the instruments of war do have a role to play in preserving the peace .
and yet this truth must coexist with another -- that no matter how justified , war promises human tragedy .
the soldier 's courage and sacrifice is full of glory , expressing devotion to country , to cause , to comrades in arms .
but war itself is never glorious , and we must never trumpet it as such .
so part of our challenge is reconciling these two seemingly inreconcilable truths -- that war is sometimes necessary , and war at some level is an expression of human folly .
concretely , we must direct our effort to the task that president kennedy called for long ago . "
let us focus , " he said , " on a more practical , more attainable peace , based not on a sudden revolution in human nature but on a gradual evolution in human institutions . "
a gradual evolution of human institutions .
what might this evolution look like ?
what might these practical steps be ?
to begin with , i believe that all nations -- strong and weak alike -- must adhere to standards that govern the use of force .
i -- like any head of state -- reserve the right to act unilaterally if necessary to defend my nation .
nevertheless , i am convinced that adhering to standards , international standards , strengthens those who do , and isolates and weakens those who do n't .
the world rallied around america after the 9/11 attacks , and continues to support our efforts in afghanistan , because of the horror of those senseless attacks and the recognized principle of self - defense .
likewise , the world recognized the need to confront saddam hussein when he invaded kuwait -- a consensus that sent a clear message to all about the cost of aggression .
furthermore , america -- in fact , no nation -- can insist that others follow the rules of the road if we refuse to follow them ourselves .
for when we do n't , our actions appear arbitrary and undercut the legitimacy of future interventions , no matter how justified .
and this becomes particularly important when the purpose of military action extends beyond self - defense or the defense of one nation against an aggressor .
more and more , we all confront difficult questions about how to prevent the slaughter of civilians by their own government , or to stop a civil war whose violence and suffering can engulf an entire region .
i believe that force can be justified on humanitarian grounds , as it was in the balkans , or in other places that have been scarred by war .
inaction tears at our conscience and can lead to more costly intervention later .
that 's why all responsible nations must embrace the role that militaries with a clear mandate can play to keep the peace .
america 's commitment to global security will never waver .
but in a world in which threats are more diffuse , and missions more complex , america can not act alone .
america alone can not secure the peace .
this is true in afghanistan .
this is true in failed states like somalia , where terrorism and piracy is joined by famine and human suffering .
and sadly , it will continue to be true in unstable regions for years to come .
the leaders and soldiers of nato countries , and other friends and allies , demonstrate this truth through the capacity and courage they 've shown in afghanistan .
but in many countries , there is a disconnect between the efforts of those who serve and the ambivalence of the broader public .
i understand why war is not popular , but i also know this : the belief that peace is desirable is rarely enough to achieve it .
peace requires responsibility .
peace entails sacrifice .
that 's why nato continues to be indispensable .
that 's why we must strengthen u. n. and regional peacekeeping , and not leave the task to a few countries .
that 's why we honor those who return home from peacekeeping and training abroad to oslo and rome ; to ottawa and sydney ; to dhaka and kigali -- we honor them not as makers of war , but of wagers -- but as wagers of peace .
let me make one final point about the use of force .
even as we make difficult decisions about going to war , we must also think clearly about how we fight it .
the nobel committee recognized this truth in awarding its first prize for peace to henry dunant -- the founder of the red cross , and a driving force behind the geneva conventions .
where force is necessary , we have a moral and strategic interest in binding ourselves to certain rules of conduct .
and even as we confront a vicious adversary that abides by no rules , i believe the united states of america must remain a standard bearer in the conduct of war .
that is what makes us different from those whom we fight .
that is a source of our strength .
that is why i prohibited torture .
that is why i ordered the prison at guantanamo bay closed .
and that is why i have reaffirmed america 's commitment to abide by the geneva conventions .
we lose ourselves when we compromise the very ideals that we fight to defend .
and we honor -- we honor those ideals by upholding them not when it 's easy , but when it is hard .
i have spoken at some length to the question that must weigh on our minds and our hearts as we choose to wage war .
but let me now turn to our effort to avoid such tragic choices , and speak of three ways that we can build a just and lasting peace .
first , in dealing with those nations that break rules and laws , i believe that we must develop alternatives to violence that are tough enough to actually change behavior -- for if we want a lasting peace , then the words of the international community must mean something .
those regimes that break the rules must be held accountable .
sanctions must exact a real price .
intransigence must be met with increased pressure -- and such pressure exists only when the world stands together as one .
one urgent example is the effort to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons , and to seek a world without them .
in the middle of the last century , nations agreed to be bound by a treaty whose bargain is clear : all will have access to peaceful nuclear power ; those without nuclear weapons will forsake them ; and those with nuclear weapons will work towards disarmament .
i am committed to upholding this treaty .
it is a centerpiece of my foreign policy .
and i 'm working with president medvedev to reduce america and russia 's nuclear stockpiles .
but it is also incumbent upon all of us to insist that nations like iran and north korea do not game the system .
those who claim to respect international law can not avert their eyes when those laws are flouted .
those who care for their own security can not ignore the danger of an arms race in the middle east or east asia .
those who seek peace can not stand idly by as nations arm themselves for nuclear war .
the same principle applies to those who violate international laws by brutalizing their own people .
when there is genocide in darfur , systematic rape in congo , repression in burma -- there must be consequences .
yes , there will be engagement ; yes , there will be diplomacy -- but there must be consequences when those things fail .
and the closer we stand together , the less likely we will be faced with the choice between armed intervention and complicity in oppression .
this brings me to a second point -- the nature of the peace that we seek .
for peace is not merely the absence of visible conflict .
only a just peace based on the inherent rights and dignity of every individual can truly be lasting .
it was this insight that drove drafters of the universal declaration of human rights after the second world war .
in the wake of devastation , they recognized that if human rights are not protected , peace is a hollow promise .
and yet too often , these words are ignored .
for some countries , the failure to uphold human rights is excused by the false suggestion that these are somehow western principles , foreign to local cultures or stages of a nation 's development .
and within america , there has long been a tension between those who describe themselves as realists or idealists -- a tension that suggests a stark choice between the narrow pursuit of interests or an endless campaign to impose our values around the world .
i reject these choices .
i believe that peace is unstable where citizens are denied the right to speak freely or worship as they please ; choose their own leaders or assemble without fear .
pent - up grievances fester , and the suppression of tribal and religious identity can lead to violence .
we also know that the opposite is true .
only when europe became free did it finally find peace .
america has never fought a war against a democracy , and our closest friends are governments that protect the rights of their citizens .
no matter how callously defined , neither america 's interests -- nor the world 's -- are served by the denial of human aspirations .
so even as we respect the unique culture and traditions of different countries , america will always be a voice for those aspirations that are universal .
we will bear witness to the quiet dignity of reformers like aung sang suu kyi ; to the bravery of zimbabweans who cast their ballots in the face of beatings ; to the hundreds of thousands who have marched silently through the streets of iran .
it is telling that the leaders of these governments fear the aspirations of their own people more than the power of any other nation .
and it is the responsibility of all free people and free nations to make clear that these movements -- these movements of hope and history -- they have us on their side .
let me also say this : the promotion of human rights can not be about exhortation alone .
at times , it must be coupled with painstaking diplomacy .
i know that engagement with repressive regimes lacks the satisfying purity of indignation .
but i also know that sanctions without outreach -- condemnation without discussion -- can carry forward only a crippling status quo .
no repressive regime can move down a new path unless it has the choice of an open door .
in light of the cultural revolution 's horrors , nixon 's meeting with mao appeared inexcusable -- and yet it surely helped set china on a path where millions of its citizens have been lifted from poverty and connected to open societies .
pope john paul 's engagement with poland created space not just for the catholic church , but for labor leaders like lech walesa .
ronald reagan 's efforts on arms control and embrace of perestroika not only improved relations with the soviet union , but empowered dissidents throughout eastern europe .
there 's no simple formula here .
but we must try as best we can to balance isolation and engagement , pressure and incentives , so that human rights and dignity are advanced over time .
third , a just peace includes not only civil and political rights -- it must encompass economic security and opportunity .
for true peace is not just freedom from fear , but freedom from want .
it is undoubtedly true that development rarely takes root without security ; it is also true that security does not exist where human beings do not have access to enough food , or clean water , or the medicine and shelter they need to survive .
it does not exist where children ca n't aspire to a decent education or a job that supports a family .
the absence of hope can rot a society from within .
and that 's why helping farmers feed their own people -- or nations educate their children and care for the sick -- is not mere charity .
it 's also why the world must come together to confront climate change .
there is little scientific dispute that if we do nothing , we will face more drought , more famine , more mass displacement -- all of which will fuel more conflict for decades .
for this reason , it is not merely scientists and environmental activists who call for swift and forceful action -- it 's military leaders in my own country and others who understand our common security hangs in the balance .
agreements among nations .
strong institutions .
support for human rights .
investments in development .
all these are vital ingredients in bringing about the evolution that president kennedy spoke about .
and yet , i do not believe that we will have the will , the determination , the staying power , to complete this work without something more -- and that 's the continued expansion of our moral imagination ; an insistence that there 's something irreducible that we all share .
as the world grows smaller , you might think it would be easier for human beings to recognize how similar we are ; to understand that we 're all basically seeking the same things ; that we all hope for the chance to live out our lives with some measure of happiness and fulfillment for ourselves and our families .
and yet somehow , given the dizzying pace of globalization , the cultural leveling of modernity , it perhaps comes as no surprise that people fear the loss of what they cherish in their particular identities -- their race , their tribe , and perhaps most powerfully their religion .
in some places , this fear has led to conflict .
at times , it even feels like we 're moving backwards .
we see it in the middle east , as the conflict between arabs and jews seems to harden .
we see it in nations that are torn asunder by tribal lines .
and most dangerously , we see it in the way that religion is used to justify the murder of innocents by those who have distorted and defiled the great religion of islam , and who attacked my country from afghanistan .
these extremists are not the first to kill in the name of god ; the cruelties of the crusades are amply recorded .
but they remind us that no holy war can ever be a just war .
for if you truly believe that you are carrying out divine will , then there is no need for restraint -- no need to spare the pregnant mother , or the medic , or the red cross worker , or even a person of one 's own faith .
such a warped view of religion is not just incompatible with the concept of peace , but i believe it 's incompatible with the very purpose of faith -- for the one rule that lies at the heart of every major religion is that we do unto others as we would have them do unto us .
adhering to this law of love has always been the core struggle of human nature .
for we are fallible .
we make mistakes , and fall victim to the temptations of pride , and power , and sometimes evil .
even those of us with the best of intentions will at times fail to right the wrongs before us .
but we do not have to think that human nature is perfect for us to still believe that the human condition can be perfected .
we do not have to live in an idealized world to still reach for those ideals that will make it a better place .
the non - violence practiced by men like gandhi and king may not have been practical or possible in every circumstance , but the love that they preached -- their fundamental faith in human progress -- that must always be the north star that guides us on our journey .
for if we lose that faith -- if we dismiss it as silly or na&iuml;ve ; if we divorce it from the decisions that we make on issues of war and peace -- then we lose what 's best about humanity .
we lose our sense of possibility .
we lose our moral compass .
like generations have before us , we must reject that future .
as dr. king said at this occasion so many years ago , " i refuse to accept despair as the final response to the ambiguities of history .
i refuse to accept the idea that the ' isness ' of man 's present condition makes him morally incapable of reaching up for the eternal ' oughtness ' that forever confronts him . "
let us reach for the world that ought to be -- that spark of the divine that still stirs within each of our souls .
somewhere today , in the here and now , in the world as it is , a soldier sees he 's outgunned , but stands firm to keep the peace .
somewhere today , in this world , a young protestor awaits the brutality of her government , but has the courage to march on .
somewhere today , a mother facing punishing poverty still takes the time to teach her child , scrapes together what few coins she has to send that child to school -- because she believes that a cruel world still has a place for that child 's dreams .
let us live by their example .
we can acknowledge that oppression will always be with us , and still strive for justice .
we can admit the intractability of depravation , and still strive for dignity .
clear - eyed , we can understand that there will be war , and still strive for peace .
we can do that -- for that is the story of human progress ; that 's the hope of all the world ; and at this moment of challenge , that must be our work here on earth .
thank you very much .

good morning , everybody .
as you know , i just met with leaders of both parties to discuss a way forward in light of the severe budget cuts that start to take effect today .
i told them these cuts will hurt our economy .
they will cost us jobs .
and to set it right , both sides need to be willing to compromise .
the good news is the american people are strong and they 're resilient .
they fought hard to recover from the worst economic crisis since the great depression , and we will get through this as well .
even with these cuts in place , folks all across this country will work hard to make sure that we keep the recovery going .
but washington sure is n't making it easy .
at a time when our businesses have finally begun to get some traction -- hiring new workers , bringing jobs back to america -- we should n't be making a series of dumb , arbitrary cuts to things that businesses depend on and workers depend on , like education , and research , and infrastructure and defense .
it 's unnecessary .
and at a time when too many americans are still looking for work , it 's inexcusable .
now , what 's important to understand is that not everyone will feel the pain of these cuts right away .
the pain , though , will be real .
beginning this week , many middle - class families will have their lives disrupted in significant ways .
businesses that work with the military , like the virginia shipbuilder that i visited on tuesday , may have to lay folks off .
communities near military bases will take a serious blow .
hundreds of thousands of americans who serve their country -- border patrol agents , fbi agents , civilians who work at the pentagon -- all will suffer significant pay cuts and furloughs .
all of this will cause a ripple effect throughout our economy .
layoffs and pay cuts means that people have less money in their pockets , and that means that they have less money to spend at local businesses .
that means lower profits .
that means fewer hires .
the longer these cuts remain in place , the greater the damage to our economy -- a slow grind that will intensify with each passing day .
so economists are estimating that as a consequence of this sequester , that we could see growth cut by over one - half of 1 percent .
it will cost about 750,000 jobs at a time when we should be growing jobs more quickly .
so every time that we get a piece of economic news , over the next month , next two months , next six months , as long as the sequester is in place , we 'll know that that economic news could have been better if congress had not failed to act .
and let 's be clear .
none of this is necessary .
it 's happening because of a choice that republicans in congress have made .
they 've allowed these cuts to happen because they refuse to budge on closing a single wasteful loophole to help reduce the deficit .
as recently as yesterday , they decided to protect special interest tax breaks for the well - off and well - connected , and they think that that 's apparently more important than protecting our military or middle - class families from the pain of these cuts .
i do believe that we can and must replace these cuts with a more balanced approach that asks something from everybody : smart spending cuts ; entitlement reform ; tax reform that makes the tax code more fair for families and businesses without raising tax rates -- all so that we can responsibly lower the deficit without laying off workers , or forcing parents to scramble for childcare , or slashing financial aid for college students .
i do n't think that 's too much to ask .
i do n't think that is partisan .
it 's the kind of approach that i 've proposed for two years .
it 's what i ran on last year .
and the majority of the american people agree with me in this approach , including , by the way , a majority of republicans .
we just need republicans in congress to catch up with their own party and their country on this .
and if they did so , we could make a lot of progress .
i do know that there are republicans in congress who privately , at least , say that they would rather close tax loopholes than let these cuts go through .
i know that there are democrats who 'd rather do smart entitlement reform than let these cuts go through .
so there is a caucus of common sense up on capitol hill .
it 's just -- it 's a silent group right now , and we want to make sure that their voices start getting heard .
in the coming days and in the coming weeks i 'm going to keep on reaching out to them , both individually and as groups of senators or members of the house , and say to them , let 's fix this -- not just for a month or two , but for years to come .
because the greatest nation on earth does not conduct its business in month - to - month increments , or by careening from crisis to crisis .
and america has got a lot more work to do .
in the meantime , we ca n't let political gridlock around the budget stand in the way of other areas where we can make progress .
i was pleased to see that the house passed the violence against women act yesterday .
that is a big win for not just women but for families and for the american people .
it 's a law that 's going to save lives and help more americans live free from fear .
it 's something that we 've been pushing on for a long time .
i was glad to see that done .
and it 's an example of how we can still get some important bipartisan legislation through this congress even though there is still these fiscal arguments taking place .
and i think there are other areas where we can make progress even with the sequester unresolved .
i will continue to push for those initiatives .
i 'm going to keep pushing for high - quality preschool for every family that wants it .
i 'm going to keep pushing to make sure that we raise the minimum wage so that it 's one that families can live on .
i 'm going to keep on pushing for immigration reform , and reform our voting system , and improvements on our transportation sector .
and i 'm going to keep pushing for sensible gun reforms because i still think they deserve a vote .
this is the agenda that the american people voted for .
these are america 's priorities .
they are too important to go unaddressed .
and i 'm going to keep pushing to make sure that we see them through .
so with that , i 'm going to take some questions .
i 'm going to start with julie .
look , we 've already cut $ 2.5 trillion in our deficit .
everybody says we need to cut $ 4 trillion , which means we have to come up with another trillion and a half .
the vast majority of economists agree that the problem when it comes to deficits is not discretionary spending .
it 's not that we 're spending too much money on education .
it 's not that we 're spending too much money on job training , or that we 're spending too much money rebuilding our roads and our bridges .
we 're not .
the problem that we have is a long - term problem in terms of our health care costs and programs like medicare .
and what i 've said very specifically , very detailed is that i 'm prepared to take on the problem where it exists -- on entitlements -- and do some things that my own party really does n't like -- if it 's part of a broader package of sensible deficit reduction .
so the deal that i 've put forward over the last two years , the deal that i put forward as recently as december is still on the table .
i am prepared to do hard things and to push my democratic friends to do hard things .
but what i ca n't do is ask middle - class families , ask seniors , ask students to bear the entire burden of deficit reduction when we know we 've got a bunch of tax loopholes that are benefiting the well - off and the well - connected , are n't contributing to growth , are n't contributing to our economy .
it 's not fair .
it 's not right .
the american people do n't think it 's fair and do n't think it 's right .
so i recognize that speaker boehner has got challenges in his caucus .
i recognize that it 's very hard for republican leaders to be perceived as making concessions to me .
sometimes , i reflect is there something else i could do to make these guys -- i 'm not talking about the leaders now , but maybe some of the house republican caucus members -- not paint horns on my head .
and i genuinely believe that there 's an opportunity for us to cooperate .
but what does n't make sense -- and the only thing that we 've seen from republicans so far in terms of proposals -- is to replace this set of arbitrary cuts with even worse arbitrary cuts .
that 's not going to help the economy .
that 's not going to help growth .
that 's not going to create jobs .
and as a number of economists have noted , ironically , it does n't even reduce our deficit in the smartest way possible or the fastest way possible .
so in terms of going forward , my hope is that after some reflection -- as members of congress start hearing from constituents who are being negatively impacted , as we start seeing the impact that the sequester is having -- that they step back and say , all right , is there a way for us to move forward on a package of entitlement reforms , tax reform , not raising tax rates , identifying programs that do n't work , coming up with a plan that 's comprehensive and that makes sense .
and it may take a couple of weeks .
it may take a couple of months , but i 'm just going to keep on pushing on it .
and my view is that , ultimately , common sense prevails .
but what is true right now is that the republicans have made a choice that maintaining an ironclad rule that we will not accept an extra dime 's worth of revenue makes it very difficult for us to get any larger comprehensive deal .
and that 's a choice they 're making .
they 're saying that it 's more important to preserve these tax loopholes than it is to prevent these arbitrary cuts .
and what 's interesting is speaker boehner , just a couple months ago , identified these tax loopholes and tax breaks and said we should close them and raise revenue .
so it 's not as if it 's not possible to do .
they themselves have suggested that it 's possible to do .
and if they believe that in fact these tax loopholes and these tax breaks for the well - off and the well - connected are n't contributing to growth , are n't good for our economy , are n't particularly fair and can raise revenue , well , why do n't we get started ?
why do n't we do that ?
it may be that because of the politics within the republican party , they ca n't do it right now .
i understand that .
my hope is , is that they can do it later .
and i just want to repeat , julie , because i think it 's very important to understand , it 's not as if democrats are n't being asked to do anything , either , to compromise .
there are members of my party who violently disagree with the notion that we should do anything on medicare .
and i 'm willing to say to them , i disagree with you , because i want to preserve medicare for the long haul .
and we 're going to have some tough politics within my party to get this done .
this is not a situation where i 'm only asking for concessions from republicans and asking nothing from democrats .
i 'm saying that everybody is going to have to do something .
and the one key to this whole thing is trying to make sure we keep in mind who we 're here for .
we are not here for ourselves , we 're not here for our parties , we 're not here to advance our electoral prospects .
we 're here for american families who have been getting battered pretty good over the last four years , are just starting to see the economy improve ; businesses are just starting to see some confidence coming back .
and this is not a win for anybody , this is a loss for the american people .
and , again , if we step back and just remind ourselves what it is we 're supposed to be doing here , then hopefully common sense will out in the end .
well , julie , give me an example of what i might do .
well , no , but i 'm trying to clarify the question .
what i 'm suggesting is , i 've put forward a plan that calls for serious spending cuts , serious entitlement reforms , goes right at the problem that is at the heart of our long - term deficit problem .
i 've offered negotiations around that kind of balanced approach .
and so far , we 've gotten rebuffed because what speaker boehner and the republicans have said is , we can not do any revenue , we ca n't do a dime 's worth of revenue .
so what more do you think i should do ?
okay , i just wanted to clarify .
because if people have a suggestion , i 'm happy to -- this is a room full of smart folks .
all right -- zach goldfarb .
well , i 'd like to think i 've still got some persuasive power left .
let me check .
look , the issue is not my persuasive power .
the american people agree with my approach .
they agree that we should have a balanced approach to deficit reduction .
the question is can the american people help persuade their members of congress to do the right thing , and i have a lot of confidence that over time , if the american people express their displeasure about how something is working , that eventually congress responds .
sometimes there is a little gap between what the american people think and what congress thinks .
but eventually congress catches up .
with respect to the budget and keeping the government open -- i 'll try for our viewing audience to make sure that we 're not talking in washington gobbledygook .
what 's called the continuing resolution , which is essentially just an extension of last year 's budget into this year 's budget to make sure that basic government functions continue , i think it 's the right thing to do to make sure that we do n't have a government shutdown .
and that 's preventable .
we have a budget control act , right ?
we agreed to a certain amount of money that was going to be spent each year , and certain funding levels for our military , our education system , and so forth .
if we stick to that deal , then i will be supportive of us sticking to that deal .
it 's a deal that i made .
the sequester are additional cuts on top of that .
and by law , until congress takes the sequester away , we 'd have to abide by those additional cuts .
but there 's no reason why we should have another crisis by shutting the government down in addition to these arbitrary spending cuts .
zach , i 'm not going to -- i never want to make myself 100 percent clear with you guys .
but i think it 's fair to say that i made a deal for a certain budget , certain numbers .
there 's no reason why that deal needs to be reopened .
it was a deal that speaker boehner made as well , and all the leadership made .
and if the bill that arrives on my desk is reflective of the commitments that we 've previously made , then obviously i would sign it because i want to make sure that we keep on doing what we need to do for the american people .
jessica .
> 
  i mean , jessica , i am not a dictator .
i 'm the president .
so , ultimately , if mitch mcconnell or john boehner say , we need to go to catch a plane , i ca n't have secret service block the doorway , right ?
so -- 

  i understand .
and i know that this has been some of the conventional wisdom that 's been floating around washington that somehow , even though most people agree that i 'm being reasonable , that most people agree i 'm presenting a fair deal , the fact that they do n't take it means that i should somehow do a jedi mind - meld with these folks and convince them to do what 's right .
well , they 're elected .
we have a constitutional system of government .
the speaker of the house and the leader of the senate and all those folks have responsibilities .
what i can do is i can make the best possible case for why we need to do the right thing .
i can speak to the american people about the consequences of the decisions that congress is making or the lack of decision - making by congress .
but , ultimately , it 's a choice they make .
and this idea that somehow there 's a secret formula or secret sauce to get speaker boehner or mitch mcconnell to say , you know what , mr. president , you 're right , we should close some tax loopholes for the well - off and well - connected in exchange for some serious entitlement reform and spending cuts of programs we do n't need .
i think if there was a secret way to do that , i would have tried it .
i would have done it .
what i can do is i can make the best possible argument .
and i can offer concessions , and i can offer compromise .
i can negotiate .
i can make sure that my party is willing to compromise and is not being ideological or thinking about these just in terms of political terms .
and i think i 've done that and i will continue to do that .
but what i ca n't do is force congress to do the right thing .
the american people may have the capacity to do that .
and in the absence of a decision on the part of the speaker of the house and others to put middle - class families ahead of whatever political imperatives he might have right now , we 're going to have these cuts in place .
but , again , i 'm hopeful about human nature .
i think that over time people do the right thing .
and i will keep on reaching out and seeing if there are other formulas or other ways to jigger this thing into place so that we get a better result .
well jessica , look , i 'll just give you an example .
the department of defense right now has to figure out how the children of military families are going to continue with their schooling over the next several months , because teachers at these army bases are typically civilians .
they are therefore subject to furlough , which means that they may not be able to teach one day a week .
now , i expect that we 'll be able to manage around it .
but if i 'm a man or woman in uniform in afghanistan right now , the notion that my spouse back home is having to worry about whether or not our kids are getting the best education possible , the notion that my school for my children on an army base might be disrupted because congress did n't act , that 's an impact .
now , mayor bloomberg and others may not feel that impact .
i suspect they wo n't .
but that family will .
the border patrol agents who are out there in the hot sun , doing what congress said they 're supposed to be doing , finding out suddenly that they 're getting a 10-percent pay cut and having to go home and explain that to their families , i do n't think they feel like this is an exaggerated impact .
so i guess it depends on where you sit .
now , what is absolutely true is that not everybody is going to feel it .
not everybody is going to feel it all at once .
what is true is that the accumulation of those stories all across this country , folks who suddenly -- might have been working all their lives to get an education , just so that they can get that job and get out of welfare and they 've got their kid in head start , and now , suddenly , that head start slot is gone and they 're trying to figure out how am i going to keep my job , because i ca n't afford child care for my kid ; some of the suppliers for those shipbuilders down in virginia , where you 've got some suppliers who are small businesses , this is all they do , and they may shut down those companies , and their employees are going to be laid off -- the accumulation of all of those stories of impact is going to make our economy weaker .
it 's going to mean less growth .
it 's going to mean hundreds of thousands of jobs lost .
that is real .
that 's not -- we 're not making that up .
that 's not a scare tactic , that 's a fact .
starting tomorrow , everybody here , all the folks who are cleaning the floors at the capitol -- now that congress has left , somebody is going to be vacuuming and cleaning those floors and throwing out the garbage -- they 're going to have less pay .
the janitors , the security guards , they just got a pay cut , and they 've got to figure out how to manage that .
that 's real .
so i want to be very clear here .
it is absolutely true that this is not going to precipitate the kind of crisis we talked about with america defaulting and some of the problems around the debt ceiling .
i do n't anticipate a huge financial crisis , but people are going to be hurt .
the economy will not grow as quickly as it would have .
unemployment will not go down as quickly as it would have -- and there are lives behind that .
and that 's real .
and it 's not necessary -- that 's the problem .
christi parsons .
hey , christi .
as everybody here knows , last year , upon a long period of reflection , i concluded that we can not discriminate against same - sex couples when it comes to marriage ; that the basic principle that america is founded on -- the idea that we 're all created equal -- applies to everybody , regardless of sexual orientation , as well as race or gender or religion or ethnicity .
and i think that the same evolution that i 've gone through is an evolution that the country as a whole has gone through .
and i think it is a profoundly positive thing .
so that when the supreme court essentially called the question by taking this case about california 's law , i did n't feel like that was something that this administration could avoid .
i felt it was important for us to articulate what i believe and what this administration stands for .
and although i do think that we 're seeing , on a state - by - state basis , progress being made -- more and more states recognizing same - sex couples and giving them the opportunity to marry and maintain all the benefits of marriage that heterosexual couples do -- when the supreme court asks , do you think that the california law , which does n't provide any rationale for discriminating against same - sex couples other than just the notion that , well , they 're same - sex couples , if the supreme court asks me or my attorney general or solicitor general , do we think that meets constitutional muster , i felt it was important for us to answer that question honestly -- and the answer is no .
well , that 's an argument that i 've made personally .
the solicitor general in his institutional role going before the supreme court is obliged to answer the specific question before them .
and the specific question presented before the court right now is whether prop 8 and the california law is unconstitutional .
and what we 've done is we 've put forward a basic principle , which is -- which applies to all equal protection cases .
whenever a particular group is being discriminated against , the court asks the question , what 's the rationale for this -- and it better be a good reason .
and if you do n't have a good reason , we 're going to strike it down .
and what we 've said is , is that same - sex couples are a group , a class that deserves heightened scrutiny , that the supreme court needs to ask the state why it 's doing it .
and if the state does n't have a good reason , it should be struck down .
that 's the core principle as applied to this case .
now , the court may decide that if it does n't apply in this case , it probably ca n't apply in any case .
there 's no good reason for it .
if i were on the court , that would probably be the view that i 'd put forward .
but i 'm not a judge , i 'm the president .
so the basic principle , though , is let 's treat everybody fairly and let 's treat everybody equally .
and i think that the brief that 's been presented accurately reflects our views .
ari shapiro .
right .
well , a couple of things .
number one is to make sure that we keep making progress wherever we can on things that are important to middle - class americans and those who are fighting to get into the middle class .
so if you set aside budget fights for a second , we 've been able to get now the violence against women act done .
the conversations that are taking place on a bipartisan basis around immigration reform are moving forward .
we 've seen great interest in a bipartisan fashion around how we can continue to improve our education system , including around early childhood education .
there have been constructive discussions around how do we reduce gun violence .
and what i 'm going to keep on trying to do is to make sure that we push on those things that are important to families .
and we wo n't get everything done all at once , but we can get a lot done .
so that 's point number one .
with respect to the budget , what i 've done is to make a case to the american people that we have to make sure that we have a balanced approach to deficit reduction , but that deficit reduction alone is not an economic policy .
and part of the challenge that we 've had here is that not only congress , but i think washington generally spends all its time together about deficits and does n't spend a lot of time talking about how do we create jobs .
so i want to make sure that we 're talking about both .
i think that , for example , we could put a lot of people back to work right now rebuilding our roads and bridges .
and this is deferred maintenance .
we know we 're going to have to do it .
and i went to a bridge that connects mitch mcconnell 's state to john boehner 's state , and it was a rotten bridge and everybody knows it .
and i 'll bet they really want to see that improved .
well , how do we do it ?
let 's have a conversation about it .
that will create jobs .
it will be good for businesses , reduce commuter times , improve commuter safety .
that has to be part of this conversation , not just this constant argument about cutting and spending .
so i guess my point is , ari , that what i want to try to do is to make sure that we 're constantly focused , that our true north is on how are we helping american families succeed .
deficit reduction is part of that agenda and an important part .
but it 's not the only part .
and i do n't want us to be paralyzed on everything just because we disagree on this one thing .
and as i already said to jessica , what i 'm also hoping is , is that , over time -- perhaps after republicans step back and maybe they can say , you know what , we stuck tough on the sequester , and this makes us feel good , and the republican caucus is in a better mood when they come back -- maybe then we can have a more serious discussion about what the real problems on deficit and deficit reduction are .
and the good thing about america is that sometimes we get to these bottlenecks and we get stuck , and you have these sharp , partisan fights , but the american people pretty steadily are common sense and practical , and eventually , that common - sense , practical approach wins out .
and i think that 's what will happen here as well .
and , in the meantime , just to make the final point about the sequester , we will get through this .
this is not going to be a apocalypse , i think as some people have said .
it 's just dumb .
and it 's going to hurt .
it 's going to hurt individual people and it 's going to hurt the economy overall .
but if congress comes to its senses a week from now , a month from now , three months from now , then there 's a lot of open running room there for us to grow our economy much more quickly and to advance the agenda of the american people dramatically .
so this is a temporary stop on what i believe is the long - term , outstanding prospect for american growth and greatness .
thank you very much .

mr. speaker , mr. vice president , members of congress , my fellow americans : 
 tonight marks the eighth year that i 've come here to report on the state of the union .
and for this final one , i 'm going to try to make it a little shorter .
i know some of you are antsy to get back to iowa .
i 've been there .
i 'll be shaking hands afterwards if you want some tips .
and i understand that because it 's an election season , expectations for what we will achieve this year are low .
but , mr. speaker , i appreciate the constructive approach that you and the other leaders took at the end of last year to pass a budget and make tax cuts permanent for working families .
so i hope we can work together this year on some bipartisan priorities like criminal justice reform--   -- and helping people who are battling prescription drug abuse and heroin abuse .
so , who knows , we might surprise the cynics again .
but tonight , i want to go easy on the traditional list of proposals for the year ahead .
do n't worry , i 've got plenty , from helping students learn to write computer code to personalizing medical treatments for patients .
and i will keep pushing for progress on the work that i believe still needs to be done .
fixing a broken immigration system .
protecting our kids from gun violence .
equal pay for equal work .
paid leave .
raising the minimum wage .
all these things still matter to hardworking families .
they 're still the right thing to do .
and i wo n't let up until they get done .
but for my final address to this chamber , i do n't want to just talk about next year .
i want to focus on the next five years , the next 10 years , and beyond .
i want to focus on our future .
we live in a time of extraordinary change -- change that 's reshaping the way we live , the way we work , our planet , our place in the world .
it 's change that promises amazing medical breakthroughs , but also economic disruptions that strain working families .
it promises education for girls in the most remote villages , but also connects terrorists plotting an ocean away .
it 's change that can broaden opportunity , or widen inequality .
and whether we like it or not , the pace of this change will only accelerate .
america has been through big changes before -- wars and depression , the influx of new immigrants , workers fighting for a fair deal , movements to expand civil rights .
each time , there have been those who told us to fear the future ; who claimed we could slam the brakes on change ; who promised to restore past glory if we just got some group or idea that was threatening america under control .
and each time , we overcame those fears .
we did not , in the words of lincoln , adhere to the " dogmas of the quiet past . "
instead we thought anew , and acted anew .
we made change work for us , always extending america 's promise outward , to the next frontier , to more people .
and because we did -- because we saw opportunity where others saw only peril -- we emerged stronger and better than before .
what was true then can be true now .
our unique strengths as a nation -- our optimism and work ethic , our spirit of discovery , our diversity , our commitment to rule of law -- these things give us everything we need to ensure prosperity and security for generations to come .
in fact , it 's that spirit that made the progress of these past seven years possible .
it 's how we recovered from the worst economic crisis in generations .
it 's how we reformed our health care system , and reinvented our energy sector ; how we delivered more care and benefits to our troops and veterans , and how we secured the freedom in every state to marry the person we love .
but such progress is not inevitable .
it 's the result of choices we make together .
and we face such choices right now .
will we respond to the changes of our time with fear , turning inward as a nation , turning against each other as a people ?
or will we face the future with confidence in who we are , in what we stand for , in the incredible things that we can do together ?
so let 's talk about the future , and four big questions that i believe we as a country have to answer -- regardless of who the next president is , or who controls the next congress .
first , how do we give everyone a fair shot at opportunity and security in this new economy ?
second , how do we make technology work for us , and not against us -- especially when it comes to solving urgent challenges like climate change ?
third , how do we keep america safe and lead the world without becoming its policeman ?
and finally , how can we make our politics reflect what 's best in us , and not what 's worst ?
let me start with the economy , and a basic fact : the united states of america , right now , has the strongest , most durable economy in the world .
we 're in the middle of the longest streak of private sector job creation in history .
more than 14 million new jobs , the strongest two years of job growth since the ' 90s , an unemployment rate cut in half .
our auto industry just had its best year ever .
that 's just part of a manufacturing surge that 's created nearly 900,000 new jobs in the past six years .
and we 've done all this while cutting our deficits by almost three - quarters .
anyone claiming that america 's economy is in decline is peddling fiction .
now , what is true -- and the reason that a lot of americans feel anxious-- is that the economy has been changing in profound ways , changes that started long before the great recession hit ; changes that have not let up .
today , technology does n't just replace jobs on the assembly line , but any job where work can be automated .
companies in a global economy can locate anywhere , and they face tougher competition .
as a result , workers have less leverage for a raise .
companies have less loyalty to their communities .
and more and more wealth and income is concentrated at the very top .
all these trends have squeezed workers , even when they have jobs ; even when the economy is growing .
it 's made it harder for a hardworking family to pull itself out of poverty , harder for young people to start their careers , tougher for workers to retire when they want to .
and although none of these trends are unique to america , they do offend our uniquely american belief that everybody who works hard should get a fair shot .
for the past seven years , our goal has been a growing economy that works also better for everybody .
we 've made progress .
but we need to make more .
and despite all the political arguments that we 've had these past few years , there are actually some areas where americans broadly agree .
we agree that real opportunity requires every american to get the education and training they need to land a good - paying job .
the bipartisan reform of no child left behind was an important start , and together , we 've increased early childhood education , lifted high school graduation rates to new highs , boosted graduates in fields like engineering .
in the coming years , we should build on that progress , by providing pre - k for all and --   -- offering every student the hands - on computer science and math classes that make them job - ready on day one .
we should recruit and support more great teachers for our kids .
and we have to make college affordable for every american .
no hardworking student should be stuck in the red .
we 've already reduced student loan payments to 10 percent of a borrower 's income .
and that 's good .
but now , we 've actually got to cut the cost of college .
providing two years of community college at no cost for every responsible student is one of the best ways to do that , and i 'm going to keep fighting to get that started this year .
it 's the right thing to do .
but a great education is n't all we need in this new economy .
we also need benefits and protections that provide a basic measure of security .
it 's not too much of a stretch to say that some of the only people in america who are going to work the same job , in the same place , with a health and retirement package for 30 years are sitting in this chamber .
for everyone else , especially folks in their 40s and 50s , saving for retirement or bouncing back from job loss has gotten a lot tougher .
americans understand that at some point in their careers , in this new economy , they may have to retool and they may have to retrain .
but they should n't lose what they 've already worked so hard to build in the process .
that 's why social security and medicare are more important than ever .
we should n't weaken them ; we should strengthen them .
and for americans short of retirement , basic benefits should be just as mobile as everything else is today .
that , by the way , is what the affordable care act is all about .
it 's about filling the gaps in employer - based care so that when you lose a job , or you go back to school , or you strike out and launch that new business , you 'll still have coverage .
nearly 18 million people have gained coverage so far .
and in the process , health care inflation has slowed .
and our businesses have created jobs every single month since it became law .
now , i 'm guessing we wo n't agree on health care anytime soon .
a little applause right there .
just a guess .
but there should be other ways parties can work together to improve economic security .
say a hardworking american loses his job -- we should n't just make sure that he can get unemployment insurance ; we should make sure that program encourages him to retrain for a business that 's ready to hire him .
if that new job does n't pay as much , there should be a system of wage insurance in place so that he can still pay his bills .
and even if he 's going from job to job , he should still be able to save for retirement and take his savings with him .
that 's the way we make the new economy work better for everybody .
i also know speaker ryan has talked about his interest in tackling poverty .
america is about giving everybody willing to work a chance , a hand up .
and i 'd welcome a serious discussion about strategies we can all support , like expanding tax cuts for low - income workers who do n't have children .
but there are some areas where we just have to be honest -- it has been difficult to find agreement over the last seven years .
and a lot of them fall under the category of what role the government should play in making sure the system 's not rigged in favor of the wealthiest and biggest corporations .
and it 's an honest disagreement , and the american people have a choice to make .
i believe a thriving private sector is the lifeblood of our economy .
i think there are outdated regulations that need to be changed .
there is red tape that needs to be cut .
there you go !
yes !
but after years now of record corporate profits , working families wo n't get more opportunity or bigger paychecks just by letting big banks or big oil or hedge funds make their own rules at everybody else 's expense .
middle - class families are not going to feel more secure because we allowed attacks on collective bargaining to go unanswered .
food stamp recipients did not cause the financial crisis ; recklessness on wall street did .
immigrants are n't the principal reason wages have n't gone up ; those decisions are made in the boardrooms that all too often put quarterly earnings over long - term returns .
it 's sure not the average family watching tonight that avoids paying taxes through offshore accounts .
the point is , i believe that in this new economy , workers and start - ups and small businesses need more of a voice , not less .
the rules should work for them .
and i 'm not alone in this .
this year i plan to lift up the many businesses who 've figured out that doing right by their workers or their customers or their communities ends up being good for their shareholders .
and i want to spread those best practices across america .
that 's part of a brighter future .
in fact , it turns out many of our best corporate citizens are also our most creative .
and this brings me to the second big question we as a country have to answer : how do we reignite that spirit of innovation to meet our biggest challenges ?
sixty years ago , when the russians beat us into space , we did n't deny sputnik was up there .
we did n't argue about the science , or shrink our research and development budget .
we built a space program almost overnight .
and 12 years later , we were walking on the moon .
now , that spirit of discovery is in our dna .
america is thomas edison and the wright brothers and george washington carver .
america is grace hopper and katherine johnson and sally ride .
america is every immigrant and entrepreneur from boston to austin to silicon valley , racing to shape a better world .
that 's who we are .
and over the past seven years , we 've nurtured that spirit .
we 've protected an open internet , and taken bold new steps to get more students and low - income americans online .
we 've launched next - generation manufacturing hubs , and online tools that give an entrepreneur everything he or she needs to start a business in a single day .
but we can do so much more .
last year , vice president biden said that with a new moonshot , america can cure cancer .
last month , he worked with this congress to give scientists at the national institutes of health the strongest resources that they 've had in over a decade .
so tonight , i 'm announcing a new national effort to get it done .
and because he 's gone to the mat for all of us on so many issues over the past 40 years , i'm putting joe in charge of mission control .
for the loved ones we 've all lost , for the families that we can still save , let 's make america the country that cures cancer once and for all .
medical research is critical .
we need the same level of commitment when it comes to developing clean energy sources .
look , if anybody still wants to dispute the science around climate change , have at it .
you will be pretty lonely , because you 'll be debating our military , most of america 's business leaders , the majority of the american people , almost the entire scientific community , and 200 nations around the world who agree it 's a problem and intend to solve it .
but even if -- even if the planet was n't at stake , even if 2014 was n't the warmest year on record -- until 2015 turned out to be even hotter -- why would we want to pass up the chance for american businesses to produce and sell the energy of the future ?
listen , seven years ago , we made the single biggest investment in clean energy in our history .
here are the results .
in fields from iowa to texas , wind power is now cheaper than dirtier , conventional power .
on rooftops from arizona to new york , solar is saving americans tens of millions of dollars a year on their energy bills , and employs more americans than coal -- in jobs that pay better than average .
we 're taking steps to give homeowners the freedom to generate and store their own energy -- something , by the way , that environmentalists and tea partiers have teamed up to support .
and meanwhile , we 've cut our imports of foreign oil by nearly 60 percent , and cut carbon pollution more than any other country on earth .
gas under two bucks a gallon ai n't bad , either .
now we 've got to accelerate the transition away from old , dirtier energy sources .
rather than subsidize the past , we should invest in the future -- especially in communities that rely on fossil fuels .
we do them no favor when we do n't show them where the trends are going .
that 's why i 'm going to push to change the way we manage our oil and coal resources , so that they better reflect the costs they impose on taxpayers and our planet .
and that way , we put money back into those communities , and put tens of thousands of americans to work building a 21st century transportation system .
now , none of this is going to happen overnight .
and , yes , there are plenty of entrenched interests who want to protect the status quo .
but the jobs we 'll create , the money we 'll save , the planet we 'll preserve -- that is the kind of future our kids and our grandkids deserve .
and it 's within our grasp .
climate change is just one of many issues where our security is linked to the rest of the world .
and that 's why the third big question that we have to answer together is how to keep america safe and strong without either isolating ourselves or trying to nation - build everywhere there 's a problem .
i told you earlier all the talk of america 's economic decline is political hot air .
well , so is all the rhetoric you hear about our enemies getting stronger and america getting weaker .
let me tell you something .
the united states of america is the most powerful nation on earth .
period .
period .
it 's not even close .
it 's not even close .
it 's not even close .
we spend more on our military than the next eight nations combined .
our troops are the finest fighting force in the history of the world .
no nation attacks us directly , or our allies , because they know that 's the path to ruin .
surveys show our standing around the world is higher than when i was elected to this office , and when it comes to every important international issue , people of the world do not look to beijing or moscow to lead -- they call us .
i mean , it 's useful to level the set here , because when we do n't , we do n't make good decisions .
now , as someone who begins every day with an intelligence briefing , i know this is a dangerous time .
but that 's not primarily because of some looming superpower out there , and certainly not because of diminished american strength .
in today 's world , we 're threatened less by evil empires and more by failing states .
the middle east is going through a transformation that will play out for a generation , rooted in conflicts that date back millennia .
economic headwinds are blowing in from a chinese economy that is in significant transition .
even as their economy severely contracts , russia is pouring resources in to prop up ukraine and syria -- client states that they saw slipping away from their orbit .
and the international system we built after world war ii is now struggling to keep pace with this new reality .
it 's up to us , the united states of america , to help remake that system .
and to do that well it means that we 've got to set priorities .
priority number one is protecting the american people and going after terrorist networks .
both al qaeda and now isil pose a direct threat to our people , because in today 's world , even a handful of terrorists who place no value on human life , including their own , can do a lot of damage .
they use the internet to poison the minds of individuals inside our country .
their actions undermine and destabilize our allies .
we have to take them out .
but as we focus on destroying isil , over - the - top claims that this is world war iii just play into their hands .
masses of fighters on the back of pickup trucks , twisted souls plotting in apartments or garages -- they pose an enormous danger to civilians ; they have to be stopped .
but they do not threaten our national existence .
that is the story isil wants to tell .
that 's the kind of propaganda they use to recruit .
we do n't need to build them up to show that we 're serious , and we sure do n't need to push away vital allies in this fight by echoing the lie that isil is somehow representative of one of the world 's largest religions .
we just need to call them what they are -- killers and fanatics who have to be rooted out , hunted down , and destroyed .
and that 's exactly what we 're doing .
for more than a year , america has led a coalition of more than 60 countries to cut off isil 's financing , disrupt their plots , stop the flow of terrorist fighters , and stamp out their vicious ideology .
with nearly 10,000 air strikes , we 're taking out their leadership , their oil , their training camps , their weapons .
we 're training , arming , and supporting forces who are steadily reclaiming territory in iraq and syria .
if this congress is serious about winning this war , and wants to send a message to our troops and the world , authorize the use of military force against isil .
take a vote .
take a vote .
but the american people should know that with or without congressional action , isil will learn the same lessons as terrorists before them .
if you doubt america 's commitment -- or mine -- to see that justice is done , just ask osama bin laden .
ask the leader of al qaeda in yemen , who was taken out last year , or the perpetrator of the benghazi attacks , who sits in a prison cell .
when you come after americans , we go after you .
and it may take time , but we have long memories , and our reach has no limits .
our foreign policy hast to be focused on the threat from isil and al qaeda , but it ca n't stop there .
for even without isil , even without al qaeda , instability will continue for decades in many parts of the world -- in the middle east , in afghanistan , parts of pakistan , in parts of central america , in africa , and asia .
some of these places may become safe havens for new terrorist networks .
others will just fall victim to ethnic conflict , or famine , feeding the next wave of refugees .
the world will look to us to help solve these problems , and our answer needs to be more than tough talk or calls to carpet - bomb civilians .
that may work as a tv sound bite , but it does n't pass muster on the world stage .
we also ca n't try to take over and rebuild every country that falls into crisis , even if it 's done with the best of intentions .
that 's not leadership ; that 's a recipe for quagmire , spilling american blood and treasure that ultimately will weaken us .
it 's the lesson of vietnam ; it 's the lesson of iraq -- and we should have learned it by now .
fortunately , there is a smarter approach , a patient and disciplined strategy that uses every element of our national power .
it says america will always act , alone if necessary , to protect our people and our allies ; but on issues of global concern , we will mobilize the world to work with us , and make sure other countries pull their own weight .
that 's our approach to conflicts like syria , where we 're partnering with local forces and leading international efforts to help that broken society pursue a lasting peace .
that 's why we built a global coalition , with sanctions and principled diplomacy , to prevent a nuclear - armed iran .
and as we speak , iran has rolled back its nuclear program , shipped out its uranium stockpile , and the world has avoided another war .
that 's how we stopped the spread of ebola in west africa .
our military , our doctors , our development workers -- they were heroic ; they set up the platform that then allowed other countries to join in behind us and stamp out that epidemic .
hundreds of thousands , maybe a couple million lives were saved .
that 's how we forged a trans - pacific partnership to open markets , and protect workers and the environment , and advance american leadership in asia .
it cuts 18,000 taxes on products made in america , which will then support more good jobs here in america .
with tpp , china does not set the rules in that region ; we do .
you want to show our strength in this new century ?
approve this agreement .
give us the tools to enforce it .
it 's the right thing to do .
let me give you another example .
fifty years of isolating cuba had failed to promote democracy , and set us back in latin america .
that 's why we restored diplomatic relations--   -- opened the door to travel and commerce , positioned ourselves to improve the lives of the cuban people .
so if you want to consolidate our leadership and credibility in the hemisphere , recognize that the cold war is over -- lift the embargo .
the point is american leadership in the 21st century is not a choice between ignoring the rest of the world -- except when we kill terrorists -- or occupying and rebuilding whatever society is unraveling .
leadership means a wise application of military power , and rallying the world behind causes that are right .
it means seeing our foreign assistance as a part of our national security , not something separate , not charity .
when we lead nearly 200 nations to the most ambitious agreement in history to fight climate change , yes , that helps vulnerable countries , but it also protects our kids .
when we help ukraine defend its democracy , or colombia resolve a decades - long war , that strengthens the international order we depend on .
when we help african countries feed their people and care for the sick --   -- it 's the right thing to do , and it prevents the next pandemic from reaching our shores .
right now , we 're on track to end the scourge of hiv / aids .
that 's within our grasp .
and we have the chance to accomplish the same thing with malaria -- something i 'll be pushing this congress to fund this year .
that 's american strength .
that 's american leadership .
and that kind of leadership depends on the power of our example .
that 's why i will keep working to shut down the prison at guantanamo .
it is expensive , it is unnecessary , and it only serves as a recruitment brochure for our enemies .
there 's a better way .
and that 's why we need to reject any politics -- any politics -- that targets people because of race or religion .
let me just say this .
this is not a matter of political correctness .
this is a matter of understanding just what it is that makes us strong .
the world respects us not just for our arsenal ; it respects us for our diversity , and our openness , and the way we respect every faith .
his holiness , pope francis , told this body from the very spot that i 'm standing on tonight that"to imitate the hatred and violence of tyrants and murderers is the best way to take their place."when politicians insult muslims , whether abroad or our fellow citizens , when a mosque is vandalized , or a kid is called names , that does n't make us safer .
that 's not telling it like it is .
it 's just wrong .
it diminishes us in the eyes of the world .
it makes it harder to achieve our goals .
it betrays who we are as a country .
" we the people . "
our constitution begins with those three simple words , words we 've come to recognize mean all the people , not just some ; words that insist we rise and fall together , and that 's how we might perfect our union .
and that brings me to the fourth , and maybe the most important thing that i want to say tonight .
the future we want -- all of us want -- opportunity and security for our families , a rising standard of living , a sustainable , peaceful planet for our kids -- all that is within our reach .
but it will only happen if we work together .
it will only happen if we can have rational , constructive debates .
it will only happen if we fix our politics .
a better politics does n't mean we have to agree on everything .
this is a big country -- different regions , different attitudes , different interests .
that 's one of our strengths , too .
our founders distributed power between states and branches of government , and expected us to argue , just as they did , fiercely , over the size and shape of government , over commerce and foreign relations , over the meaning of liberty and the imperatives of security .
but democracy does require basic bonds of trust between its citizens .
it does n't work if we think the people who disagree with us are all motivated by malice .
it does n't work if we think that our political opponents are unpatriotic or trying to weaken america .
democracy grinds to a halt without a willingness to compromise , or when even basic facts are contested , or when we listen only to those who agree with us .
our public life withers when only the most extreme voices get all the attention .
and most of all , democracy breaks down when the average person feels their voice does n't matter ; that the system is rigged in favor of the rich or the powerful or some special interest .
too many americans feel that way right now .
it 's one of the few regrets of my presidency -- that the rancor and suspicion between the parties has gotten worse instead of better .
i have no doubt a president with the gifts of lincoln or roosevelt might have better bridged the divide , and i guarantee i 'll keep trying to be better so long as i hold this office .
but , my fellow americans , this can not be my task -- or any president 's -- alone .
there are a whole lot of folks in this chamber , good people who would like to see more cooperation , would like to see a more elevated debate in washington , but feel trapped by the imperatives of getting elected , by the noise coming out of your base .
i know ; you 've told me .
it 's the worst - kept secret in washington .
and a lot of you are n't enjoying being trapped in that kind of rancor .
but that means if we want a better politics -- and i 'm addressing the american people now --if we want a better politics , it 's not enough just to change a congressman or change a senator or even change a president .
we have to change the system to reflect our better selves .
i think we 've got to end the practice of drawing our congressional districts so that politicians can pick their voters , and not the other way around .
let a bipartisan group do it .
we have to reduce the influence of money in our politics , so that a handful of families or hidden interests ca n't bankroll our elections .
and if our existing approach to campaign finance reform ca n't pass muster in the courts , we need to work together to find a real solution -- because it 's a problem .
and most of you do n't like raising money .
i know ; i 've done it .
we 've got to make it easier to vote , not harder .
we need to modernize it for the way we live now .
this is america : we want to make it easier for people to participate .
and over the course of this year , i intend to travel the country to push for reforms that do just that .
but i ca n't do these things on my own .
changes in our political process -- in not just who gets elected , but how they get elected -- that will only happen when the american people demand it .
it depends on you .
that 's what 's meant by a government of , by , and for the people .
what i 'm suggesting is hard .
it 's a lot easier to be cynical ; to accept that change is not possible , and politics is hopeless , and the problem is all the folks who are elected do n't care , and to believe that our voices and actions do n't matter .
but if we give up now , then we forsake a better future .
those with money and power will gain greater control over the decisions that could send a young soldier to war , or allow another economic disaster , or roll back the equal rights and voting rights that generations of americans have fought , even died , to secure .
and then , as frustration grows , there will be voices urging us to fall back into our respective tribes , to scapegoat fellow citizens who do n't look like us , or pray like us , or vote like we do , or share the same background .
we ca n't afford to go down that path .
it wo n't deliver the economy we want .
it will not produce the security we want .
but most of all , it contradicts everything that makes us the envy of the world .
so , my fellow americans , whatever you may believe , whether you prefer one party or no party , whether you supported my agenda or fought as hard as you could against it -- our collective futures depends on your willingness to uphold your duties as a citizen .
to vote .
to speak out .
to stand up for others , especially the weak , especially the vulnerable , knowing that each of us is only here because somebody , somewhere , stood up for us .
we need every american to stay active in our public life -- and not just during election time -- so that our public life reflects the goodness and the decency that i see in the american people every single day .
it is not easy .
our brand of democracy is hard .
but i can promise that a little over a year from now , when i no longer hold this office , i will be right there with you as a citizen , inspired by those voices of fairness and vision , of grit and good humor and kindness that helped america travel so far .
voices that help us see ourselves not , first and foremost , as black or white , or asian or latino , not as gay or straight , immigrant or native born , not as democrat or republican , but as americans first , bound by a common creed .
voices dr. king believed would have the final word -- voices of unarmed truth and unconditional love .
and they 're out there , those voices .
they do n't get a lot of attention ; they do n't seek a lot of fanfare ; but they 're busy doing the work this country needs doing .
i see them everywhere i travel in this incredible country of ours .
i see you , the american people .
and in your daily acts of citizenship , i see our future unfolding .
i see it in the worker on the assembly line who clocked extra shifts to keep his company open , and the boss who pays him higher wages instead of laying him off .
i see it in the dreamer who stays up late to finish her science project , and the teacher who comes in early because he knows she might someday cure a disease .
i see it in the american who served his time , and made mistakes as a child but now is dreaming of starting over -- and i see it in the business owner who gives him that second chance .
the protester determined to prove that justice matters -- and the young cop walking the beat , treating everybody with respect , doing the brave , quiet work of keeping us safe .
i see it in the soldier who gives almost everything to save his brothers , the nurse who tends to him till he can run a marathon , the community that lines up to cheer him on .
it 's the son who finds the courage to come out as who he is , and the father whose love for that son overrides everything he 's been taught .
i see it in the elderly woman who will wait in line to cast her vote as long as she has to ; the new citizen who casts his vote for the first time ; the volunteers at the polls who believe every vote should count -- because each of them in different ways know how much that precious right is worth .
that 's the america i know .
that 's the country we love .
clear - eyed .
big - hearted .
undaunted by challenge .
optimistic that unarmed truth and unconditional love will have the final word .
that 's what makes me so hopeful about our future .
i believe in change because i believe in you , the american people .
and that 's why i stand here confident as i have ever been that the state of our union is strong .
thank you , god bless you .
god bless the united states of america .

