my fellow citizens : as long ago as august , 1906 , in the congressional campaign in maine , i ventured to announce that i was a tariff revisionist and thought that the time had come for a readjustment of the schedules .
i pointed out that it had been ten years prior to that time that the dingley bill had been passed ; that great changes had taken place in the conditions surrounding the productions of the farm , the factory , and the mine , and that under the theory of protection in that time the rates imposed in the dingley bill in many instances might have become excessive ; that is , might have been greater than the difference between the cost of production abroad and the cost of production at home with a sufficient allowance for a reasonable rate of profit to the american producer .
i said that the party was divided on the issue , but that in my judgment the opinion of the party was crystallizing and would probably result in the near future in an effort to make such revision .
i pointed out the difficulty that there always was in a revision of the tariff , due to the threatened disturbance of industries to be affected and the suspension of business , in a way which made it unwise to have too many revisions .
in the summer of 1907 my position on the tariff was challenged , and i then entered into a somewhat fuller discussion of the matter .
it was contended by the so - called " standpatters " that rates beyond the necessary measure of protection were not objectionable , because behind the tariff wall competition always reduced the prices , and thus saved the consumer .
but i pointed out in that speech what seems to me as true to - day as it then was , that the danger of excessive rates was in the temptation they created to form monopolies in the protected articles , and thus to take advantage of the excessive rates by increasing the prices , and therefore , and in order to avoid such a danger , it was wise at regular intervals to examine the question of what the effect of the rates had been upon the industries in this country , and whether the conditions with respect to the cost of production here had so changed as to warrant a reduction in the tariff , and to make a lower rate truly protective of the industry .
it will be observed that the object of the revision under such a statement was not to destroy protected industries in this country , but it was to continue to protect them where lower rates offered a sufficient protection to prevent injury by foreign competition .
that was the object of the revision as advocated by me , and it was certainly the object of the revision as promised in the republican platform .
i want to make as clear as i can this proposition , because , in order to determine whether a bill is a compliance with the terms of that platform , it must be understood what the platform means .
a free trader is opposed to any protected rate because be thinks that our manufacturers , our farmers , and our miners ought to withstand the competition of foreign manufacturers and miners and farmers , or else go out of business and find something else more profitable to do .
now , certainly the promises of the platform did not contemplate the downward revision of the tariff rates to such a point that any industry theretofore protected should be injured .
hence , those who contend that the promise of the platform was to reduce prices by letting in foreign competition are contending for a free trade , and not for anything that they had the right to infer from the republican platform .
the ways and means committee of the house , with mr. payne at its head , spent a full year in an investigation , assembling evidence in reference to the rates under the tariff , and devoted an immense amount of work in the study of the question where the tariff rates could be reduced and where they ought to be raised with a view to maintaining a reasonably protective rate , under the principles of the platform , for every industry that deserved protection .
they found that the determination of the question , what was the actual cost of production and whether an industry in this country could live under a certain rate and withstand threatened competition from abroad , was most difficult .
the manufacturers were prone to exaggerate the injury which a reduction in the duty would give and to magnify the amount of duty that was needed ; while the importers , on the other hand , who were interested in developing the importation from foreign shores , were quite likely to be equally biased on the other side .
mr. payne reported a bill -- the payne tariff bill -- which went to the senate and was amended in the senate by increasing the duty on some things and decreasing it on others .
the difference between the house bill and the senate bill was very much less than the newspapers represented .
it turns out upon examination that the reductions in the senate were about equal to those in the house , though they differed in character .
now , there is nothing quite so difficult as the discussion of a tariff bill , for the reason that it covers so many different items , and the meaning of the terms and the percentages are very hard to understand .
the passage of a new bill , especially where a change in the method of assessing the duties has been followed , presents an opportunity for various modes and calculations of the percentages of increases and decreases that are most misleading and really throw no light at all upon the changes made .
one way of stating what was done is to say what the facts show -- that under the dingley law there were 2,024 items .
this included dutiable items only .
the payne law leaves 1,150 of these items unchanged .
there are decreases in 654 of the items and increases in 220 of the items .
now , of course , that does not give a full picture , but it does show the proportion of decreases to have been three times those of the increases .
again , the schedules are divided into letters from a to n. the first schedule is that of chemicals , oils , etc .
there are 232 items in the dingley law ; of these , 81 were decreased , 22 were increased , leaving 129 unchanged .
under schedule b -- earths , earthen ware and glass ware -- there were 170 items in the dingley law ; 46 were decreased , 12 were increased , and 112 left unchanged .
c is the schedule of metals and manufactures .
there were 321 items in the dingley law ; 185 were decreased , 30 were increased , and 106 were left unchanged .
d is the schedule of wood and manufactures of wood .
there were 35 items in the dingley law ; 18 were decreased , 3 were increased , and 14 were left unchanged .
there were 38 items in sugar , and of these 2 were decreased and 36 left unchanged .
schedule f covers tobacco and manufactures of tobacco , of which there were 8 items ; they were all left unchanged .
in the schedule covering agricultural products and provisions there were 187 items in the dingley law ; 14 of them were decreased , 19 were increased , and 154 left unchanged .
schedule h -- that of spirits and wines -- contained 33 items in the dingley law ; 4 were decreased , 23 increased , and 6 left unchanged .
in cotton manufactures there were 261 items ; of these 28 were decreased , 47 increased , and 186 left unchanged .
in schedule j -- flax , hemp , and jute -- there were 254 items in the dingley law ; 187 were reduced , 4 were increased , and 63 left unchanged .
in wool , and manufactures thereof , there were 78 items ; 3 were decreased , none were increased , and 75 left unchanged .
in silk and silk goods there were 78 items ; of these , 21 were decreased , 31 were increased , and 26 were left unchanged .
in pulp , papers , and books there were 59 items in the dingley law , and of these 11 were decreased , 9 were increased , and 39 left unchanged .
in sundries there were 270 items , and of these 54 were decreased , 20 were increased , and 196 left unchanged .
so that the total showed 2,024 items in the dingley law , of which 654 were decreased , 220 were increased , making 874 changes , and 1,150 left unchanged .
changes in dingley law 
 by payne law .
schedules .
items in 
 dingley law .
decreases .
increases .
total changes .
unchanged .
a -- chemicals , oils , etc----------------------------- 232 81 22 103 129 
 b -- earths , earthen and glass ware------------------ 170 46 12 58 112 
 c -- metals , and manufactures of------------------- 321 185 30 215 106 
 d -- wood , and manufactures of--------------------- 35 18 3 21 14 
 e -- sugar , molasses , and manufactures of----------- 38 2 0 2 36 
 f -- tobacco , and manufactures of--------------------- 8 0 0 0 8 
 g -- agricultural products and provisions----------- 187 14 19 33 154 
 h -- spirits , wines , etc-------------------------------- 33 4 23 27 6 
 i -- cotton manufactures---------------------------- 261 28 47 75 186 
 j -- flax , hemp , jute , manufactures of--------------- 254 187 4 191 63 
 k -- wool , and manufactures of---------------------- 78 3 0 3 75 
 l -- silk and silk goods------------------------------- 78 21 31 52 26 
 m -- pulp , papers , and books------------------------- 59 11 9 20 39 
 n -- sundries---------------------------------------- 270 54 20 74 196 
 total------------------------------ 2,024 654 220 874 1,150 
 attempts have been made to show what the real effect of these changes has been by comparing the imports under the various schedules , and assuming that the changes and their importance were in proportion to the importations .
nothing could be more unjust in a protective tariff which also contains revenue provisions .
some of the tariff is made for the purpose of increasing the revenue by increasing importations which shall pay duty .
other items in the tariff are made for the purpose of reducing competition , that is , by reducing importations , and , therefore , the question of the importance of a change in rate can not in the slightest degree be determined by the amount of imports that take place .
in order to determine the importance of the changes , it is much fairer to take the articles on which the rates of duty have been reduced and those on which the rates of duty have been increased , and then determine from statistics how large a part the articles upon which duties have been reduced play in the consumption of the country , and how large a part those upon which the duties have been increased play in the consumption of the country .
such a table has been prepared by mr. payne , than whom there is no one who understands better what the tariff is and who has given more attention to the details of the schedule .
now , let us take schedule a -- chemicals , oils , and paints .
the articles upon which the duty has been decreased are consumed in this country to the extent of $ 433,000,000 .
the articles upon which the duty has been increased are consumed in this country to the extent of $ 11,000,000 .
take schedule b. the articles on which the duty has been decreased entered in the consumption of the country to the amount of $ 128,000,000 , and there has been no increase in duty on such articles .
take schedule c -- metals and their manufactures .
the amount to which such articles enter into the consumption of the country is $ 1,221,000,000 , whereas the articles of the same schedule upon which there has been an increase enter into the consumption of the country to the extent of only $ 37,000,000 .
take schedule d -- lumber .
the articles in this schedule upon which there has been a decrease enter into the consumption of the country to the extent of $ 566,000,000 , whereas the articles under the same schedule upon which there has been an increase enter into its consumption to the extent of $ 31,000,000 .
in tobacco there has been no change .
in agricultural products , those in which there has been a reduction of rates enter into the consumption of the country to the extent of $ 483,000,000 ; those in which there has been an increase enter into the consumption to the extent of $ 4,000,000 .
in the schedule of wines and liquors , the articles upon which there has been an increase , enter into the consumption of the country to the extent of $ 462,000,000 .
in cottons there has been a change in the higher - priced cottons and an increase .
there has been no increase in the lower - priced cottons , and of the increases the high - priced cottons enter into the consumption of the country to the extent of $ 41,000,000 .
schedule j -- flax , hemp , and jute : the articles upon which there has been a decrease enter into the consumption of the country to the extent of $ 22,000,000 , while those upon which there has been an increase enter into the consumption to the extent of $ 804,000 .
in schedule k as to wool , there has been no change .
in schedule l as to silk , the duty has been decreased on articles which enter into the consumption of the country to the extent of $ 8,000,000 , and has been increased on articles that enter into the consumption of the country to the extent of $ 106,000,000 .
on paper and pulp the duty has been decreased on articles , including print paper , that enter into the consumption of the country to the extent of $ 67,000,000 and increased on articles that enter into the consumption of the country to the extent of $ 81,000,000 .
in sundries , or schedule n , the duty has been decreased on articles that enter into the consumption of the country to the extent of $ 1,719,000,000 ; and increased on articles that enter into the consumption of the country to the extent of $ 101,000,000 .
it will be found that in schedule a the increases covered only luxuries - perfumes , pomades , and like articles ; schedule h -- wines and liquors -- which are certainly luxuries and are made subject to increase in order to increase the revenues , amounting to $ 462,000,000 ; and in schedule l -- silks -- which are luxuries , certainly , $ 106,000,000 , making a total of the consumption of those articles upon which there was an increase and which were luxuries of $ 579,000,000 , leaving a balance of increase on articles which were not luxuries of value in consumption of only $ 272,000,000 .
as against $ 5,000,000,000 , representing the amount of articles entering into the consumption of the country , mostly necessities , upon which there has been a reduction of duties , and to which the 650 decreases applied .
statement .
schedule .
consumption value .
duties decreased duties increased .
a -- chemicals , oils , and paints-------------------------------- $ 433,099,846 - --------- $ 11,105,820 
 b -- earths , earthenware , and glassware------------------------- 128,423,732 - ---------------------- 
 c -- metals , and manufactures of 1,221,956,620 - ---------------- 37,675,804 - ---------------------- 
 d -- wood , and manufactures of 566,870,950 - ------------------- 31,280,372 - ---------------------- 
 e -- sugar , molasses , and manufactures of----------------------- 300,965,953 - ---------------------- 
 f -- tobacco , and manufactures of ( no change of rates ) 
 g -- agricultural , products and provisions----------------------- 483,430,637 - ------------ 4,380,043 
 h -- spirits , wines , and other beverages------------------------------------------------- 462,001,856 
 i -- cotton manufactures------------------------------------------------------------------ 41,622,024 
 j -- flax , hemp , jute , and manufactures of------------------------ 22,127,145 - -------------- 804,445 
 k -- wool and manufactures of wool . (
no production statistics available for 
 articles affected by changes of rates)---------------------------------------------------------------- 
 l -- silks , and silk goods------------------------------------------- 7,947,568 - --------- 106,742,646 
 m -- pulp , papers , and books-------------------------------------- 67,628,055 - ---------- 81,486,466 
 n -- sundries--------------------------------------------------- 1,719,428,069 - --------- 101,656,598 
 total--------------------------------------------------------- $ 4,951,878,575 $ 878,756,074 
 of the above increases the following are luxuries , being articles strictly of voluntary use : 
 schedule a. chemicals , including perfumeries , pomades , and like articles------------- 11,105,820 
 h. wines and liquors----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 462 , 001,856 
 schedule l. silks----------------------------------------------------------------------- 106,742,646 
 total--------------------------------------------------------------------------- $ 579,850,322 
 this leaves a balance of increases which are not on articles of luxury of $ 298,905,752 , as against decreases on about five billion dollars of consumption .
now , this statement shows as conclusively as possible the fact that there was a substantial downward revision on articles entering into the general consumption of the country which can be termed necessities , for the proportion is $ 5,000,000,000 , representing the consumption of articles to which decreases applied , to less than $ 300,000,000 of articles of necessity to which the increases applied .
now , the promise of the republican platform was not to revise everything downward , and in the speeches which have been taken as interpreting that platform , which i made in the campaign , i did not promise that everything should go downward .
what i promised was , that there should be many decreases , and that in some few things increases would be found to be necessary ; but that on the whole i conceived that the change of conditions would make the revision necessarily downward -- and that , i contend , under the showing which i have made , has been the result of the payne bill .
i did not agree , nor did the republican party agree , that we would reduce rates to such a point as to reduce prices by the introduction of foreign competition .
that is what the free traders desire .
that is what the revenue tariff reformers desire ; but that is not what the republican platform promised , and it is not what the republican party wished to bring about .
to repeat the statement with which i opened this speech , the proposition of the republican party was to reduce rates so as to maintain a difference between the cost of production abroad and the cost of production here , insuring a reasonable profit to the manufacturer on all articles produced in this country ; and the proposition to reduce rates and prevent their being excessive was to avoid the opportunity for monopoly and the suppression of competition , so that the excessive rates could be taken advantage of to force prices up .
now , it is said that there was not a reduction in a number of the schedules where there should have been .
it is said that there was no reduction in the cotton schedule .
there was not .
the house and the senate took evidence and found from cotton manufacturers and from other sources that the rates upon the lower class of cottons were such as to enable them to make a decent profit -- but only a decent profit -- and they were contented with it ; but that the rates on the higher grades of cotton cloth , by reason of court decisions , had been reduced so that they were considerably below those of the cheaper grades of cotton cloth , and that by undervaluations and otherwise the whole cotton schedule had been made unjust and the various items were disproportionate in respect to the varying cloths .
hence , in the senate a new system was introduced attempting to make the duties more specific rather than ad valorem , in order to prevent by judicial decision or otherwise a disproportionate and unequal operation of the schedule .
under this schedule it was contended that there had been a general rise of all the duties on cotton .
this was vigorously denied by the experts of the treasury department .
at last , the senate in conference consented to a reduction amounting to about 10 per cent .
on all the lower grades of cotton and thus reduced the lower grades substantially to the same rates as before and increased the higher grades to what they ought to be under the dingley law and what they were intended to be .
now , i am not going into the question of evidence as to whether the cotton duties were too high and whether the difference between the cost of production abroad and at home , allowing only a reasonable profit to the manufacturer here , is less than the duties which are imposed under the payne bill .
it was a question of evidence which congress passed upon , after they heard the statements of cotton manufacturers and such other evidence as they could avail themselves of .
i agree that the method of taking evidence and the determination was made in a general way , and that there ought to be other methods of obtaining evidence and reaching a conclusion more satisfactory .
criticism has also been made of the crockery schedule and the failure to reduce that .
the question whether it ought to have been reduced or not was a question of evidence which both committees of congress took up , and both concluded that the present rates on crockery were such as were needed to maintain the business in this country .
i had been informed that the crockery schedule was not high enough , and mentioned that in one of my campaign speeches as a schedule probably where there ought to be some increases .
it turned out that the difficulty was rather in undervaluations than in the character of the schedule itself , and so it was not changed .
it is entirely possible to collect evidence to attack almost any of the schedules , but one story is good until another is told , and i have heard no reason for sustaining the contention that the crockery schedule is unduly high .
so with respect to numerous details -- items of not great importance -- in which , upon what they regarded as sufficient evidence , the committee advanced the rates in order to save a business which was likely to he destroyed .
i have never known a subject that will evoke so much contradictory evidence as the question of tariff rates and the question of cost of production at home and abroad .
take the subject of paper .
a committee was appointed by congress a year before the tariff sittings began , to determine what the difference was between the cost of production in canada of print paper and the cost of production here , and they reported that they thought that a good bill would be one imposing $ 2 a ton on paper , rather than $ 6 , the dingley rate , provided that canada could be induced to take off the export duties and remove the other obstacles to the importation of spruce wood in this country out of which wood pulp is made .
an examination of the evidence satisfied mr. payne -- i believe it satisfied some of the republican dissenters -- that $ 2 , unless some change was made in the canadian restrictions upon the exports of wood to this country , was much too low , and that $ 4 was only a fair measure of the difference between the cost of production here and in canada .
in other words , the $ 2 found by the special committee in the house was rather an invitation to canada and the canadian print - paper people to use their influence with their government to remove the wood restrictions by reducing the duty on print paper against canadian print - paper mills .
it was rather a suggestion of a diplomatic nature than a positive statement of the difference in actual cost of production under existing conditions between canada and the united states .
there are other subjects which i might take up .
the tariff on hides was taken off because it was thought that it was not necessary in view of the high price of cattle thus to protect the man who raised them , and that the duty imposed was likely to throw the control of the sale of hides into the hands of the meat packers in chicago .
in order to balance the reduction on hides , however , there was a great reduction in shoes , from 25 to 10 per cent . ;
on sole leather , from 20 to 5 per cent . ;
on harness , from 45 to 20 per cent .
so there was a reduction in the duty on coal of 33 1/3 per cent .
all countervailing duties were removed from oil , naphtha , gasoline , and its refined products .
lumber was reduced from $ 2 to $ 1.25 ; and these all on articles of prime necessity .
it is said that there might have been more .
but there were many business interests in the south , in maine , along the border , and especially in the far northwest , which insisted that it would give great advantage to canadian lumber if the reduction were made more than 75 cents .
mr. pinchot , the chief forester , thought that it would tend to make better lumber in this country if a duty were retained on it .
the lumber interests thought that $ 2 was none too much , but the reduction was made and the compromise effected .
personally i was in favor of free lumber , because i did not think that if the tariff was taken off there would be much suffering among the lumber interests .
but in the controversy the house and senate took a middle course , and who can say they were not justified .
with respect to the wool schedule , i agree that it probably represents considerably more than the difference between the cost of production abroad and the cost of production here .
the difficulty about the woolen schedule is that there were two contending factions early in the history of republican tariffs , to wit , woolgrowers and the woolen manufacturers , and that finally , many years ago , they settled on a basis by which wool in the grease should have 11 cents a pound , and by which allowance should be made for the shrinkage of the washed wool in the differential upon woolen manufactures .
the percentage of duty was very heavy -- quite beyond the difference in the cost of production , which was not then regarded as a necessary or proper limitation upon protective duties .
when it came to the question of reducing the duty at this bearing in the tariff bill on wool , mr. payne , in the house , and mr. aldrich , in the senate , although both favored reduction in the schedule , found that in the republican party the interests of the woolgrowers of the far west and the interests of the woolen manufacturers in the east and in other states , reflected through their representatives in congress , was sufficiently strong to defeat any attempt to change the woolen tariff , and that had it been attempted it would have beaten the bill reported from either committee .
i am sorry this is so , and i could wish that it had been otherwise .
it is the one important defect in the present payne tariff bill and in the performance of the promise of the platform to reduce rates to a difference in the cost of production , with reasonable profit to the manufacturer .
that it will increase the price of woolen cloth or clothes , i very much doubt .
there have been increases by the natural product , but this was not due to the tariff , because the tariff was not changed .
the increase would , therefore , have taken place whether the tariff would have been changed or not .
the cost of woolen cloths behind the tariff wall , through the effect of competition , has been greatly less than the duty , if added to the price , would have made it .
there is a complaint now by the woolen clothiers and by the carded woolen people of this woolen schedule .
they have honored me by asking in circulars sent out by them that certain questions be put to me in respect to it , and asking why i did not veto the bill in view of the fact that the woolen schedule was not made in accord with the platform .
i ought to say in respect to this point that all of them in previous tariff bills were strictly in favor of maintaining the woolen schedule as it was .
the carded woolen people are finding that carded wools are losing their sales because they are going out of style .
people prefer worsteds .
the clothing people who are doing so much circularizing were contented to let the woolen schedule remain as it was until very late in the tariff discussion , long after the bill had passed the house , and , indeed , they did not grow very urgent until the bill had passed the senate .
this was because they found that the price of woolen cloth was going up , and so they desired to secure reduction in the tariff which would enable them to get cheaper material .
they themselves are protected by a large duty , and i can not with deference to them ascribe their intense interest only to a deep sympathy with the ultimate consumers , so - called .
but , as i have already said , i am quite willing to admit that allowing the woolen schedule to remain where it is , is not a compliance with the terms of the platform as i interpret it and as it is generally understood .
on the whole , however , i am bound to say that i think the payne tariff bill is the best tariff bill that the republican party ever passed ; that in it the party has conceded the necessity for following the changed conditions and reducing tariff rates accordingly .
this is a substantial achievement in the direction of lower tariffs and downward revision , and it ought to be accepted as such .
critics of the bill utterly ignore the very tremendous cuts that have been made in the iron schedule , which heretofore has been subject to criticism in all tariff bills .
from iron ore , which was cut 75 per cent . ,
to all the other items as low as 20 per cent . ,
with an average of something like 40 or 50 per cent . ,
that schedule has been reduced so that the danger of increasing prices through a monopoly of the business is very much lessened , and that was the chief purpose of revising the tariff downward under republican protective principles .
the severe critics of the bill pass this reduction in the metal schedule with a sneer , and say that the cut did not hurt the iron interests of the country .
well , of course it did not hurt them .
it was not expected to hurt them .
it was expected only to reduce excessive rates , so that business should still be conducted at a profit , and the very character of the criticism is an indication of the general injustice of the attitude of those who make it , in assuming that it was the promise of the republican party to hurt the industries of the country by the reductions which they were to make in the tariff , whereas it expressly indicated as plainly as possible in the platform that all of the industries were to be protected against injury by foreign competition , and the promise only went to the reduction of excessive rates beyond what was necessary to protect them .
the high cost of living , of which 50 per cent .
is consumed in food , 25 per cent .
in clothing , and 25 per cent .
in rent and fuel , has not been produced by the tariff , because the tariff has remained the same while the increases have gone on .
it is due to the change of conditions the world over .
living has increased everywhere in cost -- in countries where there is free trade and in countries where there is protection -- and that increase has been chiefly seen in the cost of food products .
in other words we have had to pay more for the products of the farmer , for meat , for grain , for everything that enters into food .
now , certainly no one will contend that protection has increased the cost of food in this country , when the fact is that we have been the greatest exporters of food products in the world .
it is only that the demand has increased beyond the supply , that farm lands have not been opened as rapidly as the population , and the demand has increased .
i am not saying that the tariff does not increase prices in clothing and in building and in other items that enter into the necessities of life , but what i wish to emphasize is that the recent increases in the cost of living in this country have not been due to the tariff .
we have a much higher standard of living in this country than they have abroad , and this has been made possible by higher income for the workingman , the farmer , and all classes .
higher wages have been made possible by the encouragement of diversified industries , built up and fostered by the tariff .
now , the revision downward of the tariff that i have favored will not , i hope , destroy the industries of the country .
certainly it is not intended to .
all that it is intended to do , and that is what i wish to repeat , is to put the tariff where it will protect industries here from foreign competition , but will not enable those who will wish to monopolize to raise prices by taking advantage of excessive rates beyond the normal difference in the cost of production .
if the country desires free trade , and the country desires a revenue tariff and wishes the manufacturers all over the country to go out of business , and to have cheaper prices at the expense of the sacrifice of many of our manufacturing interests , then it ought to say so and ought to put the democratic party in power if it thinks that party can be trusted to carry out any affirmative policy in favor of a revenue tariff .
certainly in the discussions in the senate there was no great manifestation on the part of our democratic friends in favor of reducing rates on necessities .
they voted to maintain the tariff rates on everything that came from their particular sections .
if we are to have free trade , certainly it can not be had through the maintenance of republican majorities in the senate and house and a republican administration .
and now the question arises , what was the duty of a member of congress who believed in a downward revision greater than that which has been accomplished , who thought that the wool schedules ought to be reduced , and that perhaps there were other respects in which the bill could be improved ?
was it his duty because , in his judgment , it did not fully and completely comply with the promises of the party platform as he interpreted it , and indeed as i had interpreted it , to vote against the bill ?
i am here to justify those who answer this question in the negative .
mr. tawney was adownward revisionist like myself .
he is a low - tariff man , and has been known to be such in congress all the time he has been there .
he is a prominent republican , the head of the appropriations committee , and when a man votes as i think he ought to vote , and an opportunity such as this presents itself , i am glad to speak in behalf of what he did , not in defense of it , but in support of it .
this is a government by a majority of the people .
it is a representative government .
people select some 400 members to constitute the lower house and some 92 members to constitute the upper house through their legislatures , and the varying views of a majority of the voters in eighty or ninety millions of people are reduced to one resultant force to take affirmative steps in carrying on a government by a system of parties .
without parties popular government would be absolutely impossible .
in a party , those who join it , if they would make it effective , must surrender their personal predilections on matters comparatively of less importance in order to accomplish the good which united action on the most important principles at issue secures .
now , i am not here to criticise those republican members and senators whose views on the subject of the tariff were so strong and intense that they believed it their duty to vote against their party on the tariff bill .
it is a question for each man to settle for himself .
the question is whether he shall help maintain the party solidarity for accomplishing its chief purposes , or whether the departure from principle in the bill as he regards it is so extreme that he must in conscience abandon the party .
all i have to say is , in respect to mr. tawney 's action , and in respect to my own in signing the bill , that i believed that the interests of the country , the interests of the party , required me to sacrifice the accomplishment of certain things in the revision of the tariff which i had hoped for , in order to maintain party solidarity , which i believe to be much more important than the reduction of rates in one or two schedules of the tariff .
had mr. tawney voted against the bill , and there had been others of the house sufficient in number to have defeated the bill , or if i had vetoed the bill because of the absence of a reduction of rates in the wool schedule , when there was a general downward revision , and a substantial one though not a complete one , we should have left the party in a condition of demoralization that would have prevented the accomplishment of purposes and a fulfillment of other promises which we had made just as solemnly as we had entered into that with respect to the tariff .
when i could say without hesitation that this is the best tariff bill that the republican party has ever passed , and therefore the best tariff bill that has been passed at all , i do not feel that i could have reconciled any other course to my conscience than that of signing the bill , and i think mr. tawney feels the same way .
of course , if i had vetoed the bill i would have received the applause of many republicans who may be called low - tariff republicans , and who think deeply on that subject , and of all the democracy .
our friends the democrats would have applauded , and then laughed in their sleeve at the condition in which the party would have been left ; but , more than this , and waiving considerations of party , where would the country have been had the bill been vetoed , or been lost by a vote ?
it would have left the question of the revision of the tariff open for further discussion during the next session .
it would have suspended the settlement of all our business down to a known basis upon which prosperity could proceed and investments be made , and it would have held up the coming of prosperity to this country certainly for a year and probably longer .
these are the reasons why i signed it .
but there are additional reasons why the bill ought not to have been beaten .
it contained provisions of the utmost importance in the interest of this country in dealing with foreign countries and in the supplying of a deficit which under the dingley bill seemed inevitable .
there has been a disposition in some foreign countries taking advantage of greater elasticity in their systems of imposing tariffs and of making regulations to exclude our products and exercise against us undue discrimination .
against these things we have been helpless , because it required an act of congress to meet the difficulties .
it is now proposed by what is called the maximum and minimum clause , to enable the president to allow to come into operation a maximum or penalizing increase of duties over the normal or minimum duties whenever in his opinion the conduct of the foreign countries has been unduly discriminatory against the united states .
it is hoped that very little use may be required of this clause , but its presence in the law and the power conferred upon the executive , it is thought , will prevent in the future such undue discriminations .
certainly this is most important to our exporters of agricultural products and manufactures .
second .
we have imposed an excise tax upon corporations measured by 1 per cent .
upon the net income of all corporations except fraternal and charitable corporations after exempting $ 5,000 .
this , it is thought , will raise an income of 26 to 30 millions of dollars , will supply the deficit which otherwise might arise without it , and will bring under federal supervision more or less all the corporations of the country .
the inquisitorial provisions of the act are mild but effective , and certainly we may look not only for a revenue but for some most interesting statistics and the means of obtaining supervision over corporate methods that has heretofore not obtained .
then , we have finally done justice to the philippines .
we have introduced free trade between the philippines and the united states , and we have limited the amount of sugar and the amount of tobacco and cigars that can be introduced from the philippines to such a figure as shall greatly profit the philippines and yet in no way disturb the products of the united states or interfere with those engaged in the tobacco or sugar interests here .
these features of the bill were most important , and the question was whether they were to be sacrificed because the bill did not in respect to wool and woolens and in some few other matters meet our expectations .
i do not hesitate to repeat that i think it would have been an unwise sacrifice of the business interests of the country , it would have been an unwise sacrifice of the solidarity , efficiency , and promise - performing power of the party , to have projected into the next session another long discussion of the tariff , and to have delayed or probably defeated the legislation needed in the improvement of our interstate commerce regulation , and in making more efficient our antitrust law and the prosecutions under it .
such legislation is needed to clinch the roosevelt policies , by which corporations and those in control of them shall be limited to a lawful path and shall be prevented from returning to those abuses which a recurrence of prosperity is too apt to bring about unless definite , positive steps of a legislative character are taken to mark the lines of honest and lawful corporate management .
now , there is another provision in the new tariff bill that i regard as of the utmost importance .
it is a provision which appropriates $ 75,000 for the president to employ persons to assist him in the execution of the maximum and minimum tariff clause and in the administration of the tariff law .
under that authority , i conceive that the president has the right to appoint a board , as i have appointed it , who shall associate with themselves , and have under their control , a number of experts who shall address themselves , first , to the operation of foreign tariffs upon the exports of the united states , and then to the operation of the united states tariff upon imports and exports .
there are provisions in the general tariff procedure for the ascertainment of the cost of production of articles abroad and the cost of production of articles here .
i intend to direct the board in the course of these duties and in carrying them out , in order to assist me in the administration of the law , to make what might be called a glossary of the tariff , or a small encyclopedia of the tariff , or something to be compared to the united states pharmacopoeia with reference to information as to drugs and medicines .
i conceive that such a board may very properly , in the course of their duties , take up separately all the items of the tariff , both those on the free list and those which are dutiable , describe what they are , where they are manufactured , what their uses are , the methods of manufacture , the cost of production abroad and here , and every other fact with respect to each item which would enable the executive to understand the operation of the tariff , the value of the article , and the amount of duty imposed , and all those details which the student of every tariff law finds it so difficult to discover .
i do not intend , unless compelled or directed by congress , to publish the result of these investigations , but to treat them merely as incidental facts brought out officially from time to time , and as they may be ascertained and put on record in the department , there to be used when they have all been accumulated and are sufficiently complete to justify executive recommendation based on them .
now , i think it is utterly useless , as i think it would be greatly distressing to business , to talk of another revision of the tariff during the present congress .
i should think that it would certainly take the rest of this administration to accumulate the data upon which a new and proper revision of the tariff might be had .
by that time the whole republican party can express itself again in respect to the matter and bring to bear upon its representatives in congress that sort of public opinion which shall result in solid party action .
i am glad to see that a number of those who thought it their duty to vote against the bill insist that they are still republicans and intend to carry on their battle in favor of lower duties and a lower revision within the lines of the party .
that is their right and , in their view of things , is their duty .
it is vastly better that they should seek action of the party than that they should break off from it and seek to organize another party , which would probably not result in accomplishing anything more than merely defeating our party and inviting in the opposing party , which does not believe , or says that it does not believe , in protection .
i think that we ought to give the present bill a chance .
after it has been operating for two or three years , we can tell much more accurately than we can to - day its effect upon the industries of the country and the necessity for any amendment in its provisions .
i have tried to state as strongly as i can , but not more strongly than i think the facts justify , the importance of not disturbing the business interests of this country by an attempt in this congress or the next to make a new revision ; but meantime i intend , so far as in me lies , to secure official data upon the operation of the tariff , from which , when a new revision is attempted , exact facts can be secured .
i have appointed a tariff board that has no brief for either side in respect to what the rates shall be .
i hope they will make their observations and note their data in their record with exactly the same impartiality and freedom from anxiety as to result with which the weather bureau records the action of the elements or any scientific bureau of the government records the results of its impartial investigations .
certainly the experience in this tariff justifies the statement that no revision should hereafter be attempted in which more satisfactory evidence of an impartial character is not secured .
i am sorry that i am not able to go into further detail with respect to the tariff bill , but i have neither the information nor the time in which to do it .
i have simply stated the case as it seemed to mr. tawney in his vote and as it seemed to me in my signing the bill .

to the senate and house of representatives : 
 this message is the first of several which i shall send to congress during the interval between the opening of its regular session and its adjournment for the christmas holidays .
the amount of information to be communicated as to the operations of the government , the number of important subjects calling for comment by the executive , and the transmission to congress of exhaustive reports of special commissions , make it impossible to include in one message of a reasonable length a discussion of the topics that ought to be brought to the attention of the national legislature at its first regular session .
in may last the supreme court handed down decisions in the suits in equity brought by the united states to enjoin the further maintenance of the standard oil trust and of the american tobacco trust , and to secure their dissolution .
the decisions are epoch - making and serve to advise the business world authoritatively of the scope and operation of the anti - trust act of 1890 .
the decisions do not depart in any substantial way from the previous decisions of the court in construing and applying this important statute , but they clarify those decisions by further defining the already admitted exceptions to the literal construction of the act .
by the decrees , they furnish a useful precedent as to the proper method of dealing with the capital and property of illegal trusts .
these decisions suggest the need and wisdom of additional or supplemental legislation to make it easier for the entire business community to square with the rule of action and legality thus finally established and to preserve the benefit , freedom , and spur of reasonable competition without loss of real efficiency or progress .
the statute in its first section declares to be illegal " every contract , combination in the form of trust or otherwise , or conspiracy , in restraint of trade or commerce among the several states or with foreign nations , " and in the second , declares guilty of a misdemeanor " every person who shall monopolize or attempt to monopolize or combine or conspire with any other person to monopolize any part of the trade or commerce of the several states or with foreign nations . "
in two early cases , where the statute was invoked to enjoin a transportation rate agreement between interstate railroad companies , it was held that it was no defense to show that the agreement as to rates complained of was reasonable at common law , because it was said that the statute was directed against all contracts and combinations in restraint of trade whether reasonable at common law or not .
it was plain from the record , however , that the contracts complained of in those cases would not have been deemed reasonable at common law .
in subsequent cases the court said that the statute should be given a reasonable construction and refused to include within its inhibition , certain contractual restraints of trade which it denominated as incidental or as indirect .
these cases of restraint of trade that the court excepted from the operation of the statute were instances which , at common law , would have been called reasonable .
in the standard oil and tobacco cases , therefore , the court merely adopted the tests of the common law , and in defining exceptions to the literal application of the statute , only substituted for the test of being incidental or indirect , that of being reasonable , and this , without varying in the slightest the actual scope and effect of the statute .
in other words , all the cases under the statute which have now been decided would have been decided the same way if the court had originally accepted in its construction the rule at common law .
it has been said that the court , by introducing into the construction of the statute common - law distinctions , has emasculated it .
this is obviously untrue .
by its judgment every contract and combination in restraint of interstate trade made with the purpose or necessary effect of controlling prices by stifling competition , or of establishing in whole or in part a monopoly of such trade , is condemned by the statute .
the most extreme critics can not instance a case that ought to be condemned under the statute which is not brought within its terms as thus construed .
the suggestion is also made that the supreme court by its decision in the last two cases has committed to the court the undefined and unlimited discretion to determine whether a case of restraint of trade is within the terms of the statute .
this is wholly untrue .
a reasonable restraint of trade at common law is well understood and is clearly defined .
it does not rest in the discretion of the court .
it must be limited to accomplish the purpose of a lawful main contract to which , in order that it shall be enforceable at all , it must be incidental .
if it exceed the needs of that contract , it is void .
the test of reasonableness was never applied by the court at common law to contracts or combinations or conspiracies in restraint of trade whose purpose was or whose necessary effect would be to stifle competition , to control prices , or establish monopolies .
the courts never assumed power to say that such contracts or combinations or conspiracies might be lawful if the parties to them were only moderate in the use of the power thus secured and did not exact from the public too great and exorbitant prices .
it is true that many theorists , and others engaged in business violating the statute , have hoped that some such line could be drawn by courts ; but no court of authority has ever attempted it .
certainly there is nothing in the decisions of the latest two cases from which such a dangerous theory of judicial discretion in enforcing this statute can derive the slightest sanction .
we have been twenty - one years making this statute effective for the purposes for which it was enacted .
the knight case was discouraging and seemed to remit to the states the whole available power to attack and suppress the evils of the trusts .
slowly , however , the error of that judgment was corrected , and only in the last three or four years has the heavy hand of the law been laid upon the great illegal combinations that have exercised such an absolute dominion over many of our industries .
criminal prosecutions have been brought and a number are pending , but juries have felt averse to convicting for jail sentences , and judges have been most reluctant to impose such sentences on men of respectable standing in society whose offense has been regarded as merely statutory .
still , as the offense becomes better understood and the committing of it partakes more of studied and deliberate defiance of the law , we can be confident that juries will convict individuals and that jail sentences will be imposed .
in the standard oil case the supreme and circuit courts found the combination to be a monopoly of the interstate business of refining , transporting , and marketing petroleum and its products , effected and maintained through thirty - seven different corporations , the stock of which was held by a new jersey company .
it in effect commanded the dissolution of this combination , directed the transfer and pro rata distribution by the new jersey company of the stock held by it in the thirty - seven corporations to and among its stockholders ; and the corporations and individual defendants were enjoined from conspiring or combining to restore such monopoly ; and all agreements between the subsidiary corporations tending to produce or bring about further violations of the act were enjoined .
in the tobacco case , the court found that the individual defendants , twenty - nine in number , had been engaged in a successful effort to acquire complete dominion over the manufacture , sale , and distribution of tobacco in this country and abroad , and that this had been done by combinations made with a purpose and effect to stifle competition , control prices , and establish a monopoly , not only in the manufacture of tobacco , but also of tin - foil and licorice used in its manufacture and of its products of cigars , cigarettes , and snuffs .
the ' tobacco suit presented a far more complicated and difficult case than the standard oil suit for a decree which would effectuate the will of the court and end the violation of the statute .
there was here no single holding company as in the case of the standard oil trust .
the main company was the american tobacco company , a manufacturing , selling , and holding company .
the plan adopted to destroy the combination and restore competition involved the redivision of the capital and plants of the whole trust between some of the companies constituting the trust and new companies organized for the purposes of the decree and made parties to it , and numbering , new and old , fourteen .
the american tobacco company ( old ) , readjusted capital , $ 92 , 000,000 ; the liggett & meyers tobacco company ( new ) , capital , $ 67,000,000 ; the p. lorillard company ( new ) , capital , $ 47,000,000 ; and the r. j. reynolds tobacco company ( old ) , capital , $ 7,525,000 , are chiefly engaged in the manufacture and sale of chewing and smoking tobacco and cigars .
the former one tinfoil company is divided into two , one of $ 825,000 capital and the other of $ 400,000 .
the one snuff company is divided into three companies , one with a capital of $ 15,000,000 , another with a capital of $ 8,000,000 , and a third with a capital of $ 8,000,000 .
the licorice companies are two one with a capital of $ 5,758,300 and another with a capital of $ 200,000 .
there is , also , the british - american tobacco company , a british corporation , doing business abroad with a capital of $ 26,000,000 , the porto rican tobacco company , with a capital of $ 1,800,000 , and the corporation of united cigar stores , with a capital of $ 9,000,000 .
under this arrangement , each of the different kinds of business will be distributed between two or more companies with a division of the prominent brands in the same tobacco products , so as to make competition not only possible but necessary .
thus the smoking - tobacco business of the country is divided so that the present independent companies have 21 - 39 per cent , while the american tobacco company will have 33 - 08 per cent , the liggett & meyers 20.05 per cent , the lorillard company 22.82 per cent , and the reynolds company 2.66 per cent .
the stock of the other thirteen companies , both preferred and common , has been taken from the defendant american tobacco company and has been distributed among its stockholders .
all covenants restricting competition have been declared null and further performance of them has been enjoined .
the preferred stock of the different companies has now been given voting power which was denied it under the old organization .
the ratio of the preferred stock to the common was as 78 to 40 .
this constitutes a very decided change in the character of the ownership and control of each company .
in the original suit there were twenty - nine defendants who were charged with being the conspirators through whom the illegal combination acquired and exercised its unlawful dominion .
under the decree these defendants .
will hold amounts of stock in the various distributee companies ranging from 41 per cent as a maximum to 28.5 per cent as a minimum , except in the case of one small company , the porto rican tobacco company , in which they will hold 45 per cent .
the twenty - nine individual defendants are enjoined for three years from buying any stock except from each other , and the group is thus prevented from extending its control during that period .
all parties to the suit , and the new companies who are made parties are enjoined perpetually from in any way effecting any combination between any of the companies in violation of the statute by way of resumption of the old trust .
each of the fourteen companies is enjoined from acquiring stock in any of the others .
all these companies are enjoined from having common directors or officers , or common buying or selling agents , or common offices , or lending money to each other .
objection was made by certain independent tobacco companies that this settlement was unjust because it left companies with very large capital in active business , and that the settlement that would be effective to put all on an equality would be a division of the capital and plant of the trust into small fractions in amount more nearly equal to that of each of the independent companies .
this contention results from a misunderstanding of the anti - trust law and its purpose .
it is not intended thereby to prevent the accumulation of large capital in business enterprises in which such a combination can secure reduced cost of production , sale , and distribution .
it is directed against such an aggregation of capital only when its purpose is that of stifling competition , enhancing or controlling prices , and establishing a monopoly .
if we shall have by the decree defeated these purposes and restored competition between the large units into which the capital and plant have been divided , we shall have accomplished the useful purpose of the statute .
it is not the purpose of the statute to confiscate the property and capital of the offending trusts .
methods of punishment by fine or imprisonment of the individual offenders , by fine of the corporation or by forfeiture of its goods in transportation , are provided , but the proceeding in equity is a specific remedy to stop the operation of the trust by injunction and prevent the future use of the plant and capital in violation of the statute .
i venture to say that not in the history of american law has a decree more effective for such a purpose been entered by a court than that against the tobacco trust .
as circuit judge noyes said in his judgment approving the decree : 
 " the extent to which it has been necessary to tear apart this combination and force it into new forms with the attendant burdens ought to demonstrate that the federal anti - trust statute is a drastic statute which accomplishes effective results ; which so long as it stands on the statute books must be obeyed , and which can not be disobeyed without incurring far - reaching penalties .
and , on the other hand , the successful reconstruction of this organization should teach that the effect of enforcing this statute is not to destroy , but to reconstruct ; not to demolish , but to re - create in accordance with the conditions which the congress has declared shall exist among the people of the united states . "
it has been assumed that the present pro rata and common ownership in all these companies by former stockholders of the trust would insure a continuance of the same old single control of all the companies into which the trust has by decree been disintegrated .
this is erroneous and is based upon the assumed inefficacy and innocuousness of judicial injunctions .
the companies are enjoined from cooperation or combination ; they have different managers , directors , purchasing and sales agents .
if all or many of the numerous stockholders , reaching into the thousands , attempt to secure concerted action of the companies with a view to the control of the market , their number is so large that such an attempt could not well be concealed , and its prime movers and all its participants would be at once subject to contempt proceedings and imprisonment of a summary character .
the immediate result of the present situation will necessarily be activity by all the companies under different managers , and then competition must follow , or there will be activity by one company and stagnation by another .
only a short time will inevitably lead to a change in ownership of the stock , as all opportunity for continued cooperation must disappear .
those critics who speak of this dis 
 integration in the trust as a mere change of garments have not given consideration to the inevitable working of the decree and understand little the personal danger of attempting to evade or set at naught the solemn injunction of a court whose object is made plain by the decree and whose inhibitions are set forth with a detail and comprehensiveness 

 the effect of these two decisions has led to decrees dissolving the combination of manufacturers of electric lamps , a southern wholesale grocers ' association , an interlocutory decree against the powder trust with directions by the circuit court compelling dissolution , and other combinations of a similar history are now negotiating with the department of justice looking to a disintegration by decree and reorganization in accordance with law .
it seems possible to bring about these reorganizations without general business disturbance .
but now that the anti - trust act is seen to be effective for the accomplishment of the purpose of its enactment , we are met by a cry from many different quarters for its repeal .
it is said to be obstructive of business progress .
to be an attempt to restore old - fashioned methods of destructive competition between small units , and to make impossible those useful combinations of capital and the reduction of the cost of production that are essential to continued prosperity and normal growth .
in the recent decisions the supreme court makes clear that there is nothing in the statute which condemns combinations of capital or mere bigness of plant organized to secure economy in production and a reduction of its cost .
it is only when the purpose or necessary effect of the organization and maintenance of the combination or the aggregation of immense size are the stifling of competition , actual and potential , and the enhancing of prices and establishing a monopoly , that the statute is violated .
mere size is no sin against the law .
the merging of two or more business plants necessarily eliminates competition between the units thus combined , but this elimination is in contravention of the statute only when the combination is made for purpose of ending this particular competition in order to secure control of , and enhance , prices and create a monopoly .
the complaint is made of the statute that it is not sufficiently definite in its description of that which is forbidden , to enable business men to avoid its violation .
the suggestion is , that we may have a combination of two corporations , which may run on for years , and that subsequently the attorney general may conclude that it wa 's a violation of the statute , and that which was supposed by the combiners to be innocent then turns out to be a combination in violation of the statute .
the answer to this hypothetical case is that when men attempt to amass such stupendous capital as will enable them to suppress competition , control prices and establish a monopoly , they know the purpose of their acts .
men do not do such a thing without having it clearly in mind .
if what they do is merely for the purpose of reducing the cost of production , without the thought of suppressing competition by use of the bigness of the plant they are creating , then they can not be convicted at the time the union is made , nor can they be convicted later , unless it happen that later on they conclude to suppress competition and take the usual methods for doing so , and thus establish for themselves a monopoly .
they can , in such a case , hardly complain if the motive which subsequently is disclosed is attributed by the court to the original combination .
much is said of the repeal of this statute and of constructive legislation intended to accomplish the purpose and blaze a clear path for honest merchants and business men to follow .
it may be that such a plan will be evolved , but i submit that the discussions which have been brought out in recent days by the fear of the continued execution of the anti - trust law have produced nothing but glittering generalities and have offered no line of distinction or rule of action as definite and as clear as that which the supreme court itself lays down in enforcing the statute .
i see no objection - and indeed i can see decided advantages - in the enactment of a law which shall describe and denounce methods of competition which are unfair and are badges of the unlawful purpose denounced in the anti - trust law .
the attempt and purpose to suppress a competitor by underselling him at a price so unprofitable as to drive him out of business , or the making of exclusive contracts with customers under which they are required to give up association with other manufacturers , and numerous kindred methods for stifling competition and effecting monopoly , should be described with sufficient accuracy in a criminal statute on the one hand to enable the government to shorten its task by prosecuting single misdemeanors instead of an entire conspiracy , and , on the other hand , to serve the purpose of pointing out more in detail to the business community what must be avoided .
in a special message to congress on january 7 , 1910 , i ventured to point out the disturbance to business that would probably attend the dissolution of these offending trusts .
i said : 
 " but such an investigation and possible prosecution of corporations whose prosperity or destruction affects the comfort not only of stockholders but of millions of wage earners , employees , and associated tradesmen must necessarily tend to disturb the confidence of the business community , to dry up the now flowing sources of capital from its places of hoarding , and produce a halt in our present prosperity that will cause suffering and strained circumstances among the innocent many for the faults of the guilty few .
the question which i wish in this message to bring clearly to the consideration and discussion of congress is whether , in order to avoid such a possible business danger , something can not be done by which these business combinations may be offered a means , without great financial disturbance , of changing the character , organization , and extent of their business into one within the lines of the law under federal control and supervision , securing compliance with the anti - trust statute .
" generally , in the industrial combinations called ' trusts , ' the principal business is the sale of goods in many states and in foreign markets ; in other words , the interstate and foreign business far exceeds the business done in any one state .
this fact will justify the federal government in granting a federal charter to such a combination to make and sell in interstate and foreign commerce the products of useful manufacture under such limitations as will secure a compliance with the anti - trust law .
it is possible so to frame a statute that while it offers protection to a federal company against harmful , vexatious , and unnecessary invasion by the states , it shall subject it to reasonable taxation and control by the states with respect to its purely local business . * * *
" corporations organized under this act should be prohibited from acquiring and holding stock in other corporations ( except for special reasons , upon approval by the proper federal authority ) , thus avoiding the creation under national auspices of the holding company with subordinate corporations in different states , which has been such an effective agency in the creation of the great trusts and monopolies .
" if the prohibition of the anti - trust act against combinations in restraint of trade is to be effectively enforced , it is essential that the national government shall provide for the creation of national corporations to carry on a legitimate business throughout the united states .
the conflicting laws of the different states of the union with respect to foreign corporations make it difficult , if not impossible , for one corporation to comply with their requirements so as to carry on business in a number of different states . "
i renew the recommendation of the enactment of a general law providing for the voluntary formation of corporations to engage in trade and commerce among the states and with foreign nations .
every argument which was then advanced for such a law , and every explanation which was at that time offered to possible objections , have been confirmed by our experience since the enforcement of the antitrust , statute has resulted in the actual dissolution of active commercial organizations .
it is even more manifest now than it was then that the denunciation of conspiracies in restraint of trade should not and does not mean the denial of organizations large enough to be intrusted with our interstate and foreign trade .
it has been made more clear now than it was then that a purely negative statute like the anti - trust law may well be supplemented by specific provisions for the building up and regulation of legitimate national and foreign commerce .
the drafting of the decrees in the dissolution of the present trusts , with a view to their reorganization into legitimate corporations , has made it especially apparent that the courts are not provided with the administrative machinery to make the necessary inquiries preparatory to reorganization , or to pursue such inquiries , and they should be empowered to invoke the aid of the bureau of corporations in determining the suitable reorganization of the disintegrated parts .
the circuit court and the attorney general were greatly aided in framing the decree in the tobacco trust dissolution by an expert from the bureau of corporations .
i do not set forth in detail the terms and sections of a statute which might supply the constructive legislation permitting and aiding the formation of combinations of capital into federal corporations .
they should be subject to rigid rules as to their organization and procedure , including effective publicity , and to the closest supervision as to the issue of stock and bonds by an executive bureau or commission in the department of commerce and labor , to which in times of doubt they might well submit their proposed plans for future business .
it must be distinctly understood that incorporation under federal law could not exempt the company thus formed and its incorporators and managers from prosecution under the anti - trust law for subsequent illegal conduct , but the publicity of its procedure and the opportunity for frequent consultation with the bureau or commission in charge of the incorporation as to the legitimate purpose of its transactions would offer it as great security against successful prosecutions for violations of the law as would be practical or wise .
stich a bureau or commission might well be invested also with the duty already referred to , of aiding courts in the dissolution and recreation of trusts within the law .
it should be an executive tribunal of the dignity and power of the comptroller of the currency or the interstate commerce commission , which now exercise supervisory power over important classes of corporations under federal regulation .
the drafting of such a federal incorporation law would offer ample opportunity to prevent many manifest evils in corporate management to - day , including irresponsibility of control in the hands of the few who are not the real owners .
i recommend that the federal charters thus to be granted shall be voluntary , at least until experience justifies mandatory provisions .
the benefit to be derived from the operation of great businesses under the protection of such a charter would attract all who are anxious to keep within the lines of the law .
other large combinations that fail to take advantage of the federal incorporation will not have a right to complain if their failure is ascribed to unwillingness to submit their transactions to the careful official .
scrutiny , competent supervision , and publicity attendant upon the enjoyment of such a charter .
the opportunity thus suggested for federal incorporation , it seems tome , is suitable constructive legislation needed to facilitate the squaring of great industrial enterprises to the rule of action laid down by the anti - trust law .
this statute as construed by the supreme court must continue to be the line of distinction for legitimate business .
it must be enforced , unless we are to banish individualism from all business and reduce it to one common system of regulation or control of prices like that which now prevails with respect to public utilities , and which when applied to all business would be a long step toward state socialism .
the anti - trust act is the expression of the effort of a freedomloving people to preserve equality of opportunity .
it is the result of the confident determination of such a people to maintain their future growth by preserving uncontrolled and unrestricted the enterprise of the individual , his industry , his ingenuity , his intelligence , and his independent courage .
for twenty years or more this statute has been upon the statute book .
all knew its general purpose and approved .
many of its violators were cynical over its assumed impotence .
it seemed impossible of enforcement .
slowly the mills of the courts ground , and only gradually did the majesty of the law assert itself .
many of its statesmen - authors died before it became a living force , and they and others saw the evil grow which they had hoped to destroy .
now its efficacy is seen ; now its power is heavy ; now its object is near achievement .
now we hear the call for its repeal on the plea that it interferes with business prosperity , and we are advised in most general terms , how by some other statute and in some other way the evil we are just stamping out can be cured , if we only abandon this work of twenty years and try another experiment for another term of years .
it is said that the act has not done good .
can this be said in the face of the effect of the northern securities decree ?
that decree was in no way so drastic or inhibitive in detail as either the standard oil decree or the tobacco decree ; but did it not stop for all time the then powerful movement toward the control of all the railroads of the country in a single hand ?
such a one - man power could not have been a healthful influence in the republic , even though exercised under the general supervision of an interstate commission .
do we desire to make such ruthless combinations and monopolies lawful ?
when all energies are directed , not toward the reduction of the cost of production for the public benefit by a healthful competition , but toward new ways and means for making permanent in a few hands the absolute control of the conditions and prices prevailing in the whole field of industry , then individual enterprise and effort will be paralyzed and the spirit of commercial freedom will be dead .
[ on foreign relations . ]
to the senate and house of representatives : 
 the relations of the united states with other countries have continued during the past twelve months upon a basis of the usual good will and friendly intercourse .
the year just passed marks an important general movement on the part of the powers for broader arbitration .
in the recognition of the manifold benefits to mankind in the extension of the policy of the settlement of international disputes by arbitration rather than by war , and in response to a widespread demand for an advance in that direction on the part of the people of the united states and of great britain and of france , new arbitration treaties were negotiated last spring with great britain and france , the terms of which were de signed , as expressed in the preamble of these treaties , to extend the scope and obligations of the policy of arbitration adopted in our present treaties with those governments to pave the way for this treat with the united states , great britain negotiated an important modification in its alliance with japan , and the french government also expedited the negotiations with signal good will .
the new treaties have been submitted to the senate and are awaiting its advice and consent to their ratification .
all the essentials of these important treaties have long been known , and it is my earnest hope that they will receive prompt and favorable action .
i am glad to report that on july 5 last the american claim of alsop & co. against the government of chile was finally disposed of by the decision of his britannic majesty george v , to whom , as amiable compositeur , the matter had been referred for determination .
his majesty made an award of nearly $ 1,000,000 to the claimants , which was promptly paid by chile .
the settlement of this controversy has happily eliminated from the relations between the republic of chile and the united states the only question which for two decades had given the two foreign offices any serious concern and makes possible the unobstructed development of the relations of friendship which it has been the aim of this government in every possible way to further and cultivate .
in further illustration of the practical and beneficent application of the principle of arbitration and the underlying broad spirit of conciliation , i am happy to advert to the part of the united states in facilitating amicable settlement of disputes which menaced the peace between panama and costa rica and between haiti and the dominican republic .
since the date of their independence , colombia and costa rica had been seeking a solution of a boundary dispute , which came as an heritage from colombia to the new republic of panama , upon its beginning life as an independent nation .
although the disputants had submitted this question for decision to the president of france under the terms of an arbitration treaty , the exact interpretation of the provisions of the award rendered had been a matter of serious disagreement between the two countries , both contending for widely different lines even under the terms of the decision .
subsequently and since t903 this boundary question bad been the subject of fruitless diplomatic negotiations between the parties .
in january , 1910 , at the request of both governments the agents representing them met in conference at the department of state and subsequently concluded a protocol submitting this long - pending controversy to the arbitral judgment of the chief justice of the united states , who consented to act in this capacity .
a boundary commission , according to the international agreement , has now been appointed , and it is expected that the arguments will shortly proceed and that this long - standing dispute will be honorably and satisfactorily terminated .
again , a few months ago it appeared that the dominican republic and haiti were about to enter upon hostilities because of complications growing out of an acrimonious boundary dispute which the efforts of many years had failed to solve .
the government of the united states , by a friendly interposition of good offices , succeeded in prevailing upon the parties to place their reliance upon some form of pacific settlement .
accordingly , on the friendly suggestion of this government , the two governments empowered commissioners to meet at washington in conference at the state department in order to arrange the terms of submission to arbitration of the boundary controversy .
our arbitration of the chamizal boundary question with mexico was unfortunately abortive , but with the earnest efforts on the part of both governments which its importance commands , it is felt that an early practical adjustment should prove possible .
during the past year the republic of venezuela celebrated the one hundredth anniversary of its independence .
the united states sent , in honor of this event , a special embassy to caracas , where the cordial reception and generous hospitality shown it were most gratifying as a further proof of the good relations and friendship existing between that country and the united states .
the recent political events in mexico received attention from this government because of the exceedingly delicate and difficult situation created along our southern border and the necessity for taking measures properly to safeguard american interests .
the government of the united states , in its desire to secure a proper observance and enforcement of the so - called neutrality statutes of the federal government , issued directions to the appropriate officers to exercise a diligent and vigilant regard for the requirements of such rules and laws .
although a condition of actual armed conflict existed , there was no official recognition of belligerency involving the technical neutrality obligations of international law .
on the 6th of march last , in the absence of the secretary of state , i had a personal interview with mr. wilson , the ambassador of the united states to mexico , in which he reported to me that the conditions in mexico were much more critical than the press dispatches disclosed ; that president diaz was on a volcano of popular uprising ; that the small outbreaks which had occurred were only symptomatic of the whole condition ; that a very large per cent of the people were in sympathy with the insurrection ; that a general explosion was probable at any time , in which case he feared that the 40,000 or more american residents in mexico might be assailed , and that the very large american investments might be injured or destroyed .
after a conference with the secretary of war and the secretary of the navy , i thought it wise to assemble an army division of full strength at san antonio , tex . ,
a brigade of three regiments at galveston , a brigade of infantry in the los angeles district of southern california , together with a squadron of battleships and cruisers and transports at galveston , and a small squadron of ships at san diego .
at the same time , through our representative at the city of mexico , i expressed to president diaz the hope that no apprehensions might result from unfounded conjectures as to these military maneuvers , and assured him that they had no significance which should cause concern to his government .
the mobilization was effected with great promptness , and on the 15th of march , through the secretary of war and the secretary of the navy , in a letter addressed to the chief of staff , i issued the following instructions : 
 it seems my duty as commander in chief to place troops in sufficient number where , if congress shall direct that they enter mexico to save american lives and property , an effective movement may be promptly made .
meantime , the movement of the troops to texas and elsewhere near the boundary , accompanied with sincere assurances of the utmost goodwill toward the present mexican government and with larger and more frequent patrols along the border to prevent insurrectionary expeditions from american soil , will hold up the hands of the existing government and will have a healthy moral effect to prevent attacks upon americans and their property in any subsequent general internecine strife .
again , the sudden mobilization of a division of troops has been a great test of our army and full of useful instruction , while the maneuvers that are thus made possible can occupy the troops and their officers to great advantage .
the assumption by the press that i contemplate intervention on mexican soil to protect american lives or property is of course gratuitous , because i seriously doubt whether i have such authority under any circumstances , and if i had i would not exercise it without express congressional approval .
indeed , as you know , i have already declined , without mexican consent , to order a troop of cavalry to protect the breakwater we are constructing just across the border in mexico at the mouth of the colorado river to save the imperial valley , although the insurrectos had scattered the mexican troops and were taking our horses and supplies and frightening our workmen away .
my determined purpose , however , is to be in a position so that when danger to american lives and property in mexico threatens and the existing government is rendered helpless by the insurrection , i can promptly execute congressional orders to protect them , with effect .
meantime , i send you this letter , through the secretary , to call your attention to some things in connection with the presence of the division in the southwest which have doubtless occurred to you , but which i wish to emphasize .
in the first place , i want to make the mobilization a first - class training for the army , and i wish you would give your time and that of the war college to advising and carrying out maneuvers of a useful character , and plan to continue to do this during the next three months .
by that time we may expect that either ambassador wilson 's fears will have been realized and chaos and its consequences have ensued , or that the present government of mexico will have so readjusted matters as to secure tranquillity - a result devoutly to be wished .
the troops can then be returned to their posts .
i understood from you in washington that gen. aleshire said that you could probably meet all the additional expense of this whole movement out of the present appropriations if the troops continue in texas for three months .
i sincerely hope this is so .
i observe from the newspapers that you have no blank cartridges , but i presume that this is an error , or that it will be easy to procure those for use as soon as your maneuvers begin .
second .
texas is a state ordinarily peaceful , but you can not put 20,000 troops into it without running some risk of a collision between the people of that state , and especially the -mexicans who live in texas near the border and who sympathize with the insurrectos , and the federal soldiers .
for that reason i beg you to be as careful as you can to prevent friction of any kind .
we were able in cuba , with the army of pacification there of something more than 5,000 troops , to maintain them for a year without any trouble , and i hope you can do the same thing in texas .
please give your attention to this , and advise all the officers in command of the necessity for very great circumspection in this regard .
third .
one of the great troubles in the concentration of troops is the danger of disease , and i suppose that you have adopted the most modern methods for preventing and , if necessary , for stamping out epidemics .
that is so much a part of a campaign that it hardly seems necessary for me to call attention to it .
finally , i wish you to examine the question of the patrol of the border and put as many troops on that work as is practicable , and more than are now engaged in it , in order to prevent the use of our borderland for the carrying out of the insurrection .
i have given assurances to the mexican ambassador on this point .
i sincerely hope that this experience will always be remembered by the army and navy as a useful means of education , and i should be greatly disappointed if it resulted in any injury or disaster to our forces from any cause .
i have taken a good deal of responsibility in ordering this mobilization , but i am ready to answer for it if only you and those under you use the utmost care to avoid the difficulties which i have pointed out .
you may have a copy of this letter made and left with gen. carter and such other generals in command as you may think wise and necessary to guide them in their course , but to be regarded as confidential .
i am more than happy to here record the fact that all apprehensions as to the effect of the presence of so large a military force in texas proved groundless ; no disturbances occurred ; the conduct of the troops was exemplary and the public reception and treatment of them was all that could have been desired , and this notwithstanding the presence of a large number of mexican refugees in the border territory .
from time to time communications were received from ambassador wilson , who had returned to mexico , confirming the view that the massing of american troops in the neighborhood had had good effect .
by dispatch of april 3 , 1911 , the ambassador said : 
 the continuing gravity of the situation here and the chaos that would ensue should the constitutional authorities be eventually overthrown , thus greatly increasing the danger to which american lives and property are already subject , confirm the wisdom of the president in taking those military precautions which , making every allowance for the dignity and the sovereignty of a friendly state , are due to our nationals abroad .
charged as i am with the responsibility of safeguarding these lives and property , i am bound to say to the department that our military dispositions on the frontier have produced an effective impression on the mexican mind and may , at any moment , prove to be the only guaranties for the safety of our nationals and their property .
if it should eventuate that conditions here require more active measures by the president and congress , sporadic attacks might be made upon the lives and property of our nationals , but the ultimate result would be order and adequate protection .
the insurrection continued and resulted in engagements between the regular mexican troops and the insurgents , and this along the border , so that in several instances bullets from the contending forces struck american citizens engaged in their lawful occupations on american soil .
proper protests were made against these invasions of american rights to the mexican authorities .
on april 17 , 1911 , 1 received the following telegram from the governor of arizona : 
 as a result of to - day 's fighting across the international line , but within gunshot range of the heart of douglas , five americans wounded on this side of the line .
everything points to repetition of these casualties on to - morrow , and while the federals seem disposed to keep their agreement not to fire into douglas , the position of the insurrectionists is such that when fighting occurs on the east and southeast of the intrenchments people living in douglas are put in danger of their lives .
in my judgment radical measures are needed to protect our innocent people , and if anything can be done to stop the fighting at agua prieta the , ittiation calls for such action .
it is impossible to safeguard the people of douglas unless the town be vacated .
can anything be done to relieve situation , now acute ?
after a conference with the secretary of state , the following telegram was sent to governor sloan , on april is , 1911 9 11 , and made public : 
 your dispatch received .
have made urgent demand upon mexican government to issue instructions to prevent firing across border by mexican federal troops , and am waiting reply .
meantime i have sent direct warning to the mexican and insurgent forces near douglas .
i infer from your dispatch that both parties attempt to heed the warning , but that in the strain and exigency of the contest wild bullets still find their way into douglas .
the situation might justify me in ordering our troops to cross the border and attempt to stop the fighting , or to fire upon both combatants from the american side .
but if i take this step , i must face the possibility of resistance and greater bloodshed , and also the danger of having our motives misconstrued and misrepresented , and of thus inflaming mexican popular indignation against many thousand americans now in mexico and jeopardizing their lives and property .
the pressure for general intervention under such conditions it might not be practicable to resist .
it is impossible to foresee or reckon the consequences of such a course , and we must use the greatest self - restraint to avoid it .
pending my urgent representation to the mexican government , i can not therefore order the troops at douglas to cross the border , but i must ask you and the local authorities , in case the same danger recurs , to direct the people of douglas to place themselves where bullets can not reach them and thus avoid casualty .
i am loath to endanger americans in ' mexico , where they are necessarily exposed , by taking a radical step to prevent injury to americans on our side of the border who can avoid it by a temporary inconvenience .
i am glad to say that no further invasion of american rights of any substantial character occurred .
the presence of a large military and naval force available for prompt action , near the mexican border , proved to be most fortunate under the somewhat trying conditions presented by this invasion of american rights had no movement theretofore taken place , and because of these events it had been necessary then to bring about the mobilization , it must have bad sinister significance .
on the other hand , the presence of the troops before and at the time of the unfortunate killing and wounding of american citizens at douglas , made clear that the restraint exercised by our government in regard to this occurrence was not due to lack of force or power to deal with it promptly and aggressively , but was due to a real desire to use every means possible to avoid direct intervention in the affairs of our neighbor whose friendship we valued and were most anxious to retain .
the policy and action of this government were based upon an earnest friendliness for the mexican people as a whole , and it is a matter of gratification to note that this attitude of strict impartiality as to all factions in mexico and of sincere friendship for the neighboring nation , without regard for party allegiance , has been generally recognized and has resulted in an even closer and more sympathetic understanding between the two republics and a warmer regard one for the other .
action to suppress violence and restore tranquillity throughout the mexican republic was of peculiar interest to this government , in that it concerned the safeguarding of american life and property in that country .
the government of the united states had occasion to accord permission for the passage of a body of mexican rurales through douglas , arizona , to tia juana , mexico , for the suppression of general lawlessness which bad for some time existed in the region of northern lower california .
on may 25 , 1911 , president diaz resigned , senor de la barra was chosen provisional president .
elections for president and vice president were thereafter held throughout the republic , and senor francisco 1 .
madero was formally declared elected on october 15 to the chief magistracy .
on november 6 president madero entered upon the duties of his office .
since the inauguration of president madero a plot has been unearthed against the present government , to begin a new insurrection .
pursuing the same consistent policy which this administration has adopted from the beginning , it directed an investigation into the conspiracy charged , and this investigation has resulted in the indictment of gen. bernardo reyes and others and the seizure of a number of officers and men and horses and accoutrements assembled upon the soil of texas for the purpose of invading mexico .
similar proceedings had been taken during the insurrection against the diaz government resulting in the indictments and prosecution of persons found to be engaged in violating the neutrality laws of the united states in aid of that uprising .
the record of this government in respect of the recognition of constituted authority in mexico therefore is clear .
as to the situation in central america , i have taken occasion in the past to emphasize most strongly the importance that should be attributed to the consummation of the conventions between the republics of nicaragua and of honduras and this country , and i again earnestly recommend that the necessary advice and consent of the senate be accorded to these treaties , which will make it possible for these central american republics to enter upon an era of genuine economic national development .
the government of nicaragua which has already taken favorable action on the convention , has found it necessary , pending the exchange of final ratifications , to enter into negotiations with american bankers for the purpose of securing a temporary loan to relieve the present financial tension .
iii connection with this temporary loan and in the hope of consummating , through the ultimate operation of the convention , a complete and lasting economic regeneration , the government of nicaragua has also decided to engage an american citizen as collector general of customs .
the claims commission on which the services of two american citizens have been sought , and the work of the american financial adviser should accomplish a lasting good of inestimable benefit to the prosperity , commerce , and peace of the republic .
in considering the ratification of the conventions with nicaragua and honduras , there rests with the united states the heavy responsibility of the fact that their rejection here might destroy the progress made and consign the republics concerned to still deeper submergence in bankruptcy , revolution , and national jeopardy .
our relations with the republic of panama , peculiarly important , due to mutual obligations and the vast interests created by the canal , have continued in the usual friendly manner , and we have been glad to make appropriate expression of our attitude of sympathetic interest in the endeavors of our neighbor in undertaking the development of the rich resources of the country .
with reference to the internal political affairs of the republic , our obvious concern is in the maintenance of public peace and constitutional order , and the fostering of the general interests created by the actual relations of the two countries , without the manifestation of any preference for the success of either of the political parties .
the pan american union , formerly known as the bureau of american republics , maintained by the joint contributions of all the american nations , has during the past year enlarged its practical work as an international organization , and continues to prove its usefillness as an agency for the mutual development of commerce , better acquaintance , and closer intercourse between the united states and her sister american republics .
the past year has been marked in our relations with china by the conclusion of two important international loans , one for the construction of the hukuang railways , the other for carrying out of the currency reform to which china was pledged by treaties with the united states , great britain , and japan , of which mention was made in my last annual message .
it will be remembered that early in 1909 an agreement was consummated among british , french , and german financial groups whereby they proposed to lend the chinese government funds for the construction of railways in the provinces of hunan and hupeh , reserving for their nationals the privilege of engineering the construction of the lines and of furnishing the materials required for the work .
after negotiations with the governments and groups concerned an agreement was reached whereby american , british , french , and german nationals should participate upon equal terms in this important and useful undertaking .
thereupon the financial groups , supported by their respective governments , began negotiations with the chinese government which terminated in a loan to china of $ 30,000,000 , with the privilege of increasing the amount to $ 50,000,000 .
the cooperative construction of these trunk lines should be of immense advantage , materially and otherwise , to china and should greatly facilitate the development of the bountiful resources of the empire .
on the other hand , a large portion of these funds is to be expended for materials , american products having equal preference with those of the other three lending nations , and as the contract provides for branches and extensions subsequently to be built on the same terms the opportunities for american materials will reach considerable proportions .
knowing the interest of the united states in the reform of chinese currency , the chinese government , in the autumn of 1910 sought the assistance of the american government to procure funds with which to accomplish that all - important reform .
in the course of the subsequent negotiations there was combined with the proposed currency loan one for certain industrial developments in manchuria , the two loans aggregating the sum of $ 50,000,000 .
while this was originally to be solely an american enterprise , the american government , consistently with its desire to secure a sympathetic and practical cooperation of the great powers toward maintaining the principle of equality of opportunity and the administrative integrity of china , urged the chinese government to admit to participation in the currency loan the associates of the american group in the hukuang loan .
while of immense importance in itself , the reform contemplated in making this loan is but preliminary to other and more comprehensive fiscal reforms which will be of incalculable benefit to china and foreign interests alike , since they will strengthen the chinese empire and promote the rapid development of international trade .
when these negotiations were begun , it was understood that a financial adviser was to be employed by china in connection with the reform , and in order that absolute equality in all respects among the lending nations might be scrupulously observed , the american government proposed the nomination of a neutral adviser , which was agreed to by china and the other governments concerned .
on september 28 , 1911 , dr. vissering , president of the dutch java bank and a financier of wide experience in the orient , was recommended to the chinese government for the post of monetary adviser .
especially important at the present , when the ancient chinese empire is shaken by civil war incidental to its awakening to the many influences and activities of modernization , are the cooperative policy of good understanding which has been fostered by the international projects referred to above and the general sympathy of view among all the powers interested in the far east .
while safeguarding the interests of our nationals , this government is using its best efforts in continuance of its traditional policy of sympathy and friendship toward the chinese empire and its people , with the confident hope for their economic and administrative development , and with the constant disposition to contribute to their welfare in all proper ways consistent with an attitude of strict impartiality as between contending factions .
for the first time in the history of the two countries , a chinese cruiser , the haichi , under the command of admiral ching , recently visited new york , where the officers and men were given a cordial welcome .
the treaty of commerce and navigation between the united states and japan , signed in 1894 , would by a strict interpretation of its provisions have terminated on july 17 , 1912 .
japan 's general treaties with the other powers , however , terminated in 1911 , and the japanese government expressed an earnest desire to conduct the negotiations for a new treaty with the united states simultaneously with its negotiations with the other powers .
there were a number of important questions involved in the treaty , including the immigration of laborers , revision of the customs tariff , and the right of americans to hold real estate in japan .
the united states consented to waive all technicalities and to enter at once upon negotiations for a new treaty on the understanding that there should be a continuance throughout the , life of the treaty of the same effective measures for the restriction of immigration of laborers to american territory which had been in operation with entire satisfaction to both governments since 1908 .
the japanese government accepted this basis of negotiation , and a new treaty was quickly concluded , resulting in a highly satisfactory settlement of the other questions referred to .
a satisfactory adjustment has also been effected of the questions growing out of the annexation of korea by japan .
the recent visit of admiral count togo to the united states as the nation 's guest afforded a welcome opportunity to demonstrate the friendly feeling so happily existing between the two countries .
there has been a change of sovereigns in siam and the american minister at bangkok was accredited in a special capacity to represent the united states at the coronation ceremony of the new king .
in europe and the near east , during the past twelve - month , there has been at times considerable political unrest .
the moroccan question , which for some months was the cause of great anxiety , happily appears to have reached a stage at which it need no longer be regarded with concern .
the ottoman empire was occupied for a period by strife in albania and is now at war with italy .
in greece and the balkan countries the disquieting potentialities of this situation have been more or less felt .
persia has been the scene of a long internal struggle .
these conditions have been the cause of uneasiness in european diplomacy , but thus far without direct political concern to the united states .
in the war which unhappily exists between italy and turkey this government has no direct political interest , and i took occasion at the suitable time to issue a proclamation of neutrality in that conflict .
at the same time all necessary steps have been taken to safeguard the personal interests of american citizens and organizations in so far as affected by the war .
in spite of the attendant economic uncertainties and detriments to commerce , the united states has gained markedly in its commercial standing with certain of the nations of the near east .
turkey , especially , is beginning to come into closer relations with the united states through the new interest of american manufacturers and exporters in the possibilities of those regions , and it is hoped that foundations are being laid for a large and mutually beneficial exchange of commodities between the two countries .
this new interest of turkey in american goods is indicated by the fact that a party of prominent merchants from a large city in turkey recently visited the united states to study conditions of manufacture and export here , and to get into personal touch with american merchants , with a view to cooperating more intelligently in opening up the markets of turkey and the adjacent countries to our manufactures .
another indication of this new interest of america in the commerce of the near east is the recent visit of a large party of american merchants and manufacturers to central and eastern europe , where they were entertained by prominent officials and organizations of the large cities , and new bonds of friendship and understanding were established which can not but lead to closer and greater commercial interchange .
the 22d of june of the present year marked the coronation of his britannic majesty king george v. in honor of this auspicious occasion i sent a special embassy to london .
the courteous and cordial welcome extended to this government 's representatives by his majesty and the people of great britain has further emphasized the strong bonds of friendship happily existing between the two nations .
as the result of a determined effort on the part of both great britain and the united states to settle all of their outstanding differences a number of treaties have been entered into between the two countries in recent years , by which nearly all of the unsettled questions between them of any importance have either been adjusted by agreement or arrangements made for their settlement by arbitration .
a number of the unsettled questions referred to consist of pecuniary claims presented by each country against the other , and in order that as many of these claims as possible should be settled by arbitration a special agreement for that purpose was entered into between the two governments on the 18th day of august , 1910 , in accordance with article 11 of the general arbitration treaty with great britain of april 4 , 19o8 .
pursuant to the provisions of this special agreement a schedule of claims has already been agreed upon , and the special agreement , together with this schedule , received the approval of the senate when submitted to it for that purpose at the last session of congress .
negotiations between the two governments for the preparation of an additional schedule of claims are already well advanced , and it is my intention to submit such schedule as soon as it is agreed upon to the senate for its approval , in order that the arbitration proceedings may be undertaken at an early date .
in this connection the attention of congress is particularly called to the necessity for an appropriation 
 to cover the expense incurred in submitting these claims to arbitration .
in pursuance of the act of congress , approved june 23 , 1910 , the secretary of state and the joint committee on the library entered into a contract with the sculptor , albert jaegers , for the execution of a bronze replica of the statue of gen. von steuben erected in washington , for presentation to his majesty the german emperor and the german nation in recognition of the gift of the statue of frederick the great made by the emperor to the people of the united states .
the presentation was made on september 2 last by representatives whom i commissioned as the special mission of this government for the purpose .
the german emperor has conveyed to me by telegraph , on his own behalf and that of the german people , an expression of appreciative thanks for this action of congress .
by direction of the state department , our ambassador to russia has recently been having a series of conferences with the minister of foreign affairs of russia , with a view to securing a clearer understanding and construction of the treaty of 1832 between russia and the united states and the modification of any existing russian regulations which may be found to interfere in any way with the full recognition of the rights of american citizens under this treaty .
i believe that the government of russia is addressing itself seriously to the need of changing the present practice under the treaty and that sufficient progress has been made to warrant the continuance of these conferences in the hope that there may soon be removed any justification of the complaints of treaty violation now prevalent in this country .
i expect that immediately after the christmas recess i shall be able to make a further communication to congress on this subject .
negotiations for the amelioration of conditions found to exist in liberia by the american commission , undertaken through the department of state , have been concluded and it is only necessary for certain formalities to be arranged in securing the loan which it is hoped will place that republic on a practical financial and economic footing .
the national constituent assembly , regularly elected by the vote of the portuguese people , having on june 19 last unanimously proclaimed a republican form of government , the official recognition of the government of the united states was given to the new republic in the afternoon of the same day .
negotiations for the betterment of conditions existing in the spitzbergen islands and the adjustment of conflicting claims of american citizens and norwegian subjects to lands in that archipelago are still in progress .
the supplementary protocol to the he hague convention for the establishment of an international prize court , mentioned in my last annual message , embodying stipulations providing for an alternative procedure which would remove the constitutional objection to that part of the hague convention which provides that there may be an appeal to the proposed court from the decisions of national courts , has received the signature of the governments parties to the original convention and has been ratified by the government of the united states , together with the prize court convention .
the deposit of the ratifications with the government of the netherlands awaits action by the powers on the declaration , signed at london on february 26 , 1909 of the rules of international law to be recognized within the meaning of article 7 of the hague convention for the establishment of an international prize court .
the fur - seal controversy , which for nearly twenty - five years has been the source of serious friction between the united states and the powers bordering upon the north pacific ocean , whose subjects have been permitted to engage in pelagic sealing against the fur - seal herds having their breeding grounds within the jurisdiction of the united states , has at last been satisfactorily adjusted by the conclusion of the north pacific sealing convention entered into between the united states , great britain , japan , and russia on the 7th of july last .
this convention is a conservation measure of very great importance , and if it is carried out in the spirit of reciprocal concession and advantage upon which it is based , there is every reason to believe that not only will it result in preserving the furseal herds of the north pacific ocean and restoring them to their former value for the purposes of commerce , but also that it will afford a permanently satisfactory settlement of a question the only other solution of which seemed to be the total destruction of the fur seals .
in another aspect , also , this convention is of importance in that it furnishes an illustration of the feasibility of securing a general international game law for the protection of other mammals of the sea , the preservation of which is of importance to all the nations of the world .
the attention of congress is especially called to the necessity for legislation on the part of the united states for the purpose of fulfilling the obligations assumed under this convention , to which the senate gave its advice and consent on the 24th day of july last .
the conference of the international union for the protection of industrial property , which , under the authority of congress , convened at washington on may 16 , 1911 , closed its labors on june 2 , 1911 , by the signature of three acts , as follows : 
 ( i ) a convention revising the paris convention of march 20 , 1883 , for the protection of industrial property , as modified by the additional act signed at brussels on december 14 , 1900 ; 
 ( 2 ) an arrangement to replace the arrangement signed at madrid on april 14 , 1891 for the international registration of trade - marks , and the additional act with regard thereto signed at brussels on december 14 , 1900 ; and 
 ( 3 ) an arrangement to replace the arrangement signed at madrid on april 14 , 18gi , relating to the repression of false indication of production of merchandise .
the united states is a signatory of the first convention only , and this will be promptly submitted to the senate .
in a special message transmitted to the congress on the 11th of january , 19ii , in which i concurred in the recommendations made by the secretary of state in regard to certain needful legislation for the control of our interstate and foreign traffic in opium and other menacing drugs , i quoted from my annual message of december 7 , 1909 , in which i announced that the results of the international opium commission held at shanghai in february , 1909 , at the invitation of the united states , had been laid before this government ; that the report of that commission showed that china was making remarkable progress and admirable efforts toward the eradication of the opium evil ; that the interested governments had not permitted their commercial interests to prevent their cooperation in this reform ; and , as a result of collateral investigations of the opium question in this country , i recommended that the manufacture , sale , and use of opium in the united states should be more rigorously controlled by legislation 
 prior to that time and in continuation of the policy of this government to secure the cooperation of the interested nations , the united states proposed an international opium conference with full powers for the purpose of clothing with the force of international law the resolutions adopted by the above - mentioned commission , together with their essential corollaries .
the other powers concerned cordially responded to the proposal of this government , and , i am glad to be able to announce , representatives of all the powers assembled in conference at the hague on the first of this month .
since the passage of the opium - exclusion act , more than twenty states have been animated to modify their pharmacy laws and bring them in accord with the spirit of that act , thus stamping out , to a measure , the intrastate traffic in opium and other habit - forming drugs .
but , although i have urged on the congress the passage of certain measures for federal control of the interstate and foreign traffic in these drugs , no action has yet been taken .
in view of the fact that there is now sitting at the hague so important a conference , which has under review the municipal laws of the different nations for the mitigation of their opium and other allied evils , a conference which will certainly deal with the international aspects of these evils , it seems to me most essential that the congress should take immediate action on the anti - narcotic legislation to which i have already called attention by a special message .
the four important conventions signed at the fourth pan american conference at buenos aires , providing for the regulation of trademarks , patents , and copyrights , and for the arbitration of pecuniary claims , have , with the advice and consent of the senate , been ratified on the part of the united states and the ratifications have been deposited with the government of the argentine republic in accordance with the requirements of the conventions .
i am not advised that similiar action has been taken by any other of the signatory governments .
one of the notable advances in international morality accomplished in recent years was an arrangement entered into on april 13th of the present year between the united states and other powers for the repression of the circulation of obscene publications .
in my last annual message i referred to the tariff negotiations of the department of state with foreign countries in connection with the application , by a series of proclamations , of the minimum tariff of the united states to importations from the several countries , and i stated that , in its general operation , section 2 of the new tariff law had proved a guaranty of continued commercial peace , although there were , unfortunately , instances where foreign governments dealt arbitrarily with american interests within their jurisdiction in a manner injurious and inequitable .
during the past year some instances of discriminatory treatment have been removed , but i regret to say that there remain a few cases of differential treatment adverse to the commerce of the united states .
while none of these instances now appears to amount to undue discrimination in the sense of section 2 of the tariff law of august 5 , 1909 , they are all exceptions to that complete degree of equality of tariff treatment that the department of state has consistently sought to obtain for american commerce abroad .
while the double tariff feature of the tariff law of 1909 has been amply justified by the results achieved in removing former and preventing new , undue discriminations against american commerce it is believed that the time has come for the amendment of this feature of the law in such way as to provide a graduated means of meeting varying degrees of discriminatory treatment of american commerce in foreign countries as well as to protect the financial interests abroad of american citizens against arbitrary and injurious treatment on the part of foreign governments through either legislative or administrative measures .
it would seem desirable that the maximum tariff of the united states should embrace within its purview the free list , which is not the case at the present time , in order that it might have reasonable significance to the governments of those countries from which the importations into the united states are confined virtually to articles on the free list .
the fiscal year ended june 30 , 1911 , shows great progress in the development of american trade .
it was noteworthy as marking the highest record of exports of american products to foreign countries , the valuation being in excess of $ 2,000,000,000 .
these exports showed a gain over the preceding year of more than $ 300,000,000 .
there is widespread appreciation expressed by the business interests of the country as regards the practical value of the facilities now offered by the department of state and the department of commerce and labor for the furtherance of american commerce .
conferences with their officers at washington who have an expert knowledge of trade conditions in foreign countries and with consular officers and commercial agents of the department of commerce and labor who , while on leave of absence , visit the principal industrial centers of the united states , have been found of great value .
these trade conferences are regarded as a particularly promising method of governmental aid in foreign trade promotion .
the department of commerce and labor has arranged to give publicity to the expected arrival and the itinerary of consular officers and commercial agents while on leave in the united states , in order that trade organizations may arrange for conferences with them .
as i have indicated , it is increasingly clear that to obtain and maintain that equity and substantial equality of treatment essential to the flourishing foreign trade , which becomes year by year more important to the industrial and commercial welfare of the united states , we should have a flexibility of tariff sufficient for the give and take of negotiation by the department of state on behalf of our commerce and industry .
i need hardly reiterate the conviction that there should speedily be built up an american merchant marine .
this is necessary to assure favorable transportation facilities to our great ocean - borne commerce as well as to supplement the navy with an adequate reserve of ships and men it would have the economic advantage of keeping at home part of the vast sums now paid foreign shipping for carrying american goods .
all the great commercial nations pay heavy subsidies to their merchant marine so that it is obvious that without some wise aid from the congress the united states must lag behind in the matter of merchant marine in its present anomalous position .
legislation to facilitate the extension of american banks to foreign countries is another matter in which our foreign trade needs assistance .
the interests of our foreign commerce are nonpartisan , and as a factor in prosperity are as broad as the land .
in the dissemination of useful information and in the coordination of effort certain unofficial associations have done good work toward the promotion of foreign commerce .
it is cause for regret , however , that the great number of such associations and the comparative lack of cooperation between them fails to secure an efficiency commensurate with the public interest .
through the agency of the department of commerce and labor , and in some cases directly , the department of state transmits to reputable business interests information of commercial opportunities , supplementing the regular published consular reports .
some central organization in touch with associations and chambers of commerce throughout the country and able to keep purely american interests in closer touch with different phases of commercial affairs would , i believe , be of great value .
such organization might be managed by a committee composed of a small number of those now actively carrying on the work of some of the larger associations , and there might be added to the committee , as members ex officio , one or two officials of the department of state and one or two officials from the department of commerce and labor and representatives of the appropriate committees of congress .
the authority and success of such an organization would evidently be enhanced if the congress should see fit to prescribe its scope and organization through legislation which would give to it some such official standing as that , for example , of the national red cross .
with these factors and the continuance of the foreign - service establishment ( departmental , diplomatic , and consular ) upon the high plane where it has been placed by the recent reorganization this government would be abreast of the times in fostering the interests of its foreign trade , and the rest must be left to the energy and enterprise of our business men .
the entire foreign - service organization is being improved and developed with especial regard to the requirements of the commercial interests of the country .
the rapid growth of our foreign trade makes it of the utmost importance that governmental agencies through which that trade is to be aided and protected should possess a high degree of efficiency .
not only should the foreign representatives be maintained upon a generous scale in so far as salaries and establishments are concerned , but the selection and advancement of officers should be definitely and permanently regulated by law so that the service shall not fail to attract men of high character and ability .
the experience of the past few years with a partial application of civil - service rules to the diplomatic and consular service leaves no doubt in my mind of the wisdom of a wider and more permanent extension of those principles to both branches of the foreign service .
the men selected for appointment by means of the existing executive regulations have been of a far higher average of intelligence and ability than the men appointed before the regulations were promulgated .
moreover , the feeling that under the existing rules there is reasonable hope for permanence of tenure during good behavior and for promotion for meritorious service has served to bring about a zealous activity in the interests of the country , which never before existed or could exist .
it is my earnest conviction that the enactment into law of the general principles of the existing regulations can not fail to effect further improvement in both branches of the foreign service by providing greater inducement for young men of character and ability to seek a career abroad in the service of the government , and an incentive to those already in the service to put forth greater efforts to attain the high standards which the successful conduct of our international relations and commerce requires .
i therefore again commend to the favorable action of the congress the enactment of a law applying to the diplomatic and consular service the principles embodied in section 1753 of the revised statutes of the united states , in the civil - service act of january 16 , 1883 , and the executive orders of june 27 , 1906 , and of november 26 , 1909 .
in its consideration of this important subject i desire to recall to the attention of the congress the very favorable report made on the lowden bill for the improvement of the foreign service by the foreign affairs committee of the house of representatives .
available statistics show the strictness with which the merit system has been applied to the foreign service during recent years and the absolute nonpartisan selection of consuls and diplomatic - service secretaries who , indeed , far from being selected with any view to political consideration , have actually been chosen to a disproportionate extent from states which would have been unrepresented in the foreign service under the system which it is to be hoped is now permanently obsolete .
some legislation for the perpetuation of the present system of examinations and promotions upon merit and efficiency would be of greatest value to our commerical and international interests .
to the senate and house of representatives : 
 in my annual message to congress , december , 1909 , i stated that under section 2 of the act of august 5 , 1909 , i had appointed a tariff board of three members to cooperate with the state department in the administration of the maximum and minimum clause of that act , to make a glossary or encyclopedia of the existing tariff so as to render its terms intelligible to the ordinary reader , and then to investigate industrial conditions and costs of production at home and abroad with a view to determining to what extent existing tariff rates actually exemplify the protective principle , viz . ,
that duties should be made adequate , and only adequate , to equalize the difference in cost of production at home and abroad .
i further stated that i believed these investigations would be of great value as a basis for accurate legislation , and that i should from time to time recommend to congress the revision of certain schedules in accordance with the findings of the board .
in the last session of the sixty - first congress a bill creating a permanent tariff board of five members , of whom not more than three should be of the same political party , passed each house , but failed of enactment because of slight differences on which agreement was not reached before adjournment .
an appropriation act provided that the permanent tariff board , if created by statute , should report to congress on schedule k in december , 1911 .
therefore , to carry out so far as lay within my power the purposes of this bill for a permanent tariff board , i appointed in march , 19li , a board of five , adding two members of such party affiliation as would have fulfilled the statutory requirement , and directed them to make a report to me on schedule k of the tariff act in december of this year .
in my message of august 17 , 1911 , accompanying the veto of the wool bill , i said that , in my judgment , schedule k should be revised and the rates reduced .
my veto was based on the ground that , since the tariff board would make , in december , a detailed report on wool and wool manufactures , with special reference to the relation of the existing rates of duties to relative costs here and abroad , public policy and a fair regard to the interests of the producers and the manufacturers on the one hand and of the consumers on the other demanded that legislation should not be hastily enacted in the absence of such information ; that i was not myself possessed at that time of adequate knowledge of the facts to determine whether or not the proposed act was in accord with my pledge to support a fair and reasonable protective policy ; that such legislation might prove only temporary and inflict upon a great industry the evils of continued uncertainty .
i now herewith submit a report of the tariff board on schedule k. the board is unanimous in its findings .
on the basis of these findings i now recommend that the congress proceed to a consideration of this schedule with a view to its revision and a general reduction of its rates .
the report shows that the present method of assessing the duty on raw wool - this is , by a specific rate on the grease pound ( i. e. , unscoured ) -operates to exclude wools of high shrinkage in scouring but fine quality from the american market and thereby lessens the range of wools available to the domestic manufacturer ; that the duty on scoured wool of 33 cents per pound is prohibitory and operates to exclude the importation of clean , low - priced foreign wools of inferior grades , which are nevertheless valuable material for manufacturing , and which can not be imported in the grease because of their heavy shrinkage .
such wools , if imported , might be used to displace the cheap substitutes now in use .
to make the preceding paragraph a little plainer , take the instance of a hundred pounds of first - class wool imported under the present duty , which is 11 11 cents a pound .
that would make the duty on the hundred pounds $ 11 .
the merchantable part of the wool thus imported is the weight of the wool of this hundred pounds after scouring .
if the wool shrinks 80 per cent , as some wools do , then the duty in such a case would amount to $ 11 $ 11 on 20 pounds of scoured wool .
this , of course , would be prohibitory .
if the wool shrinks only 50 per cent , it would be $ 11 on 50 pounds of wool , and this is near to the average of the great bulk of wools that are imported from australia , which is the principal source of our imported wool .
these discriminations could be overcome by assessing a duty in ad valorem terms , but this method is open to the objection , first , that it increases administrative difficulties and tends to decrease revenue through undervaluation ; and , second , that as prices advance , the ad valorem rate increases the duty per pound at the time when the consumer most needs relief and the producer can best stand competition ; while if prices decline the duty is decreased at the time when the consumer is least burdened by the price and the producer most needs protection .
another method of meeting the difficulty of taxing the grease pound is to assess a specific duty on grease wool in terms of its scoured content .
this obviates the chief evil of the present system , namely , the discrimination due to different shrinkages , and thereby tends greatly to equalize the duty .
the board reports that this method is feasible in practice and could be administered without great expense .
the scoured content of the wool is the basis on which users of wool make their calculations , and a duty of this kind would fit the usages of the trade .
one effect of this method of assessment would be that , regardless of the rate of duty , there would be an increase in the supply and variety of wool by making available to the american market wools of both low and fine quality now excluded .
the report shows in detail the difficulties involved in attempting to state in categorical terms the cost of wool production and the great differences in cost as between different regions and different types of wool .
it is found , however , that , taking all varieties in account , the average cost of production for the whole american clip is higher than the cost in the chief competing country by an amount somewhat less than the present duty .
the report shows that the duties on noils , wool wastes , and shoddy , which are adjusted to the rate of 33 cents on scoured wool are prohibitory in the same measure that the duty on scoured wool is prohibitory .
in general , they are assessed at rates as high as , or higher than , the duties paid on the clean content of wools actually imported .
they should be reduced and so adjusted to the rate on wool as to bear their proper proportion to the real rate levied on the actual wool imports .
the duties on many classes of wool manufacture are prohibitory and greatly in excess of the difference in cost of production here and abroad .
this is true of tops , of yarns ( with the exception of worsted yarns of a very high grade ) , and of low and medium grade cloth of heavy weight .
on tops up to 52 cents a pound in value , and on yarns of 65 cents in value , the rate is 100 per cent with correspondingly higher rates for lower values .
on cheap and medium grade cloths , the existing rates frequently run to 150 per cent and on some cheap goods to over 200 per cent .
this is largely due to that part of the duty which is levied ostensibly to compensate the manufacturer for the enhanced cost of his raw material due to the duty on wool .
as a matter of fact , this compensatory duty , for numerous classes of goods , is much in excess of the amount needed for strict compensation .
on the other hand , the findings show that the duties which run to such high ad valorem equivalents are prohibitory , since the goods are not imported , but that the prices of domestic fabrics are not raised by the full amount of duty .
on a set of 1-yard samples of 16 english fabrics , which are completely excluded by the present tariff rates , it was found that the total foreign value was $ 41.84 ; the duties which would have been assessed had these fabrics been imported , $ 76.90 ; the foreign value plus the amount of the duty , $ 118.74 ; or a nominal duty of 183 per cent .
in fact , however , practically identical fabrics of domestic make sold at the same time at $ 69.75 , showing an enhanced price over the foreign market value of but 67 per cent .
although these duties do not increase prices of domestic goods by anything like their full amount , it is none the less true that such prohibitive duties eliminate the possibility of foreign competition , even in time of scarcity ; that they form a temptation to monopoly and conspiracies to control domestic prices ; that they are much in excess of the difference in cost of production here and abroad , and that they should be reduced to a point which accords with this principle .
the findings of the board show that in this industry the actual manufacturing cost , aside from the question of the price of materials , is much higher in this country than it is abroad ; that in the making of yarn and cloth the domestic woolen or worsted manufacturer has in general no advantage in the form of superior machinery or more efficient labor to offset the higher wages paid in this country the findings show that the cost of turning wool into yarn in this country is about double that in the leading competing country , and that the cost of turning yarn into cloth is somewhat more than double .
under the protective policy a great industry , involving the welfare of hundreds of thousands of people , has been established despite these handicaps .
in recommending revision and reduction , i therefore urge that action be taken with these facts in mind , to the end that an important and established industry may not be jeopardized .
the tariff board reports that no equitable method has been found to , levy purely specific duties on woolen and worsted fabrics and that , excepting for a compensatory duty , the rate must be ad valorem on such manufactures .
it is important to realize , however , that no flat ad valorem rate on such fabrics can be made to work fairly and effectively .
any single rate which is high enough to equalize the difference in manufacturing cost at home and abroad on highly finished goods involving such labor would be prohibitory on cheaper goods , in which the labor cost is a smaller proportion of the total value .
conversely , a rate only adequate to equalize this difference on cheaper goods would remove protection from the fine - goods manufacture , the increase in which has been one of the striking features of the trade 's development in recent years .
i therefore recommend that in any revision the importance of a graduated scale of ad valorem duties on cloths be carefully considered and applied .
i venture to say that no legislative -body has ever had presented to it a more complete and exhaustive report than this on so difficult and complicated a subject as the relative costs of wool and woolens the world over .
it is a monument to the thoroughness , industry , impartiality , and accuracy of the men engaged in its making .
they were chosen from both political parties but have allowed no partisan spirit to prompt or control their inquiries .
they are unanimous in their findings .
i feel sure that after the report has been printed and studied the value of such a compendium of exact knowledge in respect to this schedule of the tariff will convince all of the wisdom of making such a board permanent in order that it may treat each schedule of the tariff as it has treated this , and then keep its bureau of information up to date with current changes in the economic world .
it is no part of the function of the tariff board to propose rates of duty .
their function is merely to present findings of fact on which rates of duty may be fairly determined in the light of adequate knowledge in accord with the economic policy to be followed .
this is what the present report does .
the findings of fact by the board show ample reason for the revision downward of schedule k , in accord with the protective principle , and present the data as to relative costs and prices from which may be determined what rates will fairly equalize the difference in production costs .
i recommend that such revision be proceeded with at once .
[ on the financial condition of the treasury , needed banking and currency reform , and departmental questions . ]
to the senate and house of representatives : 
 the financial condition of the government , as shown at the close of the last fiscal year , june 30 , 1911 , was very satisfactory .
the ordinary receipts into the general fund , excluding postal revenues , amounted to $ 701,372,374.99 , and the disbursements from the general fund for current expenses and capital outlays , excluding postal and panama canal disbursements , including the interest on the public debt , amounted to $ 654,137,907 - 89 , leaving a surplus of $ 47,234,377.10 .
the postal revenue receipts amounted to $ 237,879,823,60 , while the payments made for the postal service from the postal revenues amounted to $ 237,660,705.48 , which left a surplus of postal receipts over disbursements of $ 219,118.12 , the first time in 27 years in which a surplus occurred .
the interest - bearing debt of the united states june 30 , 1911 , amounted to $ 915,353,igo .
the debt on which interest had ceased amounted to $ 1,879,830.26 , and the debt bearing no interest , including greenbacks , national bank notes to be redeemed , and fractional currency , amounted to $ 386,751,917 - 43 , or a total of interest and noninterest bearing debt amounting to $ 1,303,984,937.69 .
the actual disbursements , exclusive of those for the panama canal and for the postal service for the year ending june 30 , 1911 , were $ 654,137,997.89 .
the actual disbursements for the year ending june 30 , 1910 , exclusive of the panama canal and the postal service disbursements , were $ 659,705,391.08 , making a decrease of $ 5,567,393.19 in yearly expenditures in the year 1911 under that of 1910 .
for the year ending june 30 , 1912 , the estimated receipts , exclusive of the postal revenues , are $ 666,000,000 , while the total estimates , exclusive of those for the panama canal and the postal expenditures payable from the postal revenues , amount to $ 645,842,799.34 .
this is a decrease in the 1912 estimates from that of the 1911 estimates of $ 1,534,367 - 22 .
for the year ending june 30 , 1913 , the estimated receipts , exclusive of the postal revenues , are $ 667,000,000 , while the total estimated appropriations , exclusive of the panama canal and postal disbursements payable from postal revenues , will amount to $ 637,920,803.35 .
this is a decrease in the 1913 estimates from that of the 1912 estimates of $ 7,921,995.99 .
as to the postal revenues , the expansion of the business in that department , the normal increase in the post office and the extension of the service , will increase the outlay to the sum of $ 260,938,463 ; but as the department was self - sustaining this year the postmaster general is assured that next year the receipts will at least equal the expenditures , and probably exceed them by more than the surplus of this year .
it is fair and equitable , therefore , in determining the economy with which the government has been run , to exclude the transactions of a department like the post office department , which relies for its support upon its receipts .
in calculations heretofore made for comparison of economy in each year , it has been the proper custom only to include in the statement the deficit in the post office department which was paid out of the treasury .
a calculation of the actual increase in the expenses of government arising from the increase in the population and the general expansion of governmental functions , except those of the post office , for a number of years shows a normal increase of about 4 per cent a year .
by directing the exercise of great care to keep down the expenses and the estimates we have succeeded in reducing the total disbursements each year .
the credit of this government was shown to be better than that of any other government by the sale of the panama canal 3 per cent bonds .
these bonds did not give their owners the privilege of using them as a basis for bank - note circulation , nor was there any other privilege extended to them which would affect their general market value .
their sale , therefore , measured the credit of the government .
the premium which was realized upon the bonds made the actual interest rate of the transaction 2.909 per cent .
i in the treasury department the efficiency and economy work has been kept steadily up .
provision is made for the elimination of 134 positions during the coming year .
two hundred and sixty - seven statutory positions were eliminated during the last year in the office of the treasury in washington , and 141 positions in the year 1910 , making an elimination of 542 statutory positions since march 4 , 1909 ; and this has been done without the discharge of anybody , because the normal resignations and deaths have been equal to the elimination of the places , a system of transfers having taken care of the persons whose positions were dropped out .
in the field service if the department , too , 1,259 positions have been eliminated down to the present time , making a total net reduction of all treasury positions to the number of 1,801 .
meantime the efficiency of the work of the departmeat has increased .
a matter of first importance that will come before congress for action at this session is monetary reform .
the congress has itself arranged an early introduction of this great question through the report of its monetary commission .
this commission was appointed to recommend a solution of the banking and currency problems so long confronting the nation and to furnish the facts and data necessary to enable the congress to take action .
the commission was appointed when an impressive and urgent popular demand for legislative relief suddenly arose out of the distressing situation of the people caused by the deplorable panic of 1907 .
the congress decided that while it could not give immediately the relief required , it would provide a commission to furnish the means for prompt action at a later date .
in order to do its work with thoroughness and precision this commission has taken some time to make its report .
the country is undoubtedly hoping for as prompt action on the report as the convenience of the congress can permit .
the recognition of the gross imperfections and marked inadequacy of our banking and currency system even in our most quiet financial periods is of long standing ; and later there has matured a recognition of the fact that our system is responsible for the extraordinary devastation , waste , and business paralysis of our recurring periods of panic .
though the members of the monetary commission have for a considerable time been working in the open , and while large numbers of the people have been openly working with them , and while the press has largely noted and discussed this work as it has proceeded , so that the report of the commission promises to represent a national movement , the details of the report are still being considered .
i can not , therefore , do much more at this time than commend the immense importance of monetary reform , urge prompt consideration and action when the commission 's report is received , and express my satisfaction that the plan to be proposed promises to embrace main features that , having met the approval of a great preponderance of the practical and professional opinion of the country , are likely to meet equal approval in congress .
it is exceedingly fortunate that the wise and undisputed policy of maintaining unchanged the main features of our banking system rendered it at once impossible to introduce a central bank ; for a central bank would certainly have been resisted , and a plan into which it could have been introduced would probably have been defeated .
but as a central bank could not be a part of the only plan discussed or considered , that troublesome question is eliminated .
and ingenious and novel as the proposed national reserve association appears , it simply is a logical outgrowth of what is best in our present system , and is , in fact , the fulfillment of that system .
exactly how the management of that association should be organized is a question still open .
it seems to be desirable that the banks which would own the association should in the main manage it , it will be an agency of the banks to act for them , and they can be trusted better than anybody else chiefly to conduct it .
it is mainly bankers ' work .
but there must be some form of government supervision and ultimate control , and i favor a reasonable representation of the government in the management .
i entertain no fear of the introduction of politics or of any undesirable influences from a properly measured government representation .
i trust that all banks of the country possessing the requisite standards will be placed upon a footing of perfect equality of opportunity .
both the national system and the state system should be fairly recognized , leaving them eventually to coalesce if that shall prove to be their tendency .
but such evolution can not develop impartially if the banks of one system are given or permitted any advantages of opportunity over those of the other system .
and i trust also that the new legislation will carefully and completely protect and assure the individuality and the independence of each bank , to the end that any tendency there may ever be toward a consolidation of the money or banking power of the nation shall be defeated .
it will always be possible , of course , to correct any features of the new law which may in practice prove to be unwise ; so that while this law is sure to be enacted under conditions of unusual knowledge and authority , it also will include , it is well to remember , the possibility of future amendment .
with the present prospects of this long - awaited reform encouraging us , it would be singularly unfortunate if this monetary question should by any chance become a party issue .
and i sincerely hope it will not .
the exceeding amount of consideration it has received from the people of the nation has been wholly nonpartisan ; and the congress set its nonpartisan seal upon it when the monetary commission was appointed .
in commending the question to the favorable consideration of congress , i speak for , and in the spirit of , the great number of my fellow citizens who without any thought of party or partisanship feel with remarkable earnestness that this reform is necessary to the interests of all the people .
there is now before congress a dill , the purpose of which is to increase the efficiency and decrease the expense of the army .
it contains four principal features : first , a consolidation of the general staff with the adjutant general 's and the inspector general 's departments ; second , a consolidation of the quartermaster 's department with the subsistence and the pay departments ; third , the creation of an army service corps ; and fourth , an extension of the enlistment period from three to five years .
with the establishment of an army service corps , as proposed in the bill , i am thoroughly in accord and am convinced that the establishment of such a corps will result in a material economy and a very great increase of efficiency in the army .
it has repeatedly been recommended by me and my predecessors .
i also believe that a consolidation of the staff corps can be made with a resulting increase in efficiency and economy , but not along the lines provided in the bill under consideration .
i am opposed to any plan the result of which would be to break up or interfere with the essential principles of the detail system in the staff corps established by the act of february 2 , 1901 , and i am opposed to any plan the result of which would be to give to the officer selected as chief of staff or to any other member of the general staff corps greater permanency of office than he now has .
under the existing law neither the chief .
of staff nor any other member of the general staff corps can remain in office for a period of more than four years , and there must be an interval of two years between successive tours of duty .
the bill referred to provides that certain persons shall become permanent members of the general staff corps , and that certain others are subject to redetail without an interval of two years .
such provision is fraught with danger to the welfare of the army , and 
 would practically nullify the main purpose of the law creating the 
 in making the consolidations no reduction should be made in the total number of officers of the army , of whom there are now too few to perform the duties imposed by law .
i have in the past recommended an increase in the number of officers by 6oo in order to provide sufficient officers to perform all classes of staff duty and tc reduce the number of line officers detached from their commands .
congress at the last session increased the total number of officers by 2oo , but this is not enough .
promotion in the line of the army is too slow .
officers do not attain command rank at an age early enough properly to exercise it .
it would be a mistake further to retard this already slow promotion by throwing back into the line of the arm a number of high - ranking officers to be absorbed as is rovided in the 
 another feature of the bill which i believe to be a mistake is the proposed increase in the term of enlistment from three to five ears i believe it would be better to enlist men for six years , release them at the end of three years from active service , and put them in reserve for the remaining three years .
reenlistments should be largely confined to the noncommissioned officers and other enlisted men in the skilled grades .
this plan by the payment of a comparatively small compensation during the three years of reserve , would keep a large bodv of men at the call of the government , trained and ready for 
 the army of the united states is in good condition .
it showed itself able to meet an emergency in the successful mobilization of an army division of from i5,ooo to : 2o , ooo men , which took place along the border of mexico during the recent disturbances in that country .
the marvelous freedom from the ordinary camp diseases of typhoid fever and measles is referred to in the report of the secretary of war and shows such an effectiveness in the sanitary regulations and treatment of the medical corps , and in the discipline of the army itself , as to invoke the highest commendation .
i beg to renew my recommendation of last year that the congress appropriate for a memorial amphitheater at arlington , va. , the funds required to construct it upon the plans already approved .
the very satisfactory progress made on the panama canal last year has continued , and there is every reason to believe that the canal 
 will be completed as early as the 1st of july , 1913 , unless something unforeseen occurs .
this is about 18 months before the time promised by the engineers .
we are now near enough the completion of the canal to make it imperatively necessary that legislation should be enacted to fix the method by which the canal shall be maintained and controlled and the zone governed .
the fact is that to - day there is no statutory law by authority of which the president is maintaining the government of the zone .
such authority was given in an amendment to the spooner act , which expired by the terms of its own limitation some years ago .
since that time the government has continued , under the advice of the attorney general that in the absence of action by congress , there is necessarily an implied authority on the part of the executive to maintain a government in a territory in which he has to see that the laws are executed .
the fact that we have been able thus to get along during the important days of construction without legislation expressly formulating the government of the zone , or delegating the creation of it to the president , is not a reason for supposing that we may continue the same kind of a government after the construction is finished .
the implied authority of the president to maintain a civil government in the zone may be derived from the mandatory direction given him in the original spooner act , by which he was commanded to build the canal ; but certainly , now that the canal is about to be completed and to be put under a permanent management , there ought to be specific statutory authority for its regulation and control and for the government of the zone , which we hold for the chief and main purpose of operating the canal .
i fully concur with the secretary of war that the problem is simply the management of a great public work , and not the government of a local republic ; that every provision must be directed toward the successful maintenance of the canal as an avenue of commerce , and that all provisions for the government of those who live within the zone should be subordinate to the main purpose .
the zone is 40 miles long and 10 miles wide .
now , it has a population of 50,000 or 60,000 , but as soon as the work of construction is completed , the towns which make up this population will be deserted , and only comparatively few natives will continue their residence there .
the control of them ought to approximate a military government .
one judge and two justices of the peace will be sufficient to attend to all the judicial and litigated business there is .
with a few fundamental laws of congress , the zone should be governed by the orders of the president , issued through the war department , as it is today .
provisions can be made for the guaranties of life , liberty , and property , but beyond those , the government should be that of a military reservation , managed in connection with this great highway of trade .
in my last annual message i discussed at length the reasons for the government 's assuming the task of furnishing to all ships that use the canal , whether our own naval vessels or others , the supplies of coal and oil and other necessities with which they must be replenished either before or after passing through the canal , together with the dock facilities and repairs of every character .
this it is thought wise to do through the government , because the government must establish for itself , for its own naval vessels , large depots and dry docks and warehouses , and these may easily be enlarged so as to secure to the world public using the canal reasonable prices and a certainty that there will be no discrimination between those who wish to avail themselves of such facilities .
i renew my recommendation with respect to the tolls of the canal that within limits , which shall seem wise to congress , the power of fixing tolls be given to the president .
in order to arrive at a proper conclusion , there must be some experimenting , and this can not be done if congress does not delegate the power to one who can act expeditiously .
i am very confident that the united states has the power to relieve from the payment of tolls any part of our shipping that congress deems wise .
we own the canal .
it was our money that built it .
we have the right to charge tolls for its use .
those tolls must be the same to everyone ; but when we are dealing with our own ships , the practice of many governments of subsidizing their own merchant vessels is so well established in general that a subsidy equal to the tolls , an equivalent remission of tolls , can not be held to be a discrimination in the use of the canal .
the practice in the suez canal makes this clear .
the experiment in tolls to be made by the president would doubtless disclose how great a burden of tolls the coastwise trade between the atlantic and the pacific coast could bear without preventing its usefulness in competition with the transcontinental railroads .
one of the chief reasons for building the canal was to set up this competition and to bring the two shores closer together as a practical trade problem .
it may be that the tolls will have to be wholly remitted .
i do not think this is the best principle , because i believe that the cost of such a government work as the panama canal ought to be imposed gradually but certainly upon the trade which it creates and makes possible .
so far as we can , consistent with the development of the world 's trade through the canal , and the benefit which it was intended to secure to the east and west coastwise trade , we ought to labor to secure from the canal tolls a sufficient amount ultimately to meet the debt which we have assumed and to pay the interest .
in respect to the philippines , i urgently join in the recommendation of the secretary of war that the act of february 6 , 1905 , limiting the indebtedness that may be incurred by the philippine government for the construction of public works , be increased from $ 5,000,000 to $ 15,ooo , ooo .
the finances of that government are in excellent condition .
the maximum sum mentioned is quite low as compared with the amount of indebtedness of other governments with similar resources , and the success which has attended the expenditure of the $ 5,000,000 in the useful improvements of the harbors and other places in the islands justifies and requires additional expenditures for like purposes .
i also join in the recommendation that the legislature of the philippine islands be authorized to provide for the naturalization of filipinos and others who by the present law are treated as aliens , so as to enable them to become citizens of the philippine islands .
pending an investigation by congress at its last session , through one of its committees , into the disposition of the friars ' lands , secretary dickinson directed that the friars ' lands should not be sold in excess of the limits fixed for the public lands until congress should pass upon the subject or should have concluded its investigation .
this order has been an obstruction to the disposition of the lands , and i expect to direct the secretary of war to return to the practice under the opinion of the attorney general which will enable us to dispose of the lands much more promptly , and to prepare a sinking fund with which to meet the $ 7,000,000 of bonds issued for the purchase of the lands .
i have no doubt whatever that the attorney general 's construction was a proper one , and that it is in the interest of everyone that the land shall be promptly disposed of .
the danger of creating a monopoly of ownership in lands under the statutes as construed is nothing .
there are only two tracts of 60,000 acres each unimproved and in remote provinces that are likely to be disposed of in bulk , and the rest of the lands are subject to the limitation that they shall be first offered to the present tenants and lessors who hold them in small tracts .
the estimates for the river and harbor improvements reach $ 32,000,000 for the coming year .
i wish to urge that whenever a project has been adopted by congress as one to be completed , the more money which can be economically expended in its construction in each year , the greater the ultimate economy .
this has especial application to the improvement of the mississippi river and its large branches .
it seems to me that an increase in the amount- of money now being annually expended in the improvement of the ohio river which has been formally adopted by congress would be in the interest of the public .
a similar change ought to be made during the present congress , in the amount to be appropriated for the missouri river .
the engineers say that the cost of the improvement of the missouri river from kansas city to st. louis , in order to secure 6 feet as a permanent channel , will reach $ 20,000,000 .
there have been at least three recommendations from the chief of engineers that if the improvement be adopted , $ 2,000,000 should be expended upon it annually .
this particular improvement is especially entitled to the attention of congress , because a company has been organized in kansas city , with a capital of $ 1,000,000 , which has built steamers and barges , and is actually using the river for transportation in order to show what can be done in the way of affecting rates between kansas city and st. louis , and in order to manifest their good faith and confidence in respect of the improvement .
i urgently recommend that the appropriation for this improvement be increased from $ 600,000 , as recommended now in the completion of a contract , to $ 2,000,000 annually , so that the work may be done in 10 years .
the project for a navigable waterway from lake michigan to the mouth of the illinois river , and thence via the mississippi to the gulf of mexico , is one of national importance .
in view of the work already accomplished by the sanitary district of chicago , an agency of the state of illinois , which has constructed the most difficult and costly stretch of this waterway and made it an asset of the nation , and in view of the fact that the people of illinois have authorized the expenditure of $ 20,000,000 to carry this waterway 62 miles farther to utica , i feel that it is fitting that this work should be supplemented by the government , and that the expenditures recommended by the special board of engineers on the waterway from utica to the mouth of the illinois river be made upon lines which while providing a waterway for the nation should otherwise benefit that state to the fullest extent .
i recommend that the term of service of said special board of engineers be continued , and that it be empowered to reopen the question of the treatment of the lower illinois river , and to negotiate with a properly constituted commission representing the state of illinois , and to agree upon a plan for the improvement of the lower illinois river and upon the extent to which the united states may properly cooperate with the state of illinois in securing the construction of a navigable waterway from lockport to the mouth of the illinois river in conjunction with the development of water power by that state between lockport and utica .
removal of clerks of federal courts .
the report of the attorney general shows that he has subjected to close examination the accounts of the clerks of the federal courts ; that he has found a good many which disclose irregularities or dishonesty ; but that he has had considerable difficulty in securing an effective prosecution or removal of the clerks thus derelict .
i am certainly not unduly prejudiced against the federal courts , but the fact is that the long and confidential relations which grow out of the tenure for life on the part of the judge and the practical tenure for life on the part of the clerk are not calculated to secure the strictness of dealing by the judge with the clerk in respect to his fees and accounts which assures in the clerk 's conduct a freedom from overcharges and carelessness .
the relationship between the judge and the clerk makes it ungracious for members of the bar to complain of the clerk or for department examiners to make charges against him to be heard by the court , and an order of removal of a clerk and a judgment for the recovery of fees are in some cases reluctantly entered by the judge .
for this reason i recommend an amendment to the law whereby the president shall be given power to remove the clerks for cause .
this provision need not interfere with the right of the judge to appoint his clerk or to remove him .
french spoliation awards .
in my last message , i recommended to congress that it authorize the payment of the findings or judgments of the court of claims in the matter of the french spoliation cases .
there has been no appropriation to pay these judgments since 1905 .
the findings and awards were obtained after a very bitter fight , the government succeeding in about 75 per cent of the cases .
the amount of the awards ought , as a matter of good faith on the part of the government , to be paid .
e mployers ' liability and workmen 's compensation commission .
the limitation of the liability of the master to his servant for personal injuries to such as are occasioned by his fault has been abandoned in most civilized countries and provision made whereby the employee injured in the course of his employment is compensated for his loss of working ability irrespective of negligence .
the principle upon which such provision proceeds is that accidental injuries to workmen in modern industry , with its vast complexity and inherent dangers arising from complicated machinery and the use of the great forces of steam and electricity , should be regarded as risks of the industry and the loss borne in some equitable proportion by those who for their own profit engage therein .
in recognition of this the last congress authorized the appointment of a commission to investigate the subject of employers ' liability and workmen 's compensation and to report the result of their investigations , through the president , to congress .
this commission was appointed and has been at work , holding hearings , gathering data , and considering the subject , and it is expected will be able to report by the first of the year , in accordance with the provisions of the law .
it is hoped and expected that the commission will suggest legislation which will enable us to put in the place of the present wasteful and sometimes unjust system of employers ' liability a plan of compensation which will afford some certain and definite relief to all employees who are injured in the course of their employment in those industries which are subject to the regulating power of congress .
in promotion of the movement for the prevention of delay and unnecessary cost , in litigation , i am glad to say that the supreme court has taken steps to reform the present equity rules of the federal courts , and that we may in the near future expect a revision of them which will be a long step in the right direction .
the american bar association has recommended to congress several bills expediting procedure , one of which has already passed the house unanimously , february 6 , 1911 .
this directs that no judgment should be set aside or reversed , or new trial granted , unless it appears to the court , after an examination of the entire cause , that the error complained of has injuriously affected the substantial rights of the parties , and also provides for the submission of issues of fact to a jury , reserving questions of law for subsequent argument and decision .
i hope this bill will pass the senate and become law , for it will simplify the procedure at law .
another bill to amend chapter ii of the judicial code , in order to avoid errors in pleading , was presented by the same association , and one .
enlarging the jurisdiction of the supreme court so as to permit that court to examine , upon a writ of error , all cases in which any right or title is claimed under the constitution , or any statute or treaty of the united states , whether the decision in the court below has been against the right or title or in its favor .
both these measures are in the interest of justice and should be passed .
at the beginning of the present administration in 1909 the postal service was in arrears to the extent of $ 17,479,770.47 .
it was very much the largest deficit on record .
in the brief space of two years this has been turned into a surplus of $ 220,000 , which has been accomplished without curtailment of the postal facilities , as may be seen by the fact that there have been established 3,744 new post offices ; delivery by carrier has been added to the service in 186 cities ; 2,516 new rural routes have been established , covering 60,000 miles ; the force of postal employees has been increased in these two years by more than 8,000 , and their average annual salary has had a substantial increase .
on january 3 , 1911 , postal - savings depositories were established experimentally in 48 states and territories .
after three months ' successful operation the system was extended as rapidly as feasible to the 7,500 post offices of the first , second , and third classes constituting the presidential grade .
by the end of the year practically all of these will have been designated and then the system will be extended to all fourth - class post offices doing a money - order business .
in selecting post offices for depositories consideration was given to the efficiency of the postmasters and only those offices where the ratings were satisfactory to the department have been designated .
withholding designation from postmasters with unsatisfactory ratings has had a salutary effect on the service .
the deposits have kept pace with the extension of the system .
amounting to only $ 60,652 at the end of the first month 's operation in the experimental offices , they increased to $ 679,310 by july , and now after 11 months of operation have reached a total of $ 11,000,000 .
this sum is distributed among 2,71o banks and protected tinder the law by bonds deposited with the treasurer of the united states .
under the method adopted for the conduct of the system certificates are issued as evidence of deposits , and accounts with depositors are kept by the post offices instead of by the department .
compared with the practice in other countries of entering deposits in pass books and keeping at the central office a ledger account with each depositor , the use of the certificate has resulted in great economy of administration .
the depositors thus far number approximately 150,000 .
they include 40 nationalities , native americans largely predominating and english and italians coming next .
the first conversion of deposits into united states bonds bearing interest at the rate of 2.5 per cent occurred on july 1 , 1911 , the amount of deposits exchanged being $ 41,900 , or a little more than 6 per cent of the total outstanding certificates of deposit on june 30 .
of this issue , bonds to the value of $ 6,120 were in coupon form and $ 35,780 in registered form .
steps should be taken immediately for the establishment of a rural parcel post .
in the estimates of appropriations needed for the maintenance of the postal service for the ensuing fiscal year an item of $ 150,000 has been inserted to cover the preliminary expense of establishing a parcel post on rural mail routes , as well as to cover an investigation having for its object the final establishment of a general parcel post on all railway and steamboat transportation routes .
the department believes that after the initial expenses of establishing the system are defrayed and the parcel post is in full operation on the rural routes it will not only bring in sufficient revenue to meet its cost , but also a surplus that can be utilized in paying the expenses of a parcel post in the city delivery service .
it is hoped that congress will authorize the immediate establishment of a limited parcel post on such rural routes as may be selected , providing for the delivery along the routes of parcels not exceeding eleven pounds , which is the weight limit for the international parcel post , or at the post office from which such route emanates , or on another route emanating from the same office .
such preliminary service will prepare the way for the more thorough and comprehensive inquiry contemplated in asking for the appropriation mentioned , enable the department to gain definite information concerning the practical operation of a general system , and at the same time extend the benefit of the service to a class of people who , above all others , are specially in need of it .
the suggestion that we have a general parcel post has awakened great opposition on the part of some who think that it will have the effect to destroy the business of the country storekeeper .
instead of doing this , i think the change will greatly increase business for the benefit of all .
the reduction in the cost of living it will bring about ought to make its coming certain .
on the 2d of november last , i reviewed the fighting fleet of battleships and other vessels assembled in new york harbor , consisting of 24 battleships , 2 armored cruisers , 2 cruisers , 22 destroyers , 12 torpedo boats , 8 submarines , and other attendant vessels , making 98 vessels of all classes , of a tonnage of 576,634 tons .
those who saw the fleet were struck with its preparedness and with its high military efficiency .
all americans should be proud of its personnel .
the fleet was deficient in the number of torpedo destroyers , in cruisers , and in colliers , as well as in large battleship cruisers , which are now becoming a very important feature of foreign navies , notably the british , german , and japanese .
the building plan for this year contemplates two battleships and two colliers .
this is because the other and smaller vessels can be built much more rapidly in case of emergency than the battleships , and we certainly ought to continue the policy of two battleships a year until after the panama canal is finished and until in our first line and in our reserve line we can number 40 available vessels of proper armament and size .
the reorganization of the navy and the appointment of four aids to the secretary have continued to demonstrate their usefulness .
it would be difficult now to administer the affairs of the navy without the expert counsel and advice of these aids , and i renew the recommendation which i made last year , that the aids be recognized by statute .
it is certain that the navy , with its present size , should have admirals in active command higher than rear admirals .
the recognized grades in order are : admiral of the fleet , admiral , vice admiral , and rear admiral .
our great battleship fleet is commanded by a rear admiral , with four other rear admirals under his orders .
this is not as it should be , and when questions of precedence arise between our naval officers and those of european navies , the american rear admiral , though in command of ten times the force of a foreign vice admiral , must yield precedence to the latter .
such an absurdity ought not to prevail , and it can be avoided by the creation of two or three positions of flag rank above that of rear admiral .
i attended the opening of the new training school at north chicago , ill. , and am glad to note the opportunity which this gives for drawing upon young men of the country from the interior , from farms , stores , shops , and offices , which insures a high average of intelligence and character among them , and which they showed in the very wonderful improvement in discipline and drill which only a few short weeks ' presence at the naval station had made .
i invite your attention to the consideration of the new system of detention and of punishment for army and navy enlisted men which has obtained in great britain , and which has made greatly for the better control of the .
men .
we should adopt a similar system here .
like the treasury department and the war department , the navy department has given much attention to economy in administration , and has cut down a number of unnecessary expenses and reduced its estimates except for construction and the increase that that involves .
i urge upon congress the necessity for an immediate increase of 2,000 men in the enlisted strength of the navy , provided for in the estimates .
four thousand more are now needed to man all the available vessels .
there are in the service to - day about 47,750 enlisted men of all ratings .
careful computation shows that in april , 1912 , 49,166 men will be required for vessels in commission , and 3,000 apprentice seamen should be kept under training at all times .
the secretary of the navy has recommended the abolition of certain of the smaller and unnecessary navy yards , and in order to furnish a complete and comprehensive report has referred the question of all navy yards to the joint board of the army and navy .
this board will shortly make its report and the secretary of the navy advises me that his recommendations on the subject will be presented early in the coming year .
the measure of economy contained in a proper handling of this subject is so great and so important to the interests of the nation that i shall present it to congress as a separate subject apart from my annual message .
concentration of the necessary work for naval vessels in a few navy yards on each coast is a vital necessity if proper economy in government expenditures is to be attained .
the secretary of the navy is striving to unify the various corps of the navy to the extent possible and thereby stimulate a navy spirit as distinguished from a corps spirit .
in this he has my warm support .
all officers are to be naval officers first and specialists afterwards .
this means that officers will take up at least one specialty , such as ordnance , construction , or engineering .
this is practically what is done now , only some of the specialists , like the pay officers and naval constructors , are not of the line .
it is proposed to make them all of the line .
all combatant corps should obviously be of the line .
this necessitates amalgamating the pay officers and also those engaged in the technical work of producing the finished ship .
this is at present the case with the single exception of the naval constructors , whom it is now proposed to amalgamate with the line .
i urge again upon congress the desirability of establishing the council of national defense .
the bill to establish this council was before congress last winter , and it is hoped that this legislation will pass during the present session .
the purpose of the council is to determine the general policy of national defense and to recommend to congress and to the president such measures relating to it as it shall deem necessary and expedient .
no such machinery is now provided by which the readiness of the army and navy may be improved and the programs of military and naval requirements shall be coordinated and properly scrutinized with a view of the necessities of the whole nation rather than of separate departments .
for the consideration of matters which are pending or have been disposed of in the agricultural department and in the department of commerce and labor , i refer to the very excellent reports of the secretaries of those departments .
i shall not be able to submit to congress until after the christmas holidays the question of conservation of our resources arising in alaska and the west and the question of the rate for second - class mail matter in the post office department .
the law does not require the submission of the reports of the commission on economy and efficiency until the 31st of december .
i shall therefore not be able to submit a report of the work of that commission until the assembling of congress after the holidays .
i have already advocated , in my last annual message , the adoption of a civil - service retirement system , with a contributory feature to it so as to reduce to a minimum the cost to the government of the pensions to be paid .
after considerable reflection , i am very much opposed to a pension system that involves no contribution from the employees .
i think the experience of other governments justifies this view ; but the crying necessity for some such contributory system , with possibly a preliminary governmental outlay , in order to cover the initial cost and to set the system going at once while the contributions are accumulating , is manifest on every side .
nothing will so much promote the economy and efficiency of the government as such a system .
i wish to renew again my recommendation that all the local offices throughout the country , including collectors of internal revenue , collectors of customs , postmasters of all four classes , immigration commissioners and marshals , should be by law covered into the classified service , the necessity for confirmation by the senate be removed , and the president and the others , whose time is now taken up in distributing this patronage under the custom that has prevailed since the beginning of the government in accordance with the recommendation of the senators and congressmen of the majority party , should be relieved from this burden .
i am confident that such a change would greatly reduce the cost of administering the government , and that it would add greatly to its efficiency .
it would take away the power to use the patronage of the government for political purposes .
when officers are recommended by senators and congressmen from political motives and for political services rendered , it is impossible to expect that while in office the appointees will not regard their tenure as more or less dependent upon continued political service for their patrons , and no regulations , however stiff or rigid , will prevent this , because such regulations , in view of the method and motive for selection , are plainly inconsistent and deemed hardly worthy of respect .

my fellow - citizens : 

 anyone who has taken the oath i have just taken must feel a heavy weight of responsibility .
if not , he has no conception of the powers and duties of the office upon which he is about to enter , or he is lacking in a proper sense of the obligation which the oath imposes .
the office of an inaugural address is to give a summary outline of the main policies of the new administration , so far as they can be anticipated .
i have had the honor to be one of the advisers of my distinguished predecessor , and , as such , to hold up his hands in the reforms he has initiated .
i should be untrue to myself , to my promises , and to the declarations of the party platform upon which i was elected to office , if i did not make the maintenance and enforcement of those reforms a most important feature of my administration .
they were directed to the suppression of the lawlessness and abuses of power of the great combinations of capital invested in railroads and in industrial enterprises carrying on interstate commerce .
the steps which my predecessor took and the legislation passed on his recommendation have accomplished much , have caused a general halt in the vicious policies which created popular alarm , and have brought about in the business affected a much higher regard for existing law .
to render the reforms lasting , however , and to secure at the same time freedom from alarm on the part of those pursuing proper and progressive business methods , further legislative and executive action are needed .
relief of the railroads from certain restrictions of the antitrust law have been urged by my predecessor and will be urged by me .
on the other hand , the administration is pledged to legislation looking to a proper federal supervision and restriction to prevent excessive issues of bonds and stock by companies owning and operating interstate commerce railroads .
then , too , a reorganization of the department of justice , of the bureau of corporations in the department of commerce and labor , and of the interstate commerce commission , looking to effective cooperation of these agencies , is needed to secure a more rapid and certain enforcement of the laws affecting interstate railroads and industrial combinations .
i hope to be able to submit at the first regular session of the incoming congress , in december next , definite suggestions in respect to the needed amendments to the antitrust and the interstate commerce law and the changes required in the executive departments concerned in their enforcement .
it is believed that with the changes to be recommended american business can be assured of that measure of stability and certainty in respect to those things that may be done and those that are prohibited which is essential to the life and growth of all business .
such a plan must include the right of the people to avail themselves of those methods of combining capital and effort deemed necessary to reach the highest degree of economic efficiency , at the same time differentiating between combinations based upon legitimate economic reasons and those formed with the intent of creating monopolies and artificially controlling prices .
the work of formulating into practical shape such changes is creative word of the highest order , and requires all the deliberation possible in the interval .
i believe that the amendments to be proposed are just as necessary in the protection of legitimate business as in the clinching of the reforms which properly bear the name of my predecessor .
a matter of most pressing importance is the revision of the tariff .
in accordance with the promises of the platform upon which i was elected , i shall call congress into extra session to meet on the 15th day of march , in order that consideration may be at once given to a bill revising the dingley act .
this should secure an adequate revenue and adjust the duties in such a manner as to afford to labor and to all industries in this country , whether of the farm , mine or factory , protection by tariff equal to the difference between the cost of production abroad and the cost of production here , and have a provision which shall put into force , upon executive determination of certain facts , a higher or maximum tariff against those countries whose trade policy toward us equitably requires such discrimination .
it is thought that there has been such a change in conditions since the enactment of the dingley act , drafted on a similarly protective principle , that the measure of the tariff above stated will permit the reduction of rates in certain schedules and will require the advancement of few , if any .
the proposal to revise the tariff made in such an authoritative way as to lead the business community to count upon it necessarily halts all those branches of business directly affected ; and as these are most important , it disturbs the whole business of the country .
it is imperatively necessary , therefore , that a tariff bill be drawn in good faith in accordance with promises made before the election by the party in power , and as promptly passed as due consideration will permit .
it is not that the tariff is more important in the long run than the perfecting of the reforms in respect to antitrust legislation and interstate commerce regulation , but the need for action when the revision of the tariff has been determined upon is more immediate to avoid embarrassment of business .
to secure the needed speed in the passage of the tariff bill , it would seem wise to attempt no other legislation at the extra session .
i venture this as a suggestion only , for the course to be taken by congress , upon the call of the executive , is wholly within its discretion .
in the mailing of a tariff bill the prime motive is taxation and the securing thereby of a revenue .
due largely to the business depression which followed the financial panic of 1907 , the revenue from customs and other sources has decreased to such an extent that the expenditures for the current fiscal year will exceed the receipts by $ 100,000,000 .
it is imperative that such a deficit shall not continue , and the framers of the tariff bill must , of course , have in mind the total revenues likely to be produced by it and so arrange the duties as to secure an adequate income .
should it be impossible to do so by import duties , new kinds of taxation must be adopted , and among these i recommend a graduated inheritance tax as correct in principle and as certain and easy of collection .
the obligation on the part of those responsible for the expenditures made to carry on the government , to be as economical as possible , and to make the burden of taxation as light as possible , is plain , and should be affirmed in every declaration of government policy .
this is especially true when we are face to face with a heavy deficit .
but when the desire to win the popular approval leads to the cutting off of expenditures really needed to make the government effective and to enable it to accomplish its proper objects , the result is as much to be condemned as the waste of government funds in unnecessary expenditure .
the scope of a modern government in what it can and ought to accomplish for its people has been widened far beyond the principles laid down by the old  laissez faire  school of political writers , and this widening has met popular approval .
in the department of agriculture the use of scientific experiments on a large scale and the spread of information derived from them for the improvement of general agriculture must go on .
the importance of supervising business of great railways and industrial combinations and the necessary investigation and prosecution of unlawful business methods are another necessary tax upon government which did not exist half a century ago .
the putting into force of laws which shall secure the conservation of our resources , so far as they may be within the jurisdiction of the federal government , including the most important work of saving and restoring our forests and the great improvement of waterways , are all proper government functions which must involve large expenditure if properly performed .
while some of them , like the reclamation of arid lands , are made to pay for themselves , others are of such an indirect benefit that this can not be expected of them .
a permanent improvement , like the panama canal , should be treated as a distinct enterprise , and should be paid for by the proceeds of bonds , the issue of which will distribute its cost between the present and future generations in accordance with the benefits derived .
it may well be submitted to the serious consideration of congress whether the deepening and control of the channel of a great river system , like that of the ohio or of the mississippi , when definite and practical plans for the enterprise have been approved and determined upon , should not be provided for in the same way .
then , too , there are expenditures of government absolutely necessary if our country is to maintain its proper place among the nations of the world , and is to exercise its proper influence in defense of its own trade interests in the maintenance of traditional american policy against the colonization of european monarchies in this hemisphere , and in the promotion of peace and international morality .
i refer to the cost of maintaining a proper army , a proper navy , and suitable fortifications upon the mainland of the united states and in its dependencies .
we should have an army so organized and so officered as to be capable in time of emergency , in cooperation with the national militia and under the provisions of a proper national volunteer law , rapidly to expand into a force sufficient to resist all probable invasion from abroad and to furnish a respectable expeditionary force if necessary in the maintenance of our traditional american policy which bears the name of president monroe .
our fortifications are yet in a state of only partial completeness , and the number of men to man them is insufficient .
in a few years however , the usual annual appropriations for our coast defenses , both on the mainland and in the dependencies , will make them sufficient to resist all direct attack , and by that time we may hope that the men to man them will be provided as a necessary adjunct .
the distance of our shores from europe and asia of course reduces the necessity for maintaining under arms a great army , but it does not take away the requirement of mere prudence  that we should have an army sufficiently large and so constituted as to form a nucleus out of which a suitable force can quickly grow .
what has been said of the army may be affirmed in even a more emphatic way of the navy .
a modern navy can not be improvised .
it must be built and in existence when the emergency arises which calls for its use and operation .
my distinguished predecessor has in many speeches and messages set out with great force and striking language the necessity for maintaining a strong navy commensurate with the coast line , the governmental resources , and the foreign trade of our nation ; and i wish to reiterate all the reasons which he has presented in favor of the policy of maintaining a strong navy as the best conservator of our peace with other nations , and the best means of securing respect for the assertion of our rights , the defense of our interests , and the exercise of our influence in international matters .
our international policy is always to promote peace .
we shall enter into any war with a full consciousness of the awful consequences that it always entails , whether successful or not , and we , of course , shall make every effort consistent with national honor and the highest national interest to avoid a resort to arms .
we favor every instrumentality , like that of the hague tribunal and arbitration treaties made with a view to its use in all international controversies , in order to maintain peace and to avoid war .
but we should be blind to existing conditions and should allow ourselves to become foolish idealists if we did not realize that , with all the nations of the world armed and prepared for war , we must be ourselves in a similar condition , in order to prevent other nations from taking advantage of us and of our inability to defend our interests and assert our rights with a strong hand .
in the international controversies that are likely to arise in the orient growing out of the question of the open door and other issues the united states can maintain her interests intact and can secure respect for her just demands .
she will not be able to do so , however , if it is understood that she never intends to back up her assertion of right and her defense of her interest by anything but mere verbal protest and diplomatic note .
for these reasons the expenses of the army and navy and of coast defenses should always be considered as something which the government must pay for , and they should not be cut off through mere consideration of economy .
our government is able to afford a suitable army and a suitable navy .
it may maintain them without the slightest danger to the republic or the cause of free institutions , and fear of additional taxation ought not to change a proper policy in this regard .
the policy of the united states in the spanish war and since has given it a position of influence among the nations that it never had before , and should be constantly exerted to securing to its bona fide citizens , whether native or naturalized , respect for them as such in foreign countries .
we should make every effort to prevent humiliating and degrading prohibition against any of our citizens wishing temporarily to sojourn in foreign countries because of race or religion .
the admission of asiatic immigrants who can not be amalgamated with our population has been made the subject either of prohibitory clauses in our treaties and statutes or of strict administrative regulation secured by diplomatic negotiation .
i sincerely hope that we may continue to minimize the evils likely to arise from such immigration without unnecessary friction and by mutual concessions between self - respecting governments .
meantime we must take every precaution to prevent , or failing that , to punish outbursts of race feeling among our people against foreigners of whatever nationality who have by our grant a treaty right to pursue lawful business here and to be protected against lawless assault or injury .
this leads me to point out a serious defect in the present federal jurisdiction , which ought to be remedied at once .
having assured to other countries by treaty the protection of our laws for such of their subjects or citizens as we permit to come within our jurisdiction , we now leave to a state or a city , not under the control of the federal government , the duty of performing our international obligations in this respect .
by proper legislation we may , and ought to , place in the hands of the federal executive the means of enforcing the treaty rights of such aliens in the courts of the federal government .
it puts our government in a pusillanimous position to make definite engagements to protect aliens and then to excuse the failure to perform those engagements by an explanation that the duty to keep them is in states or cities , not within our control .
if we would promise we must put ourselves in a position to perform our promise .
we can not permit the possible failure of justice , due to local prejudice in any state or municipal government , to expose us to the risk of a war which might be avoided if federal jurisdiction was asserted by suitable legislation by congress and carried out by proper proceedings instituted by the executive in the courts of the national government .
one of the reforms to be carried out during the incoming administration is a change of our monetary and banking laws , so as to secure greater elasticity in the forms of currency available for trade and to prevent the limitations of law from operating to increase the embarrassment of a financial panic .
the monetary commission , lately appointed , is giving full consideration to existing conditions and to all proposed remedies , and will doubtless suggest one that will meet the requirements of business and of public interest .
we may hope that the report will embody neither the narrow view of those who believe that the sole purpose of the new system should be to secure a large return on banking capital or of those who would have greater expansion of currency with little regard to provisions for its immediate redemption or ultimate security .
there is no subject of economic discussion so intricate and so likely to evoke differing views and dogmatic statements as this one .
the commission , in studying the general influence of currency on business and of business on currency , have wisely extended their investigations in european banking and monetary methods .
the information that they have derived from such experts as they have found abroad will undoubtedly be found helpful in the solution of the difficult problem they have in hand .
the incoming congress should promptly fulfill the promise of the republican platform and pass a proper postal savings bank bill .
it will not be unwise or excessive paternalism .
the promise to repay by the government will furnish an inducement to savings deposits which private enterprise can not supply and at such a low rate of interest as not to withdraw custom from existing banks .
it will substantially increase the funds available for investment as capital in useful enterprises .
it will furnish absolute security which makes the proposed scheme of government guaranty of deposits so alluring , without its pernicious results .
i sincerely hope that the incoming congress will be alive , as it should be , to the importance of our foreign trade and of encouraging it in every way feasible .
the possibility of increasing this trade in the orient , in the philippines , and in south america are known to everyone who has given the matter attention .
the direct effect of free trade between this country and the philippines will be marked upon our sales of cottons , agricultural machinery , and other manufactures .
the necessity of the establishment of direct lines of steamers between north and south america has been brought to the attention of congress by my predecessor and by mr. root before and after his noteworthy visit to that continent , and i sincerely hope that congress may be induced to see the wisdom of a tentative effort to establish such lines by the use of mail subsidies .
the importance of the part which the departments of agriculture and of commerce and labor may play in ridding the markets of europe of prohibitions and discriminations against the importation of our products is fully understood , and it is hoped that the use of the maximum and minimum feature of our tariff law to be soon passed will be effective to remove many of those restrictions .
the panama canal will have a most important bearing upon the trade between the eastern and far western sections of our country , and will greatly increase the facilities for transportation between the eastern and the western seaboard , and may possibly revolutionize the transcontinental rates with respect to bulky merchandise .
it will also have a most beneficial effect to increase the trade between the eastern seaboard of the united states and the western coast of south america , and , indeed , with some of the important ports on the east coast of south america reached by rail from the west coast .
the work on the canal is making most satisfactory progress .
the type of the canal as a lock canal was fixed by congress after a full consideration of the conflicting reports of the majority and minority of the consulting board , and after the recommendation of the war department and the executive upon those reports .
recent suggestion that something had occurred on the isthmus to make the lock type of the canal less feasible than it was supposed to be when the reports were made and the policy determined on led to a visit to the isthmus of a board of competent engineers to examine the gatun dam and locks , which are the key of the lock type .
the report of that board shows nothing has occurred in the nature of newly revealed evidence which should change the views once formed in the original discussion .
the construction will go on under a most effective organization controlled by colonel goethals and his fellow army engineers associated with him , and will certainly be completed early in the next administration , if not before .
some type of canal must be constructed .
the lock type has been selected .
we are all in favor of having it built as promptly as possible .
we must not now , therefore , keep up a fire in the rear of the agents whom we have authorized to do our work on the isthmus .
we must hold up their hands , and speaking for the incoming administration i wish to say that i propose to devote all the energy possible and under my control to pushing of this work on the plans which have been adopted , and to stand behind the men who are doing faithful , hard work to bring about the early completion of this , the greatest constructive enterprise of modern times .
the governments of our dependencies in porto rico and the philippines are progressing as favorably as could be desired .
the prosperity of porto rico continues unabated .
the business conditions in the philippines are not all that we could wish them to be , but with the passage of the new tariff bill permitting free trade between the united states and the archipelago , with such limitations on sugar and tobacco as shall prevent injury to domestic interests in those products , we can count on an improvement in business conditions in the philippines and the development of a mutually profitable trade between this country and the islands .
meantime our government in each dependency is upholding the traditions of civil liberty and increasing popular control which might be expected under american auspices .
the work which we are doing there redounds to our credit as a nation .
i look forward with hope to increasing the already good feeling between the south and the other sections of the country .
my chief purpose is not to effect a change in the electoral vote of the southern states .
that is a secondary consideration .
what i look forward to is an increase in the tolerance of political views of all kinds and their advocacy throughout the south , and the existence of a respectable political opposition in every state ; even more than this , to an increased feeling on the part of all the people in the south that this government is their government , and that its officers in their states are their officers .
the consideration of this question can not , however , be complete and full without reference to the negro race , its progress and its present condition .
the thirteenth amendment secured them freedom ; the fourteenth amendment due process of law , protection of property , and the pursuit of happiness ; and the fifteenth amendment attempted to secure the negro against any deprivation of the privilege to vote because he was a negro .
the thirteenth and fourteenth amendments have been generally enforced and have secured the objects for which they are intended .
while the fifteenth amendment has not been generally observed in the past , it ought to be observed , and the tendency of southern legislation today is toward the enactment of electoral qualifications which shall square with that amendment .
of course , the mere adoption of a constitutional law is only one step in the right direction .
it must be fairly and justly enforced as well .
in time both will come .
hence it is clear to all that the domination of an ignorant , irresponsible element can be prevented by constitutional laws which shall exclude from voting both negroes and whites not having education or other qualifications thought to be necessary for a proper electorate .
the danger of the control of an ignorant electorate has therefore passed .
with this change , the interest which many of the southern white citizens take in the welfare of the negroes has increased .
the colored men must base their hope on the results of their own industry , self - restraint , thrift , and business success , as well as upon the aid and comfort and sympathy which they may receive from their white neighbors of the south .
there was a time when northerners who sympathized with the negro in his necessary struggle for better conditions sought to give him the suffrage as a protection to enforce its exercise against the prevailing sentiment of the south .
the movement proved to be a failure .
what remains is the fifteenth amendment to the constitution and the right to have statutes of states specifying qualifications for electors subjected to the test of compliance with that amendment .
this is a great protection to the negro .
it never will be repealed , and it never ought to be repealed .
if it had not passed , it might be difficult now to adopt it ; but with it in our fundamental law , the policy of southern legislation must and will tend to obey it , and so long as the statutes of the states meet the test of this amendment and are not otherwise in conflict with the constitution and laws of the united states , it is not the disposition or within the province of the federal government to interfere with the regulation by southern states of their domestic affairs .
there is in the south a stronger feeling than ever among the intelligent well - to - do , and influential element in favor of the industrial education of the negro and the encouragement of the race to make themselves useful members of the community .
the progress which the negro has made in the last fifty years , from slavery , when its statistics are reviewed , is marvelous , and it furnishes every reason to hope that in the next twenty - five years a still greater improvement in his condition as a productive member of society , on the farm , and in the shop , and in other occupations may come .
the negroes are now americans .
their ancestors came here years ago against their will , and this is their only country and their only flag .
they have shown themselves anxious to live for it and to die for it .
encountering the race feeling against them , subjected at times to cruel injustice growing out of it , they may well have our profound sympathy and aid in the struggle they are making .
we are charged with the sacred duty of making their path as smooth and easy as we can .
any recognition of their distinguished men , any appointment to office from among their number , is properly taken as an encouragement and an appreciation of their progress , and this just policy should be pursued when suitable occasion offers .
but it may well admit of doubt whether , in the case of any race , an appointment of one of their number to a local office in a community in which the race feeling is so widespread and acute as to interfere with the ease and facility with which the local government business can be done by the appointee is of sufficient benefit by way of encouragement to the race to outweigh the recurrence and increase of race feeling which such an appointment is likely to engender .
therefore the executive , in recognizing the negro race by appointments , must exercise a careful discretion not thereby to do it more harm than good .
on the other hand , we must be careful not to encourage the mere pretense of race feeling manufactured in the interest of individual political ambition .
personally , i have not the slightest race prejudice or feeling , and recognition of its existence only awakens in my heart a deeper sympathy for those who have to bear it or suffer from it , and i question the wisdom of a policy which is likely to increase it .
meantime , if nothing is done to prevent it , a better feeling between the negroes and the whites in the south will continue to grow , and more and more of the white people will come to realize that the future of the south is to be much benefited by the industrial and intellectual progress of the negro .
the exercise of political franchises by those of this race who are intelligent and well to do will be acquiesced in , and the right to vote will be withheld only from the ignorant and irresponsible of both races .
there is one other matter to which i shall refer .
it was made the subject of great controversy during the election and calls for at least a passing reference now .
my distinguished predecessor has given much attention to the cause of labor , with whose struggle for better things he has shown the sincerest sympathy .
at his instance congress has passed the bill fixing the liability of interstate carriers to their employees for injury sustained in the course of employment , abolishing the rule of fellow - servant and the common - law rule as to contributory negligence , and substituting therefor the so - called rule of  comparative negligence . 
it has also passed a law fixing the compensation of government employees for injuries sustained in the employ of the government through the negligence of the superior .
it has also passed a model child - labor law for the district of columbia .
in previous administrations an arbitration law for interstate commerce railroads and their employees , and laws for the application of safety devices to save the lives and limbs of employees of interstate railroads had been passed .
additional legislation of this kind was passed by the outgoing congress .
i wish to say that insofar as i can i hope to promote the enactment of further legislation of this character .
i am strongly convinced that the government should make itself as responsible to employees injured in its employ as an interstate - railway corporation is made responsible by federal law to its employees ; and i shall be glad , whenever any additional reasonable safety device can be invented to reduce the loss of life and limb among railway employees , to urge congress to require its adoption by interstate railways .
another labor question has arisen which has awakened the most excited discussion .
that is in respect to the power of the federal courts to issue injunctions in industrial disputes .
as to that , my convictions are fixed .
take away from the courts , if it could be taken away , the power to issue injunctions in labor disputes , and it would create a privileged class among the laborers and save the lawless among their number from a most needful remedy available to all men for the protection of their business against lawless invasion .
the proposition that business is not a property or pecuniary right which can be protected by equitable injunction is utterly without foundation in precedent or reason .
the proposition is usually linked with one to make the secondary boycott lawful .
such a proposition is at variance with the american instinct , and will find no support , in my judgment , when submitted to the american people .
the secondary boycott is an instrument of tyranny , and ought not to be made legitimate .
the issue of a temporary restraining order without notice has in several instances been abused by its inconsiderate exercise , and to remedy this the platform upon which i was elected recommends the formulation in a statute of the conditions under which such a temporary restraining order ought to issue .
a statute can and ought to be framed to embody the best modern practice , and can bring the subject so closely to the attention of the court as to make abuses of the process unlikely in the future .
the american people , if i understand them , insist that the authority of the courts shall be sustained , and are opposed to any change in the procedure by which the powers of a court may be weakened and the fearless and effective administration of justice be interfered with .
having thus reviewed the questions likely to recur during my administration , and having expressed in a summary way the position which i expect to take in recommendations to congress and in my conduct as an executive , i invoke the considerate sympathy and support of my fellow - citizens and the aid of the almighty god in the discharge of my responsible duties .

to the senate and house of representatives : 
 i have convened congress in this extra session in order to enable it to give immediate consideration to the revision of the dingley tariff act .
conditions affecting production , manufacture , and business generally have so changed in the last twelve years as to require a readjustment and revision of the import duties imposed by that act .
more than this , the present tariff act , with the other sources of government revenue , does not furnish income enough to pay the authorized expenditures .
by july 1 next the excess of expenses over receipts for the current fiscal year will equal $ 100,000,000 .
the successful party in the late lection is pledged to a revision of the tariff .
the country , and the business community especially , expect it .
the prospect of a change in the rates of import duties always causes a suspension or halt in business because of the uncertainty as to the changes to be made and their effect .
it is therefore of the highest importance that the new bill should be agreed upon and passed with as much speed as possible consistent with its due and thorough consideration .
for these reasons , i have deemed the present to be an extraordinary occasion within the meaning of the constitution , justifying and requiring the calling of an extra session .
in my inaugural address i stated in a summary way the principles upon which , in my judgment , the revision of the tariff should proceed , and indicated at least one new source of revenue that might be properly resorted to in order to avoid a future deficit it is not necessary for me to repeat what i then said .
i venture to suggest that the vital business interests of the country require that the attention of the congress in this session be chiefly devoted to the consideration of the new tariff bill , and that the less time given to other subjects of legislation in this session , the better for the country .

to the senate and house of representatives : 
 the foreign relations of the united states actually and potentially affect the state of the union to a degree not widely realized and hardly surpassed by any other factor in the welfare of the whole nation .
the position of the united states in the moral , intellectual , and material relations of the family of nations should be a matter of vital interest to every patriotic citizen .
the national prosperity and power impose upon us duties which we can not shirk if we are to be true to our ideals .
the tremendous growth of the export trade of the united states has already made that trade a very real factor in the industrial and commercial prosperity of the country .
with the development of our industries the foreign commerce of the united states must rapidly become a still more essential factor in its economic welfare .
whether we have a farseeing and wise diplomacy and are not recklessly plunged into unnecessary wars , and whether our foreign policies are based upon an intelligent grasp of present - day world conditions and a clear view of the potentialities of the future , or are governed by a temporary and timid expediency or by narrow views befitting an infant nation , are questions in the alternative consideration of which must convince any thoughtful citizen that no department of national polity offers greater opportunity for promoting the interests of the whole people on the one hand , or greater chance on the other of permanent national injury , than that which deals with the foreign relations of the united states .
the fundamental foreign policies of the united states should be raised high above the conflict of partisanship and wholly dissociated from differences as to domestic policy .
in its foreign affairs the united states should present to the world a united front .
the intellectual , financial , and industrial interests of the country and the publicist , the wage earner , the farmer , and citizen of whatever occupation must cooperate in a spirit of high patriotism to promote that national solidarity which is indispensable to national efficiency and to the attainment of national ideals .
the relations of the united states with all foreign powers remain upon a sound basis of peace , harmony , and friendship .
a greater insistence upon justice to american citizens or interests wherever it may have been denied and a stronger emphasis of the need of mutuality in commercial and other relations have only served to strengthen our friendships with foreign countries by placing those friendships upon a firm foundation of realities as well as aspirations .
before briefly reviewing the more important events of the last year in our foreign relations , which it is my duty to do as charged with their conduct and because diplomatic affairs are not of a nature to make it appropriate that the secretary of state make a formal annual report , i desire to touch upon some of the essentials to the safe management of the foreign relations of the united states and to endeavor , also , to define clearly certain concrete policies which are the logical modern corollaries of the undisputed and traditional fundamentals of the foreign policy of the united states .
at the beginning of the present administration the united states , having fully entered upon its position as a world power , with the responsibilities thrust upon it by the results of the spanish - american war , and already engaged in laying the groundwork of a vast foreign trade upon which it should one day become more and more dependent , found itself without the machinery for giving thorough attention to , and taking effective action upon , a mass of intricate business vital to american interests in every country in the world .
the department of state was an archaic and inadequate machine lacking most of the attributes of the foreign office of any great modern power .
with an appropriation made upon my recommendation by the congress on august 5 , 1909 , the department of state was completely reorganized .
there were created divisions of latinamerican affairs and of far eastern , near eastern , and western european affairs .
to these divisions were called from the foreign service diplomatic and consular officers possessing experience and knowledge gained by actual service in different parts of the world and thus familiar with political and commercial conditions in the regions concerned .
the work was highly specialized .
the result is that where previously this government from time to time would emphasize in its foreign relations one or another policy , now american interests in every quarter of the globe are being cultivated with equal assiduity .
this principle of politico - geographical division possesses also the good feature of making possible rotation between the officers of the departmental , the diplomatic , and the consular branches of the foreign service , and thus keeps the whole diplomatic and consular establishments tinder the department of state in close touch and equally inspired with the aims and policy of the government .
through the newly created division of information the foreign service is kept fully informed of what transpires from day to day in the international relations of the country , and contemporary foreign comment affecting american interests is promptly brought to the attention of the department .
the law offices of the department were greatly strengthened .
there were added foreigntrade advisers to cooperate with the diplomatic and consular bureaus and the politico - geographical divisions in the innumerable matters where commercial diplomacy or consular work calls for such special knowledge .
the same officers , together with the rest of the new organization , are able at all times to give to american citizens accurate information as to conditions in foreign countries with which they have business and likewise to cooperate more effectively with the congress and also with the other executive departments .
expert knowledge and professional training must evidently be the essence of this reorganization .
without a trained foreign service there would not be men available for the work in the reorganized department of state .
president cleveland had taken the first step toward introducing the merit system in the foreign service .
that had been followed by the application of the merit principle , with excellent results , to the entire consular branch .
almost nothing , however , had been done in this direction with regard to the diplomatic service .
in this age of commercial diplomacy it was evidently of the first importance to train an adequate personnel in that branch of the service .
therefore , on november 26 , 1909 , by an executive order i placed the diplomatic service up to the grade of secretary of embassy , inclusive , upon exactly the same strict nonpartisan basis of the merit system , rigid examination for appointment and promotion only for efficiency , as had been maintained without exception in the consular service .
how faithful to the merit system and how nonpartisan has been the conduct of the diplomatic and consular services in the last four years may be judged from the following : three ambassadors now serving held their present rank at the beginning of my administration .
of the ten ambassadors whom i have appointed , five were by promotion from the rank of minister .
nine ministers now serving held their present rank at the beginning of my administration .
of the thirty ministers whom i have appointed , eleven were promoted from the lower grades of the foreign service or from the department of state .
of the nineteen missions in latin america , where our relations are close and our interest is great , fifteen chiefs of mission are service men , three having entered the service during this administration .
thirty - seven secretaries of embassy or legation who have received their initial appointments after passing successfully the required examination were chosen for ascertained fitness , without regard to political affiliations .
a dearth of candidates from southern and western states has alone made it impossible thus far completely to equalize all the states ' representations in the foreign service .
in the effort to equalize the representation of the various states in the consular service 1 have made sixteen of the twenty - nine new appointments as consul which have occurred during my administration from the southern states .
this is 55 per cent .
every other consular appointment made , including the promotion of eleven young men from the consular assistant and student interpreter corps , has been by promotion or transfer , based solely upon efficiency shown in the service .
in order to assure to the business and other interests of the united states a continuance of the resulting benefits of this reform , i earnestly renew my previous recommendations of legislation making it permanent along some such lines as those of the measure now pending in congress .
in connection with legislation for the amelioration of the foreign service , i wish to invite attention to the advisability of placing the salary appropriations upon a better basis .
i believe that the best results would be obtained by a moderate scale of salaries , with adequate funds for the expense of proper representation , based in each case upon the scale and cost of living at each post , controlled by a system of accounting , and under the general direction of the department of state .
in line with the object which i have sought of placing our foreign service on a basis of permanency , i have at various times advocated provision by congress for the acquisition of government - owned buildings for the residence and offices of our diplomatic officers , so as to place them more nearly on an equality with similar officers of other nations and to do away with the discrimination which otherwise must necessarily be made , in some cases , in favor of men having large private fortunes .
the act of congress which i approved on february 17 , 1911 , was a right step in this direction .
the secretary of state has already made the limited recommendations permitted by the act for any one year , and it is my hope that the bill introduced in the house of representatives to carry out these recommendations will be favorably acted on by the congress during its present session .
in some latin - american countries the expense of governmentowned legations will be less than elsewhere , and it is certainly very urgent that in such countries as some of the republics of central america and the caribbean , where it is peculiarly difficult to rent suitable quarters , the representatives of the united states should be justly and adequately provided with dignified and suitable official residences .
indeed , it is high time that the dignity and power of this great nation should be fittingly signalized by proper buildings for the occupancy of the nation 's representatives everywhere abroad .
the diplomacy of the present administration has sought to respond to modern ideas of commercial intercourse .
this policy has been characterized as substituting dollars for bullets .
it is one that appeals alike to idealistic humanitarian sentiments , to the dictates of sound policy and strategy , and to legitimate commercial aims .
it i is an effort frankly directed to the increase of american trade upon the axiomatic principle that the government of the united states shall extend all proper support to every legitimate and beneficial american enterprise abroad .
how great have been the results of this diplomacy , coupled with the maximum and minimum provision of the tariff law , will be seen by some consideration of the wonder ful increase in the export trade of the united states .
because modern diplomacy is commercial , there has been a disposition in some quarters to attribute to it none but materialistic aims .
how strikingly erroneous is such an impression may be seen from a study of the results by which the diplomacy of the united states can be judged .
in the field of work toward the ideals of peace this government negotiated , but to my regret was unable to consummate , two arbitration treaties which set the highest mark of the aspiration of nations toward the substitution of arbitration and reason for war in the settlement of international disputes .
through the efforts of american diplomacy several wars have been prevented or ended .
i refer to the successful tripartite mediation of the argentine republic , brazil , and the united states between peru and ecuador ; the bringing of the boundary dispute between panama and costa rica to peaceful arbitration ; the staying of warlike preparations when haiti and the dominican republic were on the verge of hostilities ; the stopping of a war in nicaragua ; the halting of internecine strife in honduras .
the government of the united states was thanked for its influence toward the restoration of amicable relations between the argentine republic and bolivia .
the diplomacy of the united states is active in seeking to assuage the remaining ill - feeling between this country and the republic of colombia .
in the recent civil war in china the united states successfully joined with the other interested powers in urging an early cessation of hostilities .
an agreement has been reached between the governments of chile and peru whereby the celebrated tacnaarica dispute , which has so long embittered international relations on the west coast of south america , has at last been adjusted .
simultaneously came the news that the boundary dispute between peru and ecuador had entered upon a stage of amicable settlement .
the position of the united states in reference to the tacna - arica dispute between chile and peru has been one of nonintervention , but one of friendly influence and pacific counsel throughout the period during which the dispute in question has been the subject of interchange of views between this government and the two governments immediately concerned .
in the general easing of international tension on the west coast of south america the tripartite mediation , to which i have referred , has been a most potent and beneficent factor .
in china the policy of encouraging financial investment to enable that country to help itself has had the result of giving new life and practical application to the open - door policy .
the consistent purpose of the present administration has been to encourage the use of american capital in the development of china by the promotion of those essential reforms to which china is pledged by treaties with the united states and other powers .
the hypothecation to foreign bankers in connection with certain industrial enterprises , such as the hukuang railways , of the national revenues upon which these reforms depended , led the department of state early in the administration to demand for american citizens participation in such enterprises , in order that the united states might have equal rights and an equal voice in all questions pertaining to the disposition of the public revenues concerned .
the same policy of promoting international accord among the powers having similar treaty rights as ourselves in the matters of reform , which could not be put into practical effect without the common consent of all , was likewise adopted in the case of the loan desired by china for the reform of its currency .
the principle of international cooperation in matters of common interest upon which our policy had already been based in all of the above instances has admittedly been a great factor in that concert of the powers which has been so happily conspicuous during the perilous period of transition through which the great chinese nation has been passing .
in central america the aim has been to help such countries as nicaragua and honduras to help themselves .
they are the immediate beneficiaries .
the national benefit to the united states is twofold .
first , .
it is obvious that the monroe doctrine is more vital in the neighborhood of the panama canal and the zone of the caribbean than anywhere else .
there , too , the maintenance of that doctrine falls most heavily upon the united states .
it is therefore essential that the countries within that sphere shall be removed from the jeopardy involved by heavy foreign debt and chaotic national finances and from the ever - present danger of international complications due to disorder at home .
hence the united states has been glad to encourage and support american bankers who were willing to lend a helping hand to the financial rehabilitation of such countries because this financial rehabilitation and the protection of their customhouses from being the prey of wouldbe dictators would remove at one stroke the menace of foreign creditors and the menace of revolutionary disorder .
the second advantage of the united states is one affecting chiefly all the southern and gulf ports and the business and industry of the south .
the republics of central america and the caribbean possess great natural wealth .
they need only a measure of stability and the means of financial regeneration to enter upon an era of peace and prosperity , bringing profit and happiness to themselves and at the same time creating conditions sure to lead to a flourishing interchange of trade with this country .
i wish to call your especial attention to the recent occurrences in nicaragua , for i believe the terrible events recorded there during the revolution of the past summer - the useless loss of life , the devastation of property , the bombardment of defenseless cities , the killing and wounding of women and children , the torturing of noncombatants to exact contributions , and the suffering of thousands of human beings - might have been averted had the department of state , through approval of the loan convention by the senate , been permitted to carry out its now well - developed policy of encouraging the extending of financial aid to weak central american states with the primary objects of avoiding just such revolutions by assisting those republics to rehabilitate their finances , to establish their currency on a stable basis , to remove the customhouses from the danger of revolutions by arranging for their secure administration , and to establish reliable banks .
during this last revolution in nicaragua , the government of that republic having admitted its inability to protect american life and property against acts of sheer lawlessness on the part of the malcontents , and having requested this government to assume that office , it became necessary to land over 2,000 marines and bluejackets in nicaragua .
owing to their presence the constituted government of nicaragua was free to devote its attention wholly to its internal troubles , and was thus enabled to stamp out the rebellion in a short space of time .
when the red cross supplies sent to granada had been exhausted , 8,000 persons having been given food in one day upon the arrival of the american forces , our men supplied other unfortunate , needy nicaraguans from their own haversacks .
i wish to congratulate the officers and men of the united states navy and marine corps who took part in reestablishing order in nicaragua upon their splendid conduct , and to record with sorrow the death of seven american marines and bluejackets .
since the reestablishment of peace and order , elections have been held amid conditions of quiet and tranquility .
nearly all the american marines have now been withdrawn .
the country should soon be on the road to recovery .
the only apparent danger now threatening nicaragua arises from the shortage of funds .
although american bankers have already rendered assistance , they may naturally be loath to advance a loan adequate to set the country upon its feet without the support of some such convention as that of june , 1911 , upon which the senate has not yet acted .
in the general effort to contribute to the enjoyment of peace by those republics which are near neighbors of the united states , the administration has enforced the so - called neutrality statutes with a new vigor , and those statutes were greatly strengthened in restricting the exportation of arms and munitions by the joint resolution of last march .
it is still a regrettable fact that certain american ports are made the rendezvous of professional revolutionists and others engaged in intrigue against the peace of those republics .
it must be admitted that occasionally a revolution in this region is justified as a real popular movement to throw off the shackles of a vicious and tyrannical government .
such was the nicaraguan revolution against the zelaya regime .
a nation enjoying our liberal institutions can not escape sympathy with a true popular movement , and one so well justified .
in very many cases , however , revolutions in the republics in question have no basis in principle , but are due merely to the machinations of conscienceless and ambitious men , and have no effect but to bring new suffering and fresh burdens to an already oppressed people .
the question whether the use of american ports as foci of revolutionary intrigue can be best dealt with by a further amendment to the neutrality statutes or whether it would be safer to deal with special cases by special laws is one worthy of the careful consideration of the congress .
impressed with the particular importance of the relations between the united states and the republics of central america and the caribbean region , which of necessity must become still more intimate by reason of the mutual advantages which will be presented by the opening of the panama canal , i directed the secretary of state last february to visit these republics for the purpose of giving evidence of the sincere friendship and good will which the government and people of the united states bear toward them .
ten republics were visited .
everywhere he was received with a cordiality of welcome and a generosity of hospitality such as to impress me deeply and to merit our warmest thanks .
the appreciation of the governments and people of the countries visited , which has been appropriately shown in various ways , leaves me no doubt that his visit will conduce to that closer union and better understanding between the united states and those republics which i have had it much at heart to promote .
for two years revolution and counter - revolution has distraught the neighboring republic of mexico .
brigandage has involved a great deal of depredation upon foreign interests .
there have constantly recurred questions of extreme delicacy .
on several occasions very difficult situations have arisen on our frontier .
throughout this trying period , the policy of the united states has been one of patient nonintervention , steadfast recognition of constituted authority in the neighboring nation , and the exertion of every effort to care for american interests .
i profoundly hope that the mexican nation may soon resume the path of order , prosperity , and progress .
to that nation in its sore troubles , the sympathetic friendship of the united states has been demonstrated to a high degree .
there were in mexico at the beginning of the revolution some thirty or forty thousand american citizens engaged in enterprises contributing greatly to the prosperity of that republic and also benefiting the important trade between the two countries .
the investment of american capital in mexico has been estimated at $ 1,000,000,000 .
the responsibility of endeavoring to safeguard those interests and the dangers inseparable from propinquity to so turbulent a situation have been great , but i am happy to have been able to adhere to the policy above outlined - a policy which i hope may be soon justified by the complete success of the mexican people in regaining the blessings of peace and good order .
a most important work , accomplished in the past year by the american diplomatic officers in europe , is the investigation of the agricultural credit system in the european countries .
both as a means to afford relief to the consumers of this country through a more thorough development of agricultural resources and as a means of more sufficiently maintaining the agricultural population , the project to establish credit facilities for the farmers is a concern of vital importance to this nation .
no evidence of prosperity among well - established farmers should blind us to the fact that lack of capital is preventing a development of the nation 's agricultural resources and an adequate increase of the land under cultivation ; that agricultural production is fast falling behind the increase in population ; and that , in fact , although these well - established farmers are maintained in increasing prosperity because of the natural increase in population , we are not developing the industry of agriculture .
we are not breeding in proportionate numbers a race of independent and independence - loving landowners , for a lack of which no growth of cities can compensate .
our farmers have been our mainstay in times of crisis , and in future it must still largely be upon their stability and common sense that this democracy must rely to conserve its principles of self - government .
the need of capital which american farmers feel to - day had been experienced by the farmers of europe , with their centuries - old farms , many years ago .
the problem had been successfully solved in the old world and it was evident that the farmers of this country might profit by a study of their systems .
i therefore ordered , through the department of state , an investigation to be made by the diplomatic officers in europe , and i have laid the results of this investigation before the governors of the various states with the hope that they will be used to advantage in their forthcoming meeting .
in my last annual message i said that the fiscal year ended june 30 , 1911 , was noteworthy as marking the highest record of exports of american products to foreign countries .
the fiscal year 1912 shows that this rate of advance has been maintained , the total domestic exports having a valuation approximately of $ 2,200,000,000 , as compared with a fraction over $ 2,000,000,000 the previous year .
it is also significant that manufactured and partly manufactured articles continue to be the chief commodities forming the volume of our augmented exports , the demands of our own people for consumption requiring that an increasing proportion of our abundant agricultural products be kept at home .
in the fiscal year 1911 the exports of articles in the various stages of manufacture , not including foodstuffs partly or wholly manufactured , amounted approximately to $ 907,500,000 .
in the fiscal year 1912 the total was nearly $ 1,022,000,000 , a gain of $ 114,000,000 .
the importance which our manufactures have assumed in the commerce of the world in competition with the manufactures of other countries again draws attention to the duty of this government to use its utmost endeavors to secure impartial treatment for american products in all markets .
healthy commercial rivalry in international intercourse is best assured by the possession of proper means for protecting and promoting our foreign trade .
it is natural that competitive countries should view with some concern this steady expansion of our commerce .
if in some instance the measures taken by them to meet it are not entirely equitable , a remedy should be found .
in former messages i have described the negotiations of the department of state with foreign governments for the adjustment of the maximum and minimum tariff as provided in section 2 of the tariff law of 1909 .
the advantages secured by the adjustment of our trade relations under this law have continued during the last year , and some additional cases of discriminatory treatment of which we had reason to complain have been removed .
the department of state has for the first time in the history of this country obtained substantial most - favored - nation treatment from all the countries of the world .
there are , however , other instances which , while apparently not constituting undue discrimination in the sense of section 2 , are nevertheless exceptions to the complete equity of tariff treatment for american products that the department of state consistently has sought to obtain for american commerce abroad .
these developments confirm the opinion conveyed to you in my annual message of 1911 , that while the maximum and minimum provision of the tariff law of 1909 has been fully justified by the success achieved in removing previously existing undue discriminations against american products , yet experience has shown that this feature of the law should be amended in such way as to provide a fully effective means of meeting the varying degrees of discriminatory treatment of american commerce in foreign countries still encountered , as well as to protect against injurious treatment on the part of foreign governments , through either legislative or administrative measures , the financial interests abroad of american citizens whose enterprises enlarge the market for american commodities .
i can not too strongly recommend to the congress the passage of some stich enabling measure as the bill which was recommended by the secretary of state in his letter of december 13 , 1911 .
the object of the proposed legislation is , in brief , to enable the executive to apply , as the case may require , to any or all commodities , whether or not on the free list from a country which discriminates against the united states , a graduated scale of duties tip to the maximum of 25 per cent ad valorem provided in the present law .
flat tariffs are out of date .
nations no longer accord equal tariff treatment to all other nations irrespective of the treatment from them received .
stich a flexible power at the command of the executive would serve to moderate any unfavorable tendencies on the part of those countries from which the importations into the united states are substantially confined to articles on the free list as well as of the countries which find a lucrative market in the united states for their products under existing customs rates .
it is very necessary that the american government should be equipped with weapons of negotiation adapted to modern economic conditions , in order that we may at all times be in a position to gain not only technically just but actually equitable treatment for our trade , and also for american enterprise and vested interests abroad .
as illustrating the commercial benefits of the nation derived from the new diplomacy and its effectiveness upon the material as well as the more ideal side , it may be remarked that through direct official efforts alone there have been obtained in the course of this administration , contracts from foreign governments involving an expenditure of $ 50,000,000 in the factories of the united states .
consideration of this fact and some reflection upon the necessary effects of a scientific tariff system and a foreign service alert and equipped to cooperate with the business men of america carry the conviction that the gratifying increase in the export trade of this country is , in substantial amount , due to our improved governmental methods of protecting and stimulating it .
it is germane to these observations to remark that in the two years that have elapsed since the successful negotiation of our new treaty with japan , which at the time seemed to present so many practical difficulties , our export trade to that country has increased at the rate of over $ 1,000,000 a month .
our exports to japan for the year ended june 30 , 1910 , were $ 21,959,310 , while for the year ended june 30 , 1912 , the exports were $ 53,478,046 , a net increase in the sale of american products of nearly 150 per cent .
under the special agreement entered into between the united states and great britain on august 18 , 1910 , for the arbitration of outstanding pecuniary claims , a schedule of claims and the terms of submission have been agreed upon by the two governments , and together with the special agreement were approved by the senate on july 19 , 1911 , but in accordance with the terms of the agreement they did not go into effect until confirmed by the two governments by an exchange of notes , which was done on april 26 last .
negotiations , are still in progress for a supplemental schedule of claims to be submitted to arbitration under this agreement , and meanwhile the necessary preparations for the arbitration of the claims included in the first schedule have been undertaken and are being carried on under the authority of an appropriation made for that purpose at the last session of congress .
it is anticipated that the two governments will be prepared to call upon the arbitration tribunal , established under this agreement , to meet at washington early next year to proceed with this arbitration .
the act adopted at the last session of congress to give effect to the fur - seal convention of july 7 , 1911 , between great britain , japan , russia , and the united states provided for the suspension of all land killing of seals on the pribilof islands for a period of five years , and an objection has now been presented to this provision by the other parties in interest , which raises the issue as to whether or not this prohibition of land killing is inconsistent with the spirit , if not the letter , of the treaty stipulations .
the justification of establishing this close season depends , under the terms of the convention , upon how far , if at all , it is necessary for protecting and preserving the american fur - seal herd and for increasing its number .
this is a question requiring examination of the present condition of the herd and the treatment which it needs in the light of actual experience and scientific investigation .
a careful examination of the subject is now being made , and this government will soon be in possession of a considerable amount of new information about the american seal herd , which has been secured during the past season and will be of great value in determining this question ; and if it should appear that there is any uncertainty as to the real necessity for imposing a close season at this time i shall take an early opportunity to address a special message to congress on this subject , in the belief that this government should yield on this point rather than give the slightest ground for the charge that we have been in any way remiss in observing our treaty obligations .
on the 20th of july last an agreement was concluded between the united states and great britain adopting , with certain modifications , the rules and method of procedure recommended in the award rendered by the north atlantic coast fisheries arbitration tribunal on september 7 , 1910 , for the settlement hereafter , in accordance with the principles laid down in the award , of questions arising with reference to the exercise of the american fishing liberties under article i of the treaty of october 20 , 1818 , between the united states and great britain .
this agreement received the approval of the senate on august i and was formally ratified by the two governments on november 15 last .
the rules and a method of procedure embodied in the award provided for determining by an impartial tribunal the reasonableness of any new fishery regulations on the treaty coasts of newfoundland and canada before such regulations could be enforced against american fishermen exercising their treaty liberties on those coasts , and also for determining the delimitation of bays on such coasts more than 10 miles wide , in accordance with the definition adopted by the tribunal of the meaning of the word " bays " as used in the treaty .
in the subsequent negotiations between the two governments , undertaken for the purpose of giving practical effect to these rules and methods of procedure , it was found that certain modifications therein were desirable from the point of view of both govern , ments , and these negotiations have finally resulted in the agreement above mentioned by which the award recommendations as modified by mutual consent of the two governments are finally adopted and made effective , thus bringing this century - old controversy to a final conclusion , which is equally beneficial and satisfactory to both governments .
in order to make possible the more effective performance of the work necessary for the confinement in their present channel of the waters of the lower colorado river , and thus to protect the people of the imperial valley , as well as in order to reach with the government of mexico an understanding regarding the distribution of the waters of the colorado river , in which both governments are much interested , negotiations are going forward with a view to the establishment of a preliminary colorado river commission , which shall have the powers necessary to enable it to do the needful work and with authority to study the question of the equitable distribution of the waters .
there is every reason to believe that an understanding upon this point will be reached and that an agreement will be signed in the near future .
in the interest of the people and city of el paso this government has been assiduous in its efforts to bring to an early settlement the long - standing chamizal dispute with mexico .
much has been ac- complished , and while the final solution of the dispute is not imme- diate , the favorable attitude lately assumed by the mexican government encourages the hope that this troublesome question will be satisfactorily and definitively settled at an early day .
in pursuance of the convention of august 23 , 1906 , signed at the third pan american conference , held at rio de janeiro , the international commission of jurists met at that capital during the month of last june .
at this meeting 16 american republics were represented , including the united states , and comprehensive plans for the future work of the commission were adopted .
at the next meeting fixed for june , 1914 , committees already appointed are instructed to i report regarding topics assigned to them .
in my message on foreign relations communicated to the two houses of congress december 7 , 1911 , 1 called especial attention to the assembling of the opium conference at the hague , to the fact that that conference was to review all pertinent municipal laws relating to the opium and allied evils , and certainly all international rules regarding these evils , and to the -fact that it seemed to me most essential that the congress should take immediate action on the antinarcotic legislation before the congress , to which i had previously called attention by a special message .
the international convention adopted by the conference conforms almost entirely to the principles contained in the proposed antinarcotic legislation which has been before the last two congresses .
it was most unfortunate that this government , having taken the initiative in the international action which eventuated in the important international opium convention , failed to do its share in the great work by neglecting to pass the necessary legislation to correct the deplorable narcotic evils in the united states as well as to redeem international pledges upon which it entered by virtue of the abovementioned convention .
the congress at its present session should enact into law those bills now before it which have been so carefully drawn up in collaboration between the department of state and the other executive departments , and which have behind them not only the moral sentiment of the country , but the practical support of all the legitimate trade interests likely to be affected .
since the international convention was signed , adherence to it has been made by several european states not represented at the conference at the hague and also by seventeen latin - american republics .
the war between italy and turkey came to a close in october last by the signature of a treaty of peace , subsequently to which the ottoman empire renounced sovereignty over cyrenaica and tripolitania in favor of italy .
during the past year the near east has unfortunately been the theater of constant hostilities .
almost simultaneously with the conclusion of peace between italy and turkey and their arrival at an adjustment of the complex questions at issue between them , war broke out between turkey on the one hand and bulgaria , greece , montenegro , and servia on the other .
the united states has happily been involved neither directly nor indirectly with the causes or questions incident to any of these hostilities and has maintained in regard to them an attitude of absolute neutrality and of complete political disinterestedness .
in the second war in which the ottoman empire has been engaged the loss of life and the consequent distress on both sides have been appalling , and the united states has found occasion , in the interest of humanity , to carry out the charitable desires of the american people , to extend a measure of relief to the sufferers on either side through the impartial medium of the red cross .
beyond this the chief care of the government of the united states has been to make due provision for the protection of its national resident in belligerent territory .
in the exercise of my duty in this matter i have dispatched to turkish waters a specialservice squadron , consisting of two armored cruisers , in order that this government may if need be bear its part in such measures as it may be necessary for the interested nations to adopt for the safeguarding of foreign lives and property in the ottoman empire in the event that a dangerous situation should develop .
in the meanwhile the several interested european powers have promised to extend to american citizens the benefit of such precautionary or protective measures as they might adopt , in the same manner in which it has been the practice of this government to extend its protection to all foreign residents in those countries of the western hemisphere in which it has from time to time been the task of the united states to act in the interest of peace and good order .
the early appearance of a 
 large fleet of european warships in the bosphorus apparently assured the protection of foreigners in that quarter , where the presence of the american stationnaire the u. s. s. scorpion sufficed , tinder the circumstances , to represent the united states .
our cruisers were thus left free to act if need be along the mediterranean coasts should any unexpected contingency arise affecting the numerous american interests in the neighborhood of smyrna and beirut .
the great preponderance of american material interests in the subarctic island of spitzbergen , which has always been regarded politically as " no man 's land , " impels this government to a continued and lively interest in the international dispositions to be made for the political governance and administration of that region .
the conflict of certain claims of american citizens and others is in a fair way to adjustment , while the settlement of matters of administration , whether by international conference of the interested powers or otherwise , continues to be the subject of exchange of views between the governments concerned .
as a result of the efforts of this government to place the government of liberia in position to pay its outstanding indebtedness and to maintain a stable and efficient government , negotiations for a loan of $ 1,700,000 have been successfully concluded , and it is anticipated that the payment of the old loan and the issuance of the bonds of the 1912 loan for the rehabilitation of the finances of liberia will follow at an early date , when the new receivership will go into active operation .
the new receivership will consist of a general receiver of customs designated by the government of the united states and three receivers of customs designated by the governments of germany , france , and great britain , which countries have commercial interests in the republic of liberia .
in carrying out the understanding between the government of liberia and that of the united states , and in fulfilling the terms of the agreement between the former government and the american bankers , three competent exarmy officers are now effectively employed by the liberian government in reorganizing the police force of the republic , not only to keep in order the native tribes in the hinterland but to serve as a necessary police force along the frontier .
it is hoped that these measures will assure not only the continued existence but the prosperity and welfare of the republic of liberia .
liberia possesses fertility of soil and natural resources , which should insure to its people a reasonable prosperity .
it was the duty of the united states to assist the republic of liberia in accordance with our historical interest and moral guardianship of a community founded by american citizens , as it was also the duty of the american government to attempt to assure permanence to a country of much sentimental and perhaps future real interest to a large body of our citizens .
the legation at tangier is now in charge of our consul general , who is acting as charge d'affaires , as well as caring for our commercial interests in that country .
in view of the fact that many of the foreign powers are now represented by charges d'affaires it has not been deemed necessary to appoint at the present time a minister to fill a vacancy occurring in that post .
the political disturbances in china in the autumn and winter of 1911 - 12 resulted in the abdication of the manchu rulers on february 12 , followed by the formation of a provisional republican government empowered to conduct the affairs of the nation until a permanent government might be regularly established .
the natural sympathy of the american people with the assumption of republican principles by the chinese people was appropriately expressed in a concurrent resolution of congress on april 17 , 1912 .
a constituent assembly , composed of representatives duly chosen by the people of china in the elections that are now being held , has been called to meet in january next to adopt a permanent constitution and organize the government of the nascent republic .
during the formative constitutional stage and pending definite action by the assembly , as expressive of the popular will , and the hoped - for establishment of a stable republican form of government , capable of fulfilling its international obligations , the united states is , according to precedent , maintaining full and friendly de facto relations with the provisional government .
the new condition of affairs thus created has presented many serious and complicated problems , both of internal rehabilitation and of international relations , whose solution it was realized would necessarily require much time and patience .
from the beginning of the upheaval last autumn it was felt by the united states , in common with the other powers having large interests in china , that independent action by the foreign governments in their own individual interests would add further confusion to a situation already complicated .
a policy of international cooperation was accordingly adopted in an understanding , reached early in the disturbances , to act together for the protection of the lives and property of foreigners if menaced , to maintain an attitude of strict impartiality as between the contending factions , and to abstain from any endeavor to influence the chinese in their organization of a new form of government .
in view of the seriousness of the disturbances and their general character , the american minister at peking was instructed at his discretion to advise our nationals in the affected districts to concentrate at such centers as were easily accessible to foreign troops or men of war .
nineteen of our naval vessels were stationed at various chinese ports , and other measures were promptly taken for the adequate protection of american interests .
it was further mutually agreed , in the hope of hastening an end to hostilities , that none of the interested powers would approve the making of loans by its nationals to either side .
as soon , however , as a united provisional government of china was assured , the united states joined in a favorable consideration of that government 's request for advances needed for immediate administrative necessities and later for a loan to effect a permanent national reorganization .
the interested governments had already , by common consent , adopted , in respect to the purposes , expenditure , and security of any loans to china made by their nationals , certain conditions which were held to be essential , not only to secure reasonable protection for the foreign investors , but also to safeguard and strengthen china 's credit by discouraging indiscriminate borrowing and by insuring the application of the funds toward the establishment of the stable and effective government necessary to china 's welfare .
in june last representative banking groups of the united states , france , germany , great britain , japan , and russia formulated , with the general sanction of their respective governments , the guaranties that would be expected in relation to the expenditure and security of the large reorganization loan desired by china , which , however , have thus far proved unacceptable to the provisional government .
in august last i accredited the secretary of state as special ambassador to japan , charged with the mission of bearing to the imperial family , the government , and the people of that empire the sympathetic message of the american commonwealth oil the sad occasion of the death of his majesty the emperor mutsuhito , whose long and benevolent reign was the greater part of japan 's modern history .
the kindly reception everywhere accorded to secretary knox showed that his mission was deeply appreciated by the japanese nation and emphasized strongly the friendly relations that have for so many years existed between the two peoples .
our relations with the argentine republic are most friendly and cordial .
so , also , are our relations with brazil , whose government has accepted the invitation of the united states to send two army officers to study at the coast artillery school at fort monroe .
the long - standing alsop claim , which had been the only hindrance to the healthy growth of the most friendly relations between the united states and chile , having been eliminated through the submission of the question to his britannic majesty king george v as " amiable compositeur , " it is a cause of much gratification to me that our relations with chile are now established upon a firm basis of growing friendship .
the chilean government has placed an officer of the united states coast artillery in charge of the chilean coast artillery school , and has shown appreciation of american methods by confiding to an american firm important work for the chilean coast defenses .
last year a revolution against the established government of ecuador broke out at the pricipal port of that republic .
previous to this occurrence the chief american interest in ecuador , represented by the guayaquil & quito railway co. , incorporated in the united states , bad rendered extensive transportation and other services on account to the ecuadorian government , the amount of which ran into a sum which was steadily increasing and which the ecuadorian government had made no provision to pay , thereby threatening to crush out the very existence of this american enterprise .
when tranquillity had been restored to ecuador as a result of the triumphant progress of the government forces from quito , this government interposed its good offices to the end that the american interests in ecuador might be saved from complete extinction .
as a part of the arrangement which was reached between the parties , and at the request of the government of ecuador , i have consented to name an arbitrator , who , acting under the terms of the railroad contract , with an arbitrator named by the ecuadorian government , will pass upon the claims that have arisen since the arrangement reached through the action of a similar arbitral tribunal in 1908 .
in pursuance of a request made some time ago by the ecuadorian government , the department of state has given much attention to the problem of the proper sanitation of guayaquil .
as a result a detail of officers of the canal zone will be sent to guayaquil to recommend measures that will lead to the complete permanent sanitation of this plague and fever infected region of that republic , which has for so long constituted a menace to health conditions on the canal zone .
it is hoped that the report which this mission will furnish will point out a way whereby the modicum of assistance which the united states may properly lend the ecuadorian government may be made effective in ridding the west coast of south america of a focus of contagion to the future commercial current passing through the panama canal .
in the matter of the claim of john celestine landreau against the government of peru , which claim arises out of certain contracts and transactions in connection with the discovery and exploitation of guano , and which has been under discussion between the two governments since 1874 , 1 am glad to report that as the result of prolonged negotiations , which have been characterized by the utmost friendliness and good will on both sides , the department of state has succeeded in securing the consent of peru to the arbitration of the claim , and that the negotiations attending the drafting and signature of a protocol submitting the claim to an arbitral tribunal are proceeding with due celerity .
an officer of the american public health service and an american sanitary engineer are now on the way to iquitos , in the employ of the peruvian government , to take charge of the sanitation of that river port .
peru is building a number of submarines in this country , and continues to show every desire to have american capital invested in the republic .
in july the united states sent undergraduate delegates to the third international students congress held at lima , american students having been for the first time invited to one of these meetings .
the republic of uruguay has shown its appreciation of american agricultural and other methods by sending a large commission to this country and by employing many american experts to assist in building up agricultural and allied industries in uruguay .
venezuela is paying off the last of the claims the settlement of which was provided for by the washington protocols , including those of american citizens .
our relations with venezuela are most cordial , and the trade of that republic with the united states is now greater than with any other country .
during the past summer the revolution against the administration which followed the assassination of president caceres a year ago last november brought the dominican republic to the verge of administrative chaos , without offering any guaranties of eventual stability in the ultimate success of either party .
in pursuance of the treaty relations of the united states with the dominican republic , which were threatened by the necessity of suspending the operation under american administration of the customhouses on the haitian frontier , it was found necessary to dispatch special commissioners to the island to reestablish the customhouses and with a guard sufficient to insure needed protection to the customs administration .
the efforts which have been made appear to have resulted in the restoration of normal conditions throughout the republic .
the good offices which the commissioners were able to exercise were instrumental in bringing the contending parties together and in furnishing a basis of adjustment which it is hoped will result in permanent benefit to the dominican people .
mindful of its treaty relations , and owing to the position of the government of the united states as mediator between the dominican republic and haiti in their boundary dispute , and because of the further fact that the revolutionary activities on the haitian - dominican frontier had become so active as practically to obliterate the line of demarcation that had been heretofore recognized pending the definitive settlement of the boundary in controversy , it was found necessary to indicate to the two island governments a provisional de facto boundary line .
this was done without prejudice to the rights or obligations of either country in a final settlement to be reached by arbitration .
the tentative line chosen was one which , under the circumstances brought to the knowledge of this government , seemed to conform to the best interests of the disputants .
the border patrol which it had been found necessary to reestablish for customs purposes between the two countries was instructed provisionally to observe this line .
the republic of cuba last may was in the throes of a lawless uprising that for a time threatened the destruction of a great deal of valuable property - much of it owned by americans and other foreigners - as well as the existence of the government itself .
the armed forces of cuba being inadequate to guard property from attack and at the same time properly to operate against the rebels , a force of american marines was dispatched from our naval station at guantanamo into the province of oriente for the protection of american and other foreign life and property .
the cuban government was thus able to use all its forces in putting down the outbreak , which it succeeded in doing in a period of six weeks .
the presence of two american warships in the harbor of habana during the most critical period of this disturbance contributed in great measure to allay the fears of the inhabitants , including a large foreign colony .
there has been under discussion with the government of cuba for some time the question of the release by this government of its leasehold rights at bahia honda , on the northern coast of cuba , and the enlargement , in exchange therefor , of the naval station which has been established at guantanamo bay , on the south .
as the result of the negotiations thus carried on an agreement has been reached between the two governments providing for the suitable enlargement of the guantanamo bay station upon terms which are entirely fair and equitable to all parties concerned .
at the request alike of the government and both political parties in panama , an american commission undertook supervision of the recent presidential election in that republic , where our treaty relations , and , indeed , every geographical consideration , make the maintenance of order and satisfactory conditions of peculiar interest to the government of the united states .
the elections passed without disorder , and the new administration has entered upon its functions .
the government of great britain has asked the support of the united states for the protection of the interests of british holders of the foreign bonded debt of guatemala .
while this government is hopeful of an arrangement equitable to the british bondholders , it is naturally unable to view the question apart from its relation to the broad subject of financial stability in central america , in which the policy of the united states does not permit it to escape a vital interest .
through a renewal of negotiations between the government of guatemala and american bankers , the aim of which is a loan for the rehabilitation of guatemalan finances , a way appears to be open by which the government of guatemala could promptly satisfy any equitable and just british claims , and at the same time so improve its whole financial position as to contribute greatly to the increased prosperity of the republic and to redound to the benefit of foreign investments and foreign trade with that country .
failing such an arrangement , it may become impossible for the government of the united states to escape its obligations in connection with such measures as may become necessary to exact justice to legitimate foreign claims .
in the recent revolution in nicaragua , which , it was generally admitted , might well have resulted in a general central american conflict but for the intervention of the united states , the government of honduras was especially menaced ; but fortunately peaceful conditions were maintained within the borders of that republic .
the financial condition of that country remains unchanged , no means having been found for the final adjustment of pressing outstanding foreign claims .
this makes it the more regrettable that the financial convention between the united states and honduras has thus far failed of ratification .
the government of the united states continues to hold itself ready to cooperate with the government of honduras , which it is believed , can not much longer delay the meeting of its foreign obligations , and it is hoped at the proper time american bankers will be willing to cooperate for this purpose .
it is not possible to make to the congress a communication upon the present foreign relations of the united states so detailed as to convey an adequate impression of the enormous increase in the importance and activities of those relations .
if this government is really to preserve to the american people that free opportunity in foreign markets which will soon be indispensable to our prosperity , even greater efforts must be made .
otherwise the american merchant , manufacturer , and exporter will find many a field in which american trade should logically predominate preempted through the more energetic efforts of other governments and other commercial nations .
there are many ways in which through hearty cooperation the legislative and executive branches of this government can do much .
the absolute essential is the spirit of united effort and singleness of purpose .
i will allude only to a very few specific examples of action which ought then to result .
america can not take its proper place in the most important fields for its commercial activity and enterprise unless we have a merchant marine .
american commerce and enterprise can not be effectively fostered in those fields unless we have good american banks in the countries referred to .
we need american newspapers in those countries and proper means for public information about them .
we need to assure the permanency of a trained foreign service .
we need legislation enabling the members of the foreign service to be systematically brought in direct contact with the industrial , manufacturing , and exporting interests of this country in order that american business men may enter the foreign field with a clear perception of the exact conditions to be dealt with and the officers themselves may prosecute their work with a clear idea of what american industrial and manufacturing interests require .
congress should fully realize the conditions which obtain in the world as we find ourselves at the threshold of our middle age as a nation .
we have emerged full grown as a peer in the great concourse of nations .
we have passed through various formative periods .
we have been self - centered in the struggle to develop our domestic resources and deal with our domestic questions .
the nation is now too matured to continue in its foreign relations those temporary expedients natural to a people to whom domestic affairs are the sole concern .
in the past our diplomacy has often consisted , in normal times , in a mere assertion of the right to international existence .
we are now in a larger relation with broader rights of our own and obligations to others than ourselves .
a number of great guiding principles were laid down early in the history of this government .
the recent task of our diplomacy has been to adjust those principles to the conditions of to - day , to develop their corollaries , to find practical applications of the old principles expanded to meet new situations .
thus are being evolved bases upon which can rest the superstructure of policies which must grow with the destined progress of this nation .
the successful conduct of our foreign relations demands a broad and a modern view .
we can not meet new questions nor build for the future if we confine ourselves to outworn dogmas of the past and to the perspective appropriate at our emergence from colonial times and conditions .
the opening of the panama canal will mark a new era in our international life and create new and worldwide conditions which , with their vast correlations and consequences , will obtain for hundreds of years to come .
we must not wait for events to overtake us unawares .
with continuity of purpose we must deal with the problems of our external relations by a diplomacy modern , resourceful , magnanimous , and fittingly expressive of the high ideals of a great nation .
part ii . [
on fiscal , judicial , military and insular affairs . ]
to the senate and house of representatives : 
 on the 3d of december i sent a message to the congress , which was confined to our foreign relations .
the secretary of state makes no report to the president or to congress , and a review of the history of the transactions of the state department in one year must therefore be included by the president in his annual message or congress will not be fully informed of them .
a full discussion of all the transactions of the government , with a view to informing the congress of the important events of the year and recommending new legislation , requires more space than one message of reasonable length affords .
i have therefore adopted the course of sending three or four messages during the first ten days of the session , so as to include reference to the more important matters that should be brought to the attention of the congress .
the condition of the country with reference to business could hardly be better .
while the four years of the administration now drawing to a close have not developed great speculative expansion or a wide field of new investment , the recovery and progress made from the depressing conditions following the panic of 1907 have been steady and the improvement has been clear and easily traced in the statistics .
the business of the country is now on a solid basis .
credits are not unduly extended , and every phase of the situation seems in a state of preparedness for a period of unexampled prosperity .
manufacturing concerns are running at their full capacity and the demand for labor was never so constant and growing .
the foreign trade of the country for this year will exceed $ 4,000,000,000 , while the balance in our favor - that of the excess of exports over imports - will exceed $ 500,000,000 .
more than half our exports are manufactures or partly manufactured material , while our exports of farm products do not show the same increase because of domestic consumption .
it is a year of bumper crops ; ; the total money value of farm products will exceed $ 9,500,000,000 .
it is a year when the bushel or unit price of agricultural products has gradually fallen , and yet the total value of the entire crop is greater by over $ 1,000,000,000 than we have known in our history .
the condition of the treasury is very satisfactory .
the total interest - bearing debt is $ 963,777,770 , of which $ 134,631,980 constitute the panama canal loan .
the noninterest - bearing debt is $ 378,301,284.90 , including $ 346,681,016 of greenbacks .
we have in the treasury $ 150,000,000 in gold coin as a reserve against the outstanding greenbacks ; and in addition we have a cash balance in the treasury as a general fund of $ 167,152,478.99 , or an increase of $ 26,975,552 over the general fund last year .
for three years the expenditures of the government have decreased under the influence of an effort to economize .
this year presents an apparent exception .
the estimate by the secretary of the treasury of the ordinary receipts , exclusive of postal revenues , for the year ending june 30 , 1914 , indicates that they will amount to $ 710,000,000 .
the sum of the estimates of the expenditures for that same year , exclusive of panama canal disbursements and postal disbursements payable from postal revenues , is $ 732,000,000 , indicating a deficit of $ 22,000,000 .
for the year ending june 30 , 1913 , similarly estimated receipts were $ 667,000,000 , while the total corresponding estimate of expenditures for that year , submitted through the secretary of the treasury to congress , amounted to $ 656,000,000 .
this shows an increase of $ 76,000,000 in the estimates for 1914 over the total estimates of 1913 .
this is due to an increase of $ 25,000,000 in the estimate for rivers and harbors for the next year on projects and surveys authorized by congress ; to an increase under the new pension bill of $ 32,500,000 ; and to an increase in the estimates for expenses of the navy department of $ 24,000,000 .
the estimate for the navy department for the year 1913 included two battleships .
congress made provision for only one battleship , and therefore the navy department has deemed it necessary and proper to make an estimate which includes the first year 's expenditure for three battleships in addition to the amount required for work on the uncompleted ships now under construction .
in addition to the natural increase in the expenditures for the uncompleted ships , and the ad .
ditional battleship estimated for , the other increases are due to the pay required for 4,000 or more additional enlisted men in the navy ; and to this must be added the additional cost of construction imposed by the change in the eight - hour law which makes it applicable to ships built in private shipyards .
with the exceptions of these three items , the estimates show a reduction this year below the total estimates for 1913 of more than $ 5,000,000 .
the estimates for panama canal construction for 1914 are $ 17,000,000 less than for 1913 

 a time when panics seem far removed is the best time for us to prepare our financial system to withstand a storm .
the most crying need this country has is a proper banking and currency system .
the existing one is inadequate , and everyone who has studied the question admits it .
it is the business of the national government to provide a medium , automatically contracting and expanding in volume , to meet the needs of trade .
our present system lacks the indispensable quality of elasticity .
the only part of our monetary medium that has elasticity is the bank - note currency .
the peculiar provisions of the law requiring national banks to maintain reserves to meet the call of the depositors operates to increase the money stringency when it arises rather than to expand the supply of currency and relieve it .
it operates upon each bank and furnishes a motive for the withdrawal of currency from the channels of trade by each bank to save itself , and offers no inducement whatever for the use of the reserve to expand the supply of currency to meet the exceptional demand .
after the panic of 1907 congress realized that the present system was not adapted to the country 's needs and that under it panics were possible that might properly be avoided by legislative provision .
accordingly a monetary commission was appointed which made a report in february , 1912 .
the system which they recommended involved a national reserve association , which was , in certain of its faculties and functions , a bank , and which was given through its governing authorities the power , by issuing circulating notes for approved commercial paper , by fixing discounts , and by other methods of transfer of currency , to expand the supply of the monetary medium where it was most needed to prevent the export or hoarding of gold and generally to exercise such supervision over the supply of money in every part of the country as to prevent a stringency and a panic .
the stock in this association was to be distributed to the banks of the whole united states , state and national , in a mixed proportion to bank units and to capital stock paid in .
the control of the association was vested in a board of directors to be elected by representatives of the banks , except certain ex - officio directors , three cabinet officers , and the comptroller of the currency .
the president was to appoint the governor of the association from three persons to be selected by the directors , while the two deputy governors were to be elected by the board of directors .
the details of the plan were worked out with great care and ability , and the plan in general seems to me to furnish the basis for a proper solution of our present difficulties .
i feel that the government might very properly be given a greater voice in the executive committee of the board of directors without danger of injecting politics into its management , but i think the federation system of banks is a good one , provided proper precautions are taken to prevent banks of large capital from absorbing power through ownership of stock in other banks .
the objections to a central bank it seems to me are obviated if the ownership of the reserve association is distributed among all the banks of a country in which banking is free .
the earnings of the reserve association are limited in percentage tit a reasonable and fixed amount , and the profits over and above this are to be turned into the government treasury .
it is quite probable that still greater security against control by money centers may be worked into the plan .
certain it is , however , that the objections which were made in the past history of this country to a central bank as furnishing a monopoly of financial power to private individuals , would not apply to an association whose ownership and control is so widely distributed and is divided between all the banks of the country , state and national , on the one hand , and the chief executive through three department heads and his comptroller of the currency , on the other .
the ancient hostility to a national bank , with its branches , in which is concentrated the privilege of doing a banking business and carrying on the financial transactions of the government , has prevented the establishment of such a bank since it was abolished in the jackson administration .
our present national banking law has obviated objections growing out of the same cause by providing a free banking system in which any set of stockholders can establish a national bank if they comply with the conditions of law .
it seems to me that the national reserve association meets the same objection in a similar way ; that is , by giving to each bank , state and national , in accordance with its size , a certain share in the stock of the reserve association , nontransferable and only to be held by the bank while it performs its functions as a partner in the reserve association .
the report of the commission recommends provisions for the imposition of a graduated tax on the expanded currency of such a character as to furnish a motive for reducing the issue of notes whenever their presence in the money market is not required by the exigencies of trade .
in other words , the whole system has been worked out with the greatest care .
theoretically it presents a plan that ought to command support .
practically it may require modification in various of its provisions in order to make the security against , abuses by combinations among the banks impossible .
but in the face of the crying necessity that there is for improvement in our present system , i urgently invite the attention of congress to the proposed plan and the report of the commission , with the hope that an earnest consideration may suggest amendments and changes within the general plan which will lead to its adoption for the benefit of the country .
there is no class in the community more interested in a safe and sane banking and currency system , one which will prevent panics and automatically furnish in each trade center the currency needed in the carrying on of the business at that center , than the wage earner .
there is no class in the community whose experience better qualifies them to make suggestions as to the sufficiency of a currency and banking system than the bankers and business men .
ought we , therefore , to ignore their recommendations and reject their financial judgment as to the proper method of reforming our financial system merely because of the suspicion which exists against them in the minds of many of our fellow citizens ?
is it not the duty of congress to take up the plan suggested , examine it from all standpoints , give impartial consideration to the testimony of those whose experience ought to fit them to give the best advice on the subject , and then to adopt some plan which will secure the benefits desired ?
a banking and currency system seems far away from the wage earner and the farmer , but the fact is that they are vitally interested in a safe system of currency which shall graduate its volume to the amount needed and which shall prevent times of artificial stringency that frighten capital , stop employment , prevent the meeting of the pay roll , destroy local markets , and produce penury and want .
i have regarded it as my duty in former messages to the congress to urge the revision of the tariff upon principles of protection .
it was my judgment that the customs duties ought to be revised downward , but that the reduction ought not to be below a rate which would represent the difference in the cost of production between the article in question at home and abroad , and for this and other reasons i vetoed several bills which were presented to me in the last session of this congress .
now that a new congress has been elected on a platform of a tariff for revenue only rather than a protective tariff , and is to revise the tariff on that basis , it is needless for me to occupy the time of this congress with arguments or recommendations in favor of a protective tariff .
before passing from the tariff law , however , known as the payne tariff law of august 5 , 1909 , 1 desire to call attention to section 38 of that act , assessing a special excise tax on corporations .
it contains a provision requiring the levy of an additional 50 per cent to the annual tax in cases of neglect to verify the prescribed return or to file it before the time required by law .
this additional charge of 50 per cent operates in some cases as a harsh penalty for what may have been a mere inadvertence or unintentional oversight , and the law should be so amended as to mitigate the severity of the charge in such instances .
provision should also be made for the refund of additional taxes heretofore collected because of such infractions in those cases where the penalty imposed has been so disproportionate to the offense as equitably to demand relief .
the estimates for the next fiscal year have been assembled by the secretary of the treasury and by him transmitted to congress .
i purpose at a later day to submit to congress a form of budget prepared for me and recommended by the president 's commission on economy and efficiency , with a view of suggesting the useful and informing character of a properly framed budget .
the war department combines within its jurisdiction functions which in other countries usually occupy three departments .
it not only has the management of the army and the coast defenses , but its jurisdiction extends to the government of the philippines and of porto rico and the control of the receivership of the customs revenues of the dominican republic ; it also includes the recommendation of all plans for the improvement of harbors and waterways and their execution when adopted ; and , by virtue of an executive order , the supervision of the construction of the panama canal .
our small army now consists of 83,809 men , excluding the 5,000 philippine scouts .
leaving out of consideration the coast artillery force , whose position is fixed in our various seacoast defenses , and the present garrisons of our various insular possessions , we have to - day within the continental united states a mobile army of only about 35,000 men .
this little force must be still further drawn upon to supply the new garrisons for the great naval base which is being established at pearl harbor , in the hawaiian islands , and to protect the locks now rapidly approaching completion at panama .
the forces remaining in the united states are now scattered in nearly 50 posts , situated for a variety of historical reasons in 24 states .
these posts contain only fractions of regiments , averaging less than 700 men each .
in time of peace it has been our historical policy to administer these units separately by a geographical organization .
in other words , our army in time of peace has never been a united organization but merely scattered groups of companies , battalions , and regiments , and the first task in time of war has been to create out of these scattered units an army fit for effective teamwork and cooperation .
to the task of meeting these patent defects , the war department has been addressing itself during the past year .
for many years we had no officer or division whose business it was to study these problems and plan remedies for these defects .
with the establishment of the general staff nine years ago a body was created for this purpose .
it has , necessarily , required time to overcome , even in its own personnel , the habits of mind engendered by a century of lack of method , but of late years its work has become systematic and effective , and it has recently been addressing itself vigorously to these problems .
a comprehensive plan of army reorganization was prepared by the war college division of the general staff .
this plan was thoroughly discussed last summer at a series of open conferences held by the secretary of war and attended by representatives from all branches of the army and from congress .
in printed form it has been distributed to members of congress and throughout the army and the national guard , and widely through institutions of learning and elsewhere in the united states .
in it , for the first time , we have a tentative chart for future progress .
under the influence of this study definite and effective steps have been taken toward army reorganization so far as such reorganization lies within the executive power .
hitherto there has been no difference of policy in the treatment of the organization of our foreign garrisons from those of troops within the united states .
the difference of situation is vital , and the foreign garrison should be prepared to defend itself at an instant 's notice against a foe who may command the sea .
unlike the troops in the united states , it can not count upon reinforcements or recruitment .
it is an outpost upon which will fall the brunt of the first attack in case of war .
the historical policy of the united states of carrying its regiments during time of peace at half strength has no application to our foreign garrisons .
during the past year this defect has been remedied as to the philippines garrison .
the former garrison of 12 reduced regiments has been replaced by a garrison of 6 regiments at full strength , giving fully the same number of riflemen at an estimated economy in cost of maintenance of over $ 1,000,000 per year .
this garrison is to be permanent .
its regimental units , instead of being transferred periodically back and forth from the united states , will remain in the islands .
the officers and men composing these units will , however , serve a regular tropical detail as usual , thus involving no greater hardship upon the personnel and greatly increasing the effectiveness of the garrison .
a similar policy is proposed for the hawaiian and panama garrisons as fast as the barracks for them are completed .
i strongly urge upon congress that the necessary appropriations for this purpose should be promptly made .
it is , in my opinion , of first importance that these national outposts , upon which a successful home defense will , primarily , depend , should be finished and placed in effective condition at the earliest possible day .
simultaneously with the foregoing steps the war department has been proceeding with the reorganization of the army at home .
the formerly disassociated units are being united into a tactical organization of three divisions , each consisting of two or three brigades of infantry and , so far as practicable , a proper proportion of divisional cavalry and artillery .
of course , the extent to which this reform can be carried by the executive is practically limited to a paper organization .
the scattered units can be brought under a proper organization , but they will remain physically scattered until congress supplies the necessary funds for grouping them in more concentrated posts .
until that is done the present difficulty of drilling our scattered groups together , and thus training them for the proper team play , can not be removed .
but we shall , at least , have an army which will know its own organization and will be inspected by its proper commanders , and to which , as a unit , emergency orders can be issued in time of war or other emergency .
moreover , the organization , which in many respects is necessarily a skeleton , will furnish a guide for future development .
the separate regiments and companies will know the brigades and divisions to which they belong .
they will be maneuvered together whenever maneuvers are established by congress , and the gaps in their organization will show the pattern into which can be filled new troops as the nation grows and a larger army is provided .
one of the most important reforms accomplished during the past year has been the legislation enacted in the army appropriation bill of last summer , providing for a regular army reserve .
hitherto our national policy has assumed that at the outbreak of war our regiments would be immediately raised to full strength .
but our laws have provided no means by which this could be accomplished , or by which the losses of the regiments when once sent to the front could be repaired .
in this respect we have neglected the lessons learned by other nations .
the new law provides that the soldier , after serving four years with colors , shall pass into a reserve for three years .
at his option he may go ' into the reserve at the end of three years , remaining there for four years .
while in the reserve he can be called to active duty only in case of war or other national emergency , and when so called and only in such case will receive a stated amount of pay for all of the period in which he has been a member of the reserve .
the legislation is imperfect , in my opinion , in certain particulars , but it is a most important step in the right direction , and i earnestly hope that it will be carefully studied and perfected by congress .
under existing law the national guard constitutes , after the regular army , the first line of national defense .
its organization , discipline , training , and equipment , under recent legislation , have been assimilated , as far as possible , to those of the regular army , and its practical efficiency , under the effect of this training , has very greatly increased .
our citizen soldiers under present conditions have reached a stage of development beyond which they can not reasonably be asked to go without further direct assistance in the form of pay from the federal government .
on the other hand , such pay from the national treasury would not be justified unless it produced a proper equivalent in additional efficiency on the part of the national guard .
the organized militia to - day can not be ordered outside of the limits of the united states , and thus can not lawfully be used for general military purposes .
the officers and men are ambitious and eager to make themselves thus available and to become an efficient national reserve of citizen soldiery .
they are the only force of trained men , other than the regular army , upon which we can rely .
the so - called militia pay bill , in the form agreed on between the authorities of the war department and the representatives of the national guard , in my opinion adequately meets these conditions and offers a proper return for the pay which it is proposed to give to the national guard .
i believe that its enactment into law would be a very long step toward providing this nation with a first line of citizen soldiery , upon which its main reliance must depend in case of any national emergency .
plans for the organization of the national guard into tactical divisions , on the same lines as those adopted for the regular army , are being formulated by the war college division of the general staff .
the national guard consists of only about 110,000 men .
in any serious war in the past it has always been necessary , and in such a war in the future it doubtless will be necessary , for the nation to depend , in addition to the regular army and the national guard , upon a large force of volunteers .
there is at present no adequate provision of law for the raising of such a force .
there is now pending in congress , however , a bill which makes such provision , and which i believe is admirably adapted to meet the exigencies which would be presented in case of war .
the passage of the bill would not entail a dollar 's expense upon the government at this time or in the future until war comes .
but if war comes the methods therein directed are in accordance with the best military judgment as to what they ought to be , and the act would prevent the necessity for a discussion of any legislation and the delays incident to its consideration and adoption .
i earnestly urge its passage .
the army appropriation act of 191:2 also carried legislation for the consolidation of the quartermaster 's department , the subsistence department , and the pay corps into a single supply department , to be known as the quartermaster 's corps .
it also provided for the organization of a special force of enlisted men , to be known as the service corps , gradually to replace many of the civilian employees engaged in the manual labor necessary in every army .
i believe that both of these enactments will improve the administration of our military establishment .
the consolidation of the supply corps has already been effected , and the organization of the service corps is being put into effect .
all of the foregoing reforms are in the direction of economy and efficiency .
except for the slight increase necessary to garrison our outposts in hawaii and panama , they do not call for a larger army , but they do tend to produce a much more efficient one .
the only substantial new appropriations required are those which , as i have pointed out , are necessary to complete the fortifications and barracks at our naval bases and outposts beyond the sea .
porto rico continues to show notable progress , both commercially and in the spread of education .
its external commerce has increased 17 per cent over the preceding year , bringing the total value up to $ 92,631,886 , or more than five times the value of the commerce of the island in 1901 .
during the year 16o,657 pupils were enrolled in the public schools , as against 145,525 for the preceding year , and as compared with 26,000 for the first year of american administration .
special efforts are under way for the promotion of vocational and industrial training , the need of which is particularly pressing in the island .
when the bubonic plague broke out last june , the quick and efficient response of the people of porto rico to the demands of modern sanitation was strikingly shown by the thorough campaign which was instituted against the plague and the hearty public opinion which supported the government 's efforts to check its progress and to prevent its recurrence .
the failure thus far to grant american citizenship continues to be the only ground of dissatisfaction .
the bill conferring such citizenship has passed the house of representatives and is now awaiting the action of the senate .
i am heartily in favor of the passage of this bill .
i believe that the demand for citizenship is just , and that it is amply earned by sustained loyalty on the part of the inhabitants of the island .
but it should be remembered that the demand must be , and in the minds of most porto ricans is , entirely disassociated from any thought of statehood .
i believe that no substantial approved public opinion in the united states or in porto rico contemplates statehood for the island as the ultimate form of relations between us .
i believe that the aim to be striven for is the fullest possible allowance of legal and fiscal self - government , with american citizenship as to the bond between us ; in other words , a relation analogous to the present relation between great britain and such self - governing colonies as canada and australia .
this would conduce to the fullest and most self - sustaining development of porto rico , while at the same time it would grant her the economic and political benefits of being under the american flag .
a bill is pending in congress which revolutionizes the carefully worked out scheme of government under which the philippine islands are now governed and which proposes to render them virtually autonomous at once and absolutely independent in eight years .
stich a proposal can only be founded on the assumption that we have now discharged our trusteeship to the filipino people and our responsibility for them to the world , and that they are now prepared for selfgovernment as well as national sovereignty .
a thorough and unbiased knowledge of the facts clearly shows that these assumptions are absolutely without justification .
as to this , i believe that there is no substantial difference of opinion among any of those who have had the responsibility of facing philippine problems in the administration of the islands , and i believe that no one to whom the future of this people is a responsible concern can countenance a policy fraught with the direst consequences to those on whose behalf it is ostensibly urged .
in the philippine islands we have embarked upon an experiment unprecedented in dealing with dependent people .
we are developing there conditions exclusively for their own welfare .
we found an archipelago containing 24 tribes and races , speaking a great variety of languages , and with a population over 80 per cent of which could neither read nor write .
through the unifying forces of a common education , of commercial and economic development , and of gradual participation in local self - government we are endeavoring to evolve a homogeneous people fit to determine , when the time arrives , their own destiny .
we are seeking to arouse a national spirit and not , as under the older colonial theory , to suppress such a spirit .
the character of the work we have been doing is keenly recognized in the orient , and our success thus far followed with not a little envy by those who , initiating the same policy , find themselves hampered by conditions grown up in earlier days and under different theories of administration .
but our work is far from done .
our duty to the filipinos is far from discharged .
over half a million filipino students are now in the philippine schools helping to mold the men of the future into a homogeneous people , but there still remain more than a million filipino children of school age yet to be reached .
freed from american control the integrating forces of a common education and a common language will cease and the educational system now well started will slip back into inefficiency and disorder .
an enormous increase in the commercial development of the islands has been made since they were virtually granted full access to our markets three years ago , with every prospect of increasing development and diversified industries .
freed from american control such development is bound to decline .
every observer speaks of the great progress in public works for the benefit of the filipinos , of harbor improvements , of roads and railways , of irrigation and artesian wells , public buildings , and better means of communication .
but large parts of the islands are still unreached , still even unexplored , roads and railways are needed in many parts , irrigation systems are still to be installed , and wells to be driven .
whole villages and towns are still without means of communication other than almost impassable roads and trails .
even the great progress in sanitation , which has successfully suppressed smallpox , the bubonic plague , and asiatic cholera , has found the cause of and a cure for beriberi , has segregated the lepers , has helped to make manila the most healthful city in the orient , and to free life throughout the whole archipelago from its former dread diseases , is nevertheless incomplete in many essentials of permanence in sanitary policy .
even more remains to be accomplished .
if freed from american control sanitary progress is bound to be arrested and all that has been achieved likely to be lost .
concurrent with the economic , social , and industrial development of the islands has been the development of the political capacity of the people .
by their progressive participation in government the filipinos are being steadily and hopefully trained for self - government .
under spanish control they shared in no way in the government .
under american control they have shared largely and increasingly .
within the last dozen years they have gradually been given complete autonomy in the municipalities , the right to elect two - thirds of the provincial governing boards and the lower house of the insular legislature .
they have four native members out of nine members of the commission , or upper house .
the chief justice and two justices of the supreme court , about one - half of the higher judicial positions , and all of the justices of the peach are natives .
in the classified civil service the proportion of filipinos increased from 51 per cent in 1904 to 67 per cent in 1911 .
thus to - day all the municipal employees , over go per cent of the provincial employees , and 60 per cent of the officials and employees of the central government are filipinos .
the ideal which has been kept in mind in our political guidance of the islands has been real popular self - government and not mere paper independence .
i am happy to say that the filipinos have done well enough in the places they have filled and in the discharge of the political power with which they have been intrusted to warrant the belief that they can be educated and trained to complete self - government .
but the present satisfactory results are due to constant support and supervision at every step by americans .
if the task we have undertaken is higher than that assumed by other nations , its accomplishment must demand even more patience .
we must not forget that we found the filipinos wholly untrained in government .
up to our advent all other experience sought to repress rather than encourage political power .
it takes long time and much experience to ingrain political habits of steadiness and efficiency .
popular self - government ultimately must rest upon common habits of thought and upon a reasonably developed public opinion .
no such foundations for selfgovernment , let alone independence are now present in the philippine islands .
disregarding even their racial heterogeneity and the lack of ability to think as a nation , it is sufficient to point out that under liberal franchise privileges only about 3 per cent of the filipinos vote and only 5 per cent of the people are said to read the public press .
to confer independence upon the filipinos now is , therefore , to subject the great mass of their people to the dominance of an oligarchical and , probably , exploiting minority .
such a course will be as cruel to those people as it would be shameful to us .
our true course is to pursue steadily and courageously the path we have thus far followed ; to guide the filipinos into self - sustaining pursuits ; to continue the cultivation of sound political habits through education and political practice ; to encourage the diversification of industries , and to realize the advantages of their industrial education by conservatively approved cooperative methods , at once checking the dangers of concentrated wealth and building up a sturdy , independent citizenship .
we should do all this with a disinterested endeavor to secure for the filipinos economic independence and to fit them for complete self - government , with the power to decide eventually , according to their own largest good , whether such self - government shall be accompanied by independence .
a present declaration even of future independence would retard progress by the dissension and disorder it would arouse .
on our part it would be a disingenuous attempt , under the guise of conferring a benefit on them , to relieve ourselves from the heavy and difficult burden which thus far we have been bravely and consistently sustaining .
it would be a disguised policy of scuttle .
it would make the helpless filipino the football of oriental politics , tinder the protection of a guaranty of their independence , which we would be powerless to enforce .
there are pending before congress a large number of bills proposing to grant privileges of erecting dams for the purpose of creating water power in our navigable rivers .
the pendency of these bills has brought out an important defect in the existing general dam act .
that act does not , in my opinion , grant sufficient power to the federal government in dealing with the construction of such dams to exact protective conditions in the interest of navigation .
it does not permit the federal government , as a condition of its permit , to require that a part of the value thus created shall be applied to the further general improvement and protection of the stream .
i believe this to be one of the most important matters of internal improvement now confronting the government .
most of the navigable rivers of this country are comparatively long and shallow .
in order that they may be made fully useful for navigation there has come into vogue a method of improvement known as canalization , or the slack - water method , which consists in building a series of dams and locks , each of which will create a long pool of deep navigable water .
at each of these dams there is usually created also water power of commercial value .
if the water power thus created can be made available for the further improvement of navigation in the stream , it is manifest that the improvement will be much more quickly effected on the one hand , and , on the other , that the burden on the general taxpayers of the country will be very much reduced .
private interests seeking permits to build water - power dams in navigable streams usually urge that they thus improve navigation , and that if they do not impair navigation they should be allowed to take for themselves the entire profits of the water - power development .
whatever they may do by way of relieving the government of the expense of improving navigation should be given due consideration , but it must be apparent that there may be a profit beyond a reasonably liberal return upon the private investment which is a potential asset of the government in carrying out a comprehensive policy of waterway development .
it is no objection to the retention and use of such an asset by the government that a comprehensive waterway policy will include the protection and development of the other public uses of water , which can not and should not be ignored in making and executing plans for the protection and development of navigation .
it is also equally clear that inasmuch as the water power thus created is or may be an incident of a general scheme of waterway improvement within the constitutional jurisdiction of the federal government , the regulation of such water power lies also within that jurisdiction .
in my opinion constructive statesmanship requires that legislation should be enacted which will permit the development of navigation in these great rivers to go hand in hand with the utilization of this by - product of water power , created in the course of the same improvement , and that the general dam act should be so amended as to make this possible .
i deem it highly important that the nation should adopt a consistent and harmonious treatment of these water - power projects , which will preserve for this purpose their value to the government , whose right it is to grant the permit .
any other policy is equivalent to throwing away a most valuable national asset .
during the past year the work of construction upon the canal has progressed most satisfactorily .
about 87 per cent of the excavation work has been completed , and more than 93 per cent of the concrete for all the locks is in place .
in view of the great interest which has been manifested as to some slides in the culebra cut , i am glad to say that the report of col .
goethals should allay any apprehension on this point .
it is gratifying to note that none of the slides which occurred during this year would have interfered with the passage of the ships had the canal , in fact , been in operation , and when the slope pressures will have been finally adjusted and the growth of vegetation will minimize erosion in the banks of the cut , the slide problem will be practically solved and an ample stability assured for the culebra cut .
although the official date of the opening has been set for january 1 , 1915 , the canal will , in fact , from present indications , be opened for shipping during the latter half of 1913 .
no fixed date can as yet be set , but shipping interests will be advised as soon as assurances can be given that vessels can pass through without unnecessary delay .
recognizing the administrative problem in the management of the canal , congress in the act of august 24 , 1912 , has made admirable provisions for executive responsibility in the control of the canal and the government of the canal zone .
the problem of most efficient organization is receiving careful consideration , so that a scheme of organization and control best adapted to the conditions of the canal may be formulated and put in operation as expeditiously as possible .
acting tinder the authority conferred on me by congress , i have , by executive proclamation , promulgated the following schedule of tolls for ships passing through the canal , based upon the thorough report of emory r. johnson , special commissioner on traffic and tolls : 
 i. on merchant vessels carrying passengers or cargo , $ 1.20 per net vessel ton - each 100 cubic feet - of actual earning capacity .
2 .
on vessels in ballast without passengers or cargo , 40 per cent less than the rate of tolls for vessels with passengers or cargo .
3 .
upon naval vessels , other than transports , colliers , hospital ships , and supply ships , 50 cents per displacement ton .
4 .
upon army and navy transports , colliers , hospital ships , and supply ships , $ 1.20 per net ton , the vessels to be measured by the same rules as are employed in determining the net tonnage of merchant vessels .
rules for the determination of the tonnage upon which toll charges are based are now in course of preparation and will be promulgated in due season .
the proclamation which i have issued in respect to the panama canal tolls is in accord with the panama canal act passed by this congress august 24 , 1912 .
we have been advised that the british government has prepared a protest against the act and its enforcement in so far as it relieves from the payment of tolls american ships engaged in the american coastwise trade on the ground that it violates british rights tinder the hay - pauncefote treaty concerning the panama canal .
when the protest is presented , it will be promptly considered and an effort made to reach a satisfactory adjustment of any differ .
ences there may be between the two governments .
the promulgation of an efficient workmen 's compensation act , adapted to the particular conditions of the zone , is awaiting adequate appropriation by congress for the payment of claims arising thereunder .
i urge that speedy provision be made in order that we may install upon the zone a system of settling claims for injuries in best accord with modern humane , social , and industrial theories .
as the completion of the canal grows nearer , and as the wonderful executive work of col .
goethals becomes more conspicuous in the eyes of the country and of the world , it seems to me wise and proper to make provision by law for such reward to him as may be commensurate with the service that he has rendered to his country .
i suggest that this reward take the form of an appointment of col .
goethals as a major general in the army of the united states , and that the law authorizing such appointment be accompanied with a provision permitting his designation as chief of engineers upon the retirement of the present incumbent of that office .
the navy of the united states is in a greater state of efficiency and is more powerful than it has ever been before , but in the emulation which exists between different countries in respect to the increase of naval and military armaments this condition is not a permanent one .
in view of the many improvements and increases by foreign governments the slightest halt on our part in respect to new construction throws us back and reduces us from a naval power of the first rank and places us among the nations of the second rank .
in the past 15 years the navy has expanded rapidly and yet far less rapidly than our country .
from now on reduced expenditures in the navy means reduced military strength .
the world 's history has shown the importance of sea power both for adequate defense and for the support of important and definite policies .
i had the pleasure of attending this autumn a mobilization of the atlantic fleet , and was glad to observe and note the preparedness of the fleet for instant action .
the review brought before the president and the secretary of the navy a greater and more powerful collection of vessels than had ever been gathered in american waters .
the condition of the fleet and of the officers and enlisted men and of the equipment of the vessels entitled those in authority to the greatest credit .
i again commend to congress the giving of legislative sanction to the appointment of the naval aids to the secretary of the navy .
these aids and the council of aids appointed by the secretary of the navy to assist him in the conduct of his department have proven to be .
of the highest utility .
they have furnished an executive com mittee of the most skilled naval experts , who have coordinated the action of the various bureaus in the navy , and by their advice have enabled the secretary to give an administration at the same time economical and most efficient .
never before has the united states had a navy that compared in efficiency with its present one , but never before have the requirements with respect to naval warfare been higher and more exacting than now .
a year ago congress refused to appropriate for more than one battleship .
in this i think a great mistake of policy was made , and i urgently recommend that this congress make tip for the mistake of the last session by appropriations authorizing the construction of three battleships , in addition to destroyers , fuel ships , and the other auxiliary vessels as shown in the building program of the general board .
we are confronted by a condition in respect to the navies of the world which requires us , if we would maintain our navy as an insurance of peace , to augment our naval force by at least two battleships a year and by battle cruisers , gunboats , torpedo destroyers , and submarine boats in a proper proportion .
we have no desire for war .
we would go as far as any nation in the world to avoid war , but we are a world power .
our population , our wealth , our definite policies , our responsibilities in the pacific and the atlantic , our defense of the panama canal , together with our enormous world trade and our missionary outposts on the frontiers of civilization , require us to recognize our position as one of the foremost in the family of nations , and to clothe ourselves with sufficient naval power to give force to our reasonable demands , and to give weight to our influence in those directions of progress that a powerful christian nation should advocate .
i observe that the secretary of the navy devotes some space to a change in the disciplinary system in vogue in that branch of the service .
i think there is nothing quite so unsatisfactory to either the army or the navy as the severe punishments necessarily inflicted by court - martial for desertions and purely military offenses , and i am glad to hear that the british have solved this important and difficult matter in a satisfactory way .
i commend to the consideration of congress the details of the new disciplinary system , and recommend that laws be passed putting the same into force both in the army and the navy .
i invite the attention of congress to that part of the report of the secretary of the navy in which he recommends the formation of a naval reserve by the organization of the ex - sailors of the navy .
i repeat my recommendation made last year that proper provision should be made for the rank of the commander in chief of the squadrons and fleets of the navy .
the inconvenience attending the necessary precedence that most foreign admirals have over our own whenever they meet in official functions ought to be avoided .
it impairs the prestige of our navy and is a defect that can be very easily removed .
this department has been very active in the enforcement of the law .
it has been better organized and with a larger force than ever before in the history of the government .
the prosecutions which have been successfully concluded and which are now pending testify to the effectiveness of the departmental work .
the prosecution of trusts under the sherman antitrust law has gone on without restraint or diminution , and decrees similar to those entered in the standard oil and the tobacco cases have been entered in other suits , like the suits against the powder trust and the bathtub trust .
i am very strongly convinced that a steady , consistent course in this regard , with a continuing of supreme court decisions upon new phases of the trust question not already finally decided is going to offer a solution of this much - discussed and troublesome issue in a quiet , calm , and judicial way , without any radical legislation changing the governmental policy in regard to combinations now denounced by the sherman antitrust law .
i have already recommended as an aid in this matter legislation which would declare unlawful certain well - known phases of unfair competition in interstate trade , and i have also advocated voluntary national incorporation for the larger industrial enterprises , with provision for a closer supervision by the bureau of corporations , or a board appointed for the purpose , so as to make more certain compliance with the antitrust law on the one hand and to give greater security to the stockholders against possible prosecutions on the other .
i believe , however , that the orderly course of litigation in the courts and the regular prosecution of trusts charged with the violation of the antitrust law is producing among business men a clearer and clearer perception of the line of distinction between business that is to be encouraged and business that is to be condemned , and that in this quiet way the question of trusts can be settled and competition retained as an economic force to secure reasonableness in prices and freedom and independence in trade .
i am glad to bring to the attention of congress the fact that the supreme court has radically altered the equity rules governing the procedure on the equity side of all federal courts , and though , as these changes have not been yet put in practice so as to enable us to state from actual results what the reform will accomplish , they are of such a character that we can reasonably prophesy that they will greatly reduce the time and cost of litigation in such courts .
the court has adopted many of the shorter methods of the present english procedure , and while it may take a little while for the profession to accustom itself to these methods , it is certain greatly to facilitate litigation .
the action of the supreme court has been so drastic and so full of appreciation of the necessity for a great reform in court procedure that i have no hesitation in following tip this action with a recommendation which i foreshadowed in my message of three years ago , that the sections of the statute governing the procedure in the federal courts on the common - law side should be so amended as to give to the supreme court the same right to make rules of procedure in common law as they have , since the beginning of the court , exercised in equity .
i do not doubt that a full consideration of the subject will enable the court while giving effect to the substantial differences in right and remedy between the system of common law and the system of equity so to unite the two procedures into the form of one civil action and to shorten the procedure in such civil action as to furnish a model to all the state courts exercising concurrent jurisdiction with the federal courts of first instance .
under the statute now in force the common - law procedure in each federal court is made to conform to the procedure in the state in which the court is held .
in these days , when we should be making progress in court procedure , such a conformity statute makes the federal method too dependent upon the action of state legislatures .
i can but think it a great opportunity for congress to intrust to the highest tribunal in this country , evidently imbued with a strong spirit in favor of a reform of procedure , the power to frame a model code of procedure , which , while preserving all that is valuable and necessary of the rights and remedies at common law and in equity , shall lessen the burden of the poor litigant to a minimum in the expedition and cheapness with which his cause can be fought or defended through federal courts to final judgment .
the workman 's compensation act reported by the special commission appointed by congress and the executive , which passed the senate and is now pending in the house , the passage of which i have in previous messages urged upon congress , i venture again to call to its attention .
the opposition to it which developed in the senate , but which was overcome by a majority in that body , seemed to me to grow out rather of a misapprehension of its effect than of opposition to its principle .
i say again that i think no act can have a better effect directly upon the relations between the employer and employee than this act applying to railroads and common carriers of an interstate character , and i am sure that the passage of the act would greatly relieve the courts of the heaviest burden of litigation that they have , and would enable them to dispatch other business with a speed never before attained in courts of justice in this country .
part iii . [
concerning the work of the departments of the post office , interior , agriculture , and commerce and labor and district of columbia . ]
to the senate and house of representatives : 
 this is the third of a series of messages in which i have brought to the attention of the congress the important transactions of the government in each of its departments during the last year and have discussed needed reforms .
i recommend the adoption of legislation which shall make it the duty of heads of departments - the members of the president 's cabinet -at convenient times to attend the session of the house and the senate , which shall provide seats for them in each house , and give them the opportunity to take part in all discussions and to answer questions of which they have had due notice .
the rigid holding apart of the executive and the legislative branches of this government has not worked for the great advantage of either .
there has been much lost motion in the machinery , due to the lack of cooperation and interchange of views face to face between the representatives of the executive and the members of the two legislative branches of the government .
it was never intended that they should be separated in the sense of not being in constant effective touch and relationship to each other .
the legislative and the executive each performs its own appropriate function , but these functions must be coordinated .
time and time again debates have arisen in each house upon issues which the information of a particular department head would have enabled him , if present , to end at once by a simple explanation or statement .
time and time again a forceful and earnest presentation of facts and arguments by the representative of the executive whose duty it is to enforce the law would have brought about a useful reform by amendment , which in the absence of such a statement has failed of passage .
i do not think i am mistaken in saying that the presence of the members of the cabinet on the floor of each house would greatly contribute to the enactment of beneficial legislation .
nor would this in any degree deprive either the legislative or the executive of the independence which separation of the two branches has been intended to promote .
it would only facilitate their cooperation in the public interest .
on the other hand , i am sure that the necessity and duty imposed upon department heads of appearing in each ilouse and in answer to searching questions , of rendering upon their feet an account of what they have done , or what has been done by the administration , will spur each member of the cabinet to closer attention to the details of his department , to greater familiarity with its needs , and to greater care to avoid the just criticism which the answers brought out in questions put and discussions arising between the members of either house and the members of the cabinet may properly evoke .
objection is made that the members of the administration having no vote could exercise no power on the floor of the house , and could not assume that attitude of authority and control which the english parliamentary government have and which enables them to meet the responsibilities the english system thrusts upon them .
i agree that in certain respects it would be more satisfactory if members of the cabinet could at the same time be members of both houses , with voting power , but this is impossible under our system ; and while a lack of this feature may detract from the influence of the department chiefs , it will not prevent the good results which i have described above both in the matter of legislation and in the matter of administration .
the enactment of such a law would be quite within the power of congress without constitutional amendment , and it has such possibilities of usefulness that we might well make the experiment , and if we are disappointed the misstep can be easily retraced by a repeal of the enabling legislation .
this is not a new proposition .
in the house of representatives , in the thirty - eighth congress , the proposition was referred to a select committee of seven members .
the committee made an extensive report , and urged the adoption of the reform .
the report showed that our history had not been without illustration of the necessity and the examples of the practice by pointing out that in early days secretaries were repeatedly called to the presence of either rouse for consultation , advice , and information .
it also referred to remarks of mr. justice story in his commentaries on the constitution , in which he urgently presented the wisdom of such a change .
this report is to be found in volume i of the reports of committees of the first session of the thirty - eighth congress , april 6 , 1864 .
again , on february 4 , 1881 , a select committee of the senate recommended the passage of a similar bill , and made a report , in which , while approving the separation of the three branches , the executive , legislative , and judicial , they point out as a reason for the proposed change that , although having a separate existence , the branches are " to cooperate , each with the other , as the different members of the human body must cooperate , with each other in order to form the figure and perform the duties of a perfect man . "
the report concluded as follows : 
 this system will require the selection of the strongest men to be heads of departments and will require them to be well equipped with the knowledge of their offices .
it will also require the strongest men to be the leaders of congress and participate in debate .
it will bring these strong men in contact , perhaps into conflict , to advance the public weal , and thus stimulate their abilities and their efforts , and will thus assuredly result to the good of the country .
if it should appear by actual experience that the heads of departments in fact have not time to perform the additional duty imposed on them by this bill , the force in their offices should be increased or the duties devolving on them personally should be diminished .
an undersecretary should be appointed to whom could be confided that routine of administration which requires only order and accuracy .
the principal officers could then confine their attention to those duties which require wise discretion and intellectual activity .
thus they would have abundance of time for their duties under this bill .
indeed , your committee believes that the public interest would be subserved if the secretaries were relieved of the harassing cares of distributing clerkships and closely supervising the mere machinery of the departments .
your committee believes that the adoption of this bill and the effective execution of its provisions will be the first step toward a sound civil - service reform which will secure a larger wisdom in the adoption of policies and a better system in their execution .
( signed ) geo .
h. pendleton .
w. b. allison .
d. w. voorhees .
j. g. blaine .
m. c. butler .
john j. ingalls .
0 .
h. platt .
j. t. farley .
it would be difficult to mention the names of higher authority in the practical knowledge of our government than those which are appended to this report .
the postal savings bank system has been extended so that it now includes 4,004 fourth - class post offices ' , as well as 645 branch offices and stations in the larger cities .
there are now 12,812 depositories at which patrons of the system may open accounts .
the number of depositors is 300,000 and the amount of their deposits is approximately $ 28,000,000 , not including $ 1,314,140 which has been with drawn by depositors for the purpose of buying postal savings bonds .
experience demonstrates the value of dispensing with the pass - book and introducing in its place a certificate of deposit .
the gross income of the postal savings system for the fiscal year ending june 30 , 1913 , will amount to $ 700,000 and the interest payable to depositors to $ 300,000 .
the cost of supplies , equipment , and salaries is $ 700,000 .
it thus appears that the system lacks $ 300,000 a year of paying interest and expenses .
it is estimated , however , that when the deposits have reached the sum of $ 50,000,000 , which at the present rate they soon will do , the system will be self - sustaining .
by law the postal savings funds deposited at each post office are required to be redeposited in local banks .
state and national banks to the number of 7,357 have qualified as depositories for these funds .
such deposits are secured by bonds aggregating $ 54,000,000 .
of this amount , $ 37,000,000 represent municipal bonds .
in several messages i have favored and recommended the adoption of a system of parcel post .
in the postal appropriation act of last year a general system was provided and its installation was directed by the 1st of january .
this has entailed upon the post office department a great deal of very heavy labor , but the postmaster general informs me that on the date selected , to wit , the 1st of january , near at hand , the department will be in readiness to meet successfully the requirements of the public .
a trial , during the past three years , of the system of classifying fourth - class postmasters in that part of the country lying between the mississippi river on the west , canada on the north , the atlantic ocean on the east , and mason and dixon 's line on the south has been sufficiently satisfactory to justify the postal authorities in recommending the extension of the order to include all the fourth - class postmasters in the country .
in september , 1912 , upon the suggestion of the postmaster general , i directed him to prepare an order which should put the system in effect , except in alaska , guam , hawaii , porto rico , and samoa .
under date of october 15 1 issued such an order which affected 36,000 postmasters .
by the order the post offices were divided into groups a and b. group a includes all postmasters whose compensation is $ 500 or more , and group b those whose compensation is less than that sum .
different methods are pursued in the selection of the postmasters for group a and group , b. criticism has been made of this order on the ground that the motive for it was political .
nothing could be further from the truth .
the order was made before the election and in the interest of efficient public service .
i have several times requested congress to give me authority to put first- , second- , and third - class postmasters , and all other local officers , including internal - revenue officers , customs officers , united states marshals , and the local agents of the other departments under the classification of the civil - service law by taking away the necessity for confirming such appointments by the senate .
i deeply regret the failure of congress to follow these recommendations .
the change would have taken out of politics practically every local officer and would have entirely cured the evils growing out of what under the present law must always remain a remnant of the spoils system .
it is expected that the establishment of a parcel post on january 1st will largely increase the amount of mail matter to be transported by the railways , and congress should be prompt to provide a way by which they may receive the additional compensation to which they will be entitled .
the postmaster general urges that the department 's plan for a complete readjustment of the system of paying the railways for carrying the mails be adopted , substituting space for weight as the principal factor in fixing compensation .
under this plan it will be possible to determine without delay what additional payment should be made on account of the parcel post .
the postmaster general 's recommendation is based on the results of a far - reaching investigation begun early in the administration with the object of determining what it costs the railways to carry the mails .
the statistics obtained during the course of the inquiry show that while many of the railways , and particularly the large systems , were making profits from mail transportations , certain of the lines were actually carrying the mails at a loss .
as a result of the investigation the department , after giving the subject careful consideration , decided to urge the abandonment of the present plan of fixing compensation on the basis of the weight of the mails carried , a plan that has proved to be exceedingly expensive and in other respects unsatisfactory .
under the method proposed the railway companies will annually submit to the department reports showing what it costs them to carry the mails , and this cost will be apportioned on the basis of the car space engaged , payment to be allowed at the rate thus determined in amounts that will cover the cost and a reasonable profit .
if a railway is not satisfied with the manner in which the department apportions the cost in fixing compensation , it is to have the right , tinder the new plan , of appealing to the interstate commerce commission .
this feature of the proposed law would seem to insure a fair treatment of the railways .
it is hoped that congress will give the matter immediate attention and that the method of compensation recommended by the department or some other suitable plan will be promptly authorized .
the interior department , in the problems of administration included within its jurisdiction , presents more difficult questions than any other .
this has been due perhaps to temporary causes of a political character , but more especially to the inherent difficulty in the performance of some of the functions which are assigned to it .
its chief duty is the guardianship of the public domain and the disposition of that domain to private ownership under homestead , mining , and other laws , by which patents from the government to the individual are authorized on certain conditions .
during the last decade the public seemed to become suddenly aware that a very large part of its domain had passed from its control into private ownership , under laws not well adapted to modern conditions , and also that in the doing of this the provisions of existing law and regulations adopted in accordance with law had not been strictly observed , and that in the transfer of title much fraud had intervened , to the pecuniary benefit of dishonest persons .
there arose thereupon a demand for conservation of the public domain , its protection against fraudulent diminution , and the preservation of that part of it from private acquisition which it seemed necessary to keep for future public use .
the movement , excellent in the intention which prompted it , and useful in its results , has nevertheless had some bad effects , which the western country has recently been feeling and in respect of which there is danger of a reaction toward older abuses unless we can attain the golden mean , which consists in the prevention of the mere expioitation of the public domain for private purposes while at the same , time facilitating its development for the benefit of the local public .
the land laws need complete revision to secure proper conservation on the one hand of land that ought to be kept in public use and , on the other hand , prompt disposition of those lands which ought to be disposed in private ownership or turned over to private use by properly guarded leases .
in addition to this there are not enough officials in our land department with legal knowledge sufficient promptly to make the decisions which are called for .
the whole land - laws system should be reorganized , and not until it is reorganized , will decisions be made as promptly as they ought , or will men who have earned title to public land under the statute receive their patents within a reasonably short period .
the present administration has done what it could in this regard , but the necessity for reform and change by a revision of the laws and an increase and reorganization of the force remains , and i submit to congress the wisdom of a full examination of this subject , in order that a very large and important part of our people in the west may be relieved from a just cause of irritation .
i invite your attention to the discussion by the secretary of the interior of the need for legislation with respect to mining claims , leases of coal lands in this country and in alaska , and for similar disposition of oil , phosphate , and potash lands , and also to his discussion of the proper use to be made of water - power sites held by the government .
many of these lands are now being withheld from use by the public under the general withdrawal act which was passed by the last congress .
that act was not for the purpose of disposing of the question , but it was for the purpose of preserving the lands until the question could be solved .
i earnestly urge that the matter is of the highest importance to our western fellow citizens and ought to command the immediate attention of the legislative branch of the government .
another function which the interior department has to perform is that of the guardianship of indians .
in spite of everything which has been said in criticism of the policy of our government toward the indians , the amount of wealth which is now held by it for these wards per capita shows that the government has been generous ; but the management of so large an estate , with the great variety of circumstances that surround each tribe and each case , calls for the exercise of the highest business discretion , and the machinery provided in the indian bureau for the discharge of this function is entirely inadequate .
the position of indian commissioner demands the exercise of business ability of the first order , and it is difficult to secure such talent for the salary provided .
the condition of health of the indian and the prevalence in the tribes of curable diseases has been exploited recently in the press .
in a message to congress at its last session i brought this subject to its attention and invited a special appropriation , in order that our facilities for overcoming diseases among the indians might be properlv increased , but no action was then taken by congress on the subject , nor has such appropriation been made since .
the commission appointed by authority of the congress to report on proper method of securing railroad development in alaska is formulating its report , and i expect to have an opportunity before the end of this session to submit its recommendations .
the far - reaching utility of the educational system carried on by the department of agriculture for the benefit of the farmers of our country calls for no elaboration .
each year there is a growth in the variety of facts which it brings out for the benefit of the farmer , and each year confirms the wisdom of the expenditure of the appropriations made for that department .
the department of agriculture is charged with the execution of the pure - food law .
the passage of this encountered much opposition from manufacturers and others who feared the effect upon their business of the enforcement of its provisions .
the opposition aroused the just indignation of the public , and led to an intense sympathy with the severe and rigid enforcement of the provisions of the new law .
it had to deal in many instances with the question whether or not products of large business enterprises , in the form of food preparations , were deleterious to the public health ; and while in a great majority of instances this issue was easily determinable , there were not a few cases in which it was hard to draw the line between a useful and a harmful food preparation .
in cases like this when a decision involved the destruction of great business enterprises representing the investment of large capital and the expenditure of great energy and ability , the danger of serious injustice was very considerable in the enforcement of a new law under the spur of great public indignation .
the public officials charged with executing the law might do injustice in heated controversy through unconscious pride of opinion and obstinacy of conclusion .
for this reason president roosevelt felt justified in creating a board of experts , known as the remsen board , to whom in cases of much importance an appeal might be taken and a review had of a decision of the bureau of chemistry in the agricultural department .
i heartily agree that it was wise to create this board in order that injustice might not be done .
the questions which arise are not generally those involving palpable injury to health , but they are upon the narrow and doubtful line in respect of which it is better to be in some error not dangerous than to be radically destructive .
i think that the time has come for congress to recognize the necessity for some such tribunal of appeal and to make specific statutory provision for it .
while we are struggling to suppress an evil of great proportions like that of impure food , we must provide machinery in the law itself to prevent its becoming an instrument of oppression , and we ought to enable those whose business is threatened with annihilation to have some tribunal and some form of appeal in which they have a complete day in court .
i referred in my first message to the question of improving the system of agricultural credits .
the secretary of agriculture has made an investigation into the matter of credits in this country , and i commend a consideration of the information which through his agents he has been able to collect .
it does not in any way minimize the importance of the proposal , but it gives more accurate information upon some of the phases of the question than we have heretofore had .
i commend to congress an examination of the report of the secretary of commerce and labor , and especially that part in which he discusses the office of the bureau of corporations , the value to commerce of a proposed trade commission , and the steps which he has taken to secure the organization of a national chamber of commerce .
i heartily commend his view that the plan of a trade commission which looks to the fixing of prices is altogether impractical and ought not for a moment to be considered as a possible solution of the trust question .
the trust question in the enforcement of the sherman antitrust law is gradually solving itself , is maintaining the principle and restoring the practice of competition , and if the law is quietly but firmly enforced , business will adjust itself to the statutory requirements , and the unrest in commercial circles provoked by the trust discussion will disappear .
in conformity with a joint resolution of congress , an executive proclamation was issued last february , inviting the nations of the world to participate in the panama - pacific international exposition to be held at san francisco to celebrate the construction of the panama , canal .
a sympathetic response was immediately forthcoming , and several nations have already selected the sites for their buildings .
in furtherance of my invitation , a special commission visited european countries during the past summer , and received assurance of hearty cooperation in the task of bringing together a universal industrial , military , and naval display on an unprecedented scale .
it is evident that the exposition will be an accurate mirror of the world 's activities as they appear 400 years after the date of the discovery of the pacific ocean .
it is the duty of the united states to make the nations welcome at san francisco and to facilitate such acquaintance between them and ourselves as will promote the expansion of commerce and familiarize the world with the new trade route through the panama canal .
the action of the state governments and individuals assures a comprehensive exhibit of the resources of this country and of the progress of the people .
this participation by state and individuals should be supplemented by an adequate showing of the varied and unique activities of the national government .
the united states can not with good grace invite foreign governments to erect buildings and make expensive exhibits while itself refusing to participate .
nor would it be wise to forego the opportunity to join with other nations in the inspiring interchange of ideas tending to promote intercourse , friendship , and commerce .
it is the duty of the government to foster and build up commerce through the canal , just as it was the duty of the government to construct it .
i earnestly recommend the appropriation at this session of such a sum as will enable the united states to construct a suitable building , install a governmental exhibit , and otherwise participate in the panama - pacific international exposition in a manner commensurate with the dignity of a nation whose guests are to be the people of the world .
i recommend also such legislation as will facilitate the entry of material intended for exhibition and protect foreign exhibitors against infringement of patents and the unauthorized copying of patterns and designs .
all aliens sent to san francisco to construct and care for foreign buildings and exhibits should be admitted without restraint or embarrassment .
the city of washington is a beautiful city , with a population of 352,936 , of whom 98,667 are colored .
the annual municipal budget is about $ 14,ooo , ooo .
the presence of the national capital and other governmental structures constitutes the chief beauty and interest of the city .
the public grounds are extensive , and the opportunities for improving the city and making it still more attractive are very great .
under a plan adopted some years ago , one half the cost of running the city is paid by taxation upon the property , real and personal , of the citizens and residents , and the other half is borne by the general government .
the city is expanding at a remarkable rate , and this can only be accounted for by the coming here from other parts of the country of well - to - do people who , having finished their business careers elsewhere , build and make this their permanent place of residence .
on the whole , the city as a municipality is very well governed .
it is well lighted , the water supply is good , the streets are well paved , the police force is well disciplined , crime is not flagrant , and while it has purlieus and centers of vice , like other large cities , they are not exploited , they do not exercise any influence or control in the government of the city , and they are suppressed in as far as it has been found practicable .
municipal graft is inconsiderable .
there are interior courts in the city that are noisome and centers of disease and the refuge of criminals , but congress has begun to clean these out , and progress has been made in the case of the most notorious of these , which is known as " willow tree alley . "
this movement should continue .
the mortality for the past year was at the rate of 17.80 per 1,000 of both races ; among the whites it was 14.61 per thousand , and among the blacks 26.12 per thousand .
these are the lowest mortality rates ever recorded in the district .
one of the most crying needs in the government of the district is a tribunal or public authority for the purpose of supervising the corporations engaged in the operation of public utilities .
such a bill is pending in congress and ought to pass .
washington should show itself under the direction of congress to be a city with a model form of government , but as long as such authority over public utilities is withheld from the municipal government , it must always be de- fective .
without undue criticism of the present street railway accommodations , it can be truly said that under the spur of a public utilities commission they might be substantially improved .
while the school system of washington perhaps might be bettered in the economy of its management and the distribution of its buildings , its usefulness has nevertheless greatly increased in recent years , and it now offers excellent facilities for primary and secondary education .
from time to time there is considerable agitation in washington in favor of granting the citizens of the city the franchise and constituting an elective government .
i am strongly opposed to this change .
the history of washington discloses a number of experiments of this kind , which have always been abandoned as unsatisfactory .
the truth is this is a city governed by a popular body , to wit , the congress of the united states , selected from the people of the united states , who own washington .
the people who come here to live do so with the knowledge of the origin of the city and the restrictions , and therefore voluntarily give up the privilege of living in a municipality governed by popular vote .
washington is so unique in its origin and in its use for housing and localizing the sovereignty of the nation that the people who live here must regard its peculiar character and must be content to subject themselves to the control of a body selected by all the people of the nation .
i agree that there are certain inconveniences growing out of the government of a city by a national legislature like congress , and it would perhaps be possible to lessen these by the delegation by congress to the district commissioners of greater legislative power for the enactment of local laws than they now possess , especially those of a police character .
every loyal american has a personal pride in the beauty of washington and in its development and growth .
there is no one with a proper appreciation of our capital city who would favor a niggardly policy in respect to expenditures from the national treasury to add to the attractiveness of this city , which belongs to every citizen of the entire country , and which no citizen visits without a sense of pride of ownership .
we have had restored by a commission of fine arts , at the instance of a committee of the senate , the original plan of the french engineer l'enfant for the city of washington , and we know with great certainty the course which the improvement of washington should take .
why should there be delay in making this improvement in so far as it involves the extension of the parking system and the construction of greatly needed public buildings ?
appropriate buildings for the state department , the department of justice , and the department of commerce and labor have been projected , plans have been approved , and nothing is wanting but the appropriations for the beginning and completion of the structures .
a hall of archives is also badly needed , but nothing has been done toward its construction , although the land for it has long been bought and paid for .
plans have been made for the union of potomac park with the valley of rock creek and rock creek park , and the necessity for the connection between the soldiers ' home and rock creek park calls for no comment .
i ask again why there should be delay in carrying out these plans we have the money in the treasury , the plans are national in their scope , and the improvement should be treated as a national project .
the plan will find a hearty approval throughout the country .
i am quite sure , from the information which i have , that , at comparatively small expense , from that part of the district of columbia which was retroceded to virginia , the portion including the arlington estate , fort myer , and the palisades of the potomac can be acquired by purchase and the jurisdiction of the state of virginia over this land ceded to the nation .
this ought to be done .
the construction of the lincoln memorial and of a memorial bridge from the base of the lincoln monument to arlington would be an appropriate and symbolic expression of the union of the north and the south at the capital of the nation .
i urge upon congress the appointment of a commission to undertake these national improvements , and to submit a plan for their execution ; and when the plan has been submitted and approved , and the work carried out , washington will really become what it ought to be - the most beautiful city in the world .

to the senate and house of representatives : 
 in my annual message i reserved the subject of the conservation of our national resources for discussion in a special message , as follows : 
 " in several departments there is presented the necessity for legislation looking to the further conservation of our national resources , and the subject is one of such importance as to require a more detailed and extended discussion than can be entered upon in this communication .
for that reason i shall take an early opportunity to send a special message to congress on the subject of the improvement of our waterways ; upon the reclamation and irrigation of arid , semiarid , and swamp lands ; upon the preservation of our forests and the reforesting of suitable areas ; upon the reclassification of the public domain with a view of separating from agricultural settlement mineral , coal , and phosphate lands and sites belonging to the government bordering on streams suitable for the utilization of water power . "
in 1860 we had a public domain of 1,055,911,288 acres .
we have now 731,354,081 acres , confined largely to the mountain ranges and the arid and semiarid plains .
we have , in addition , 368,035,975 acres of land in alaska .
the public lands were , during the earliest administrations , treated as a national asset for the liquidation of the public debt and as a source of reward for our soldiers and sailors .
later on they were donated in large amounts in aid of the construction of wagon roads and railways , in order to open up regions in the west then almost inaccessible .
all the principal land statutes were enacted more than a quarter of a century ago .
the homestead act , the preemption and timber - culture act , the coal land and the mining acts were among these .
the rapid disposition of the public lands under the early statutes , and the lax methods of distribution prevailing , due , i think , to the belief that these lands should rapidly pass into private ownership , gave rise to the impression that the public domain was legitimate prey for the unscrupulous , and that it was not contrary to good morals to circumvent the land laws .
this prodigal manner of disposition resulted in the passing of large areas of valuable land and many of our national resources into the hands of persons who felt little or no responsibility for promoting the national welfare through their development .
the truth is that title to millions of acres of public lands was fraudulently obtained , and that the right to recover a large part of such lands for the government long since ceased by reason of statutes of limitations .
there has developed in recent years a deep concern in the public mind respecting the preservation and proper use of our national resources .
this has been particularly directed toward the conservation of the resources of the public domain .
the problem is how to save and how to utilize , how to conserve and still develop ; for no sane person can contend that it is for the common good that nature 's blessings are only for unborn generations .
among the most noteworthy reforms initiated by my distinguished predecessor were the vigorous prosecution of land frauds and the bringing to public attention of the necessity for preserving the remaining public domain from further spoliation , for the maintenance and extension of our forest resources , and for the enactment of laws amending the obsolete statutes so as to retain governmental control over that part of the public domain in which there are valuable deposits of coal , of oil , and of phosphate , and , in addition thereto , to preserve control , under conditions favorable to the public , of the lands along the streams in which the fall of water can be made to generate power to be transmitted in the form of electricity many miles to the point of its use , known as " water - power " sites .
the investigations into violations of the public land laws and the prosecution of land frauds have been vigorously continued under my administration , as has been the withdrawal of coal lands for classification and valuation and the temporary withholding of power sites .
since march 4 , 1909 , temporary withdrawals of power sites have been made on 102 streams and these withdrawals therefore cover 229 per cent .
more streams than were covered by the withdrawals made prior to that date .
the present statutes , except so far as they dispose of the precious metals and the purely agricultural lands , are not adapted to carry out the modern view of the best disposition of public lands to private ownership , under conditions offering on the one hand sufficient inducement to private capital to take them over for proper development , with restrictive conditions on the other which shall secure to the public that character of control which will prevent a monopoly or misuse of the lands or their products .
the power of the secretary of the interior to withdraw from the operation of existing statutes tracts of land , the disposition of which under such statutes would be detrimental to the public interest , is not clear or satisfactory .
this power has been exercised in the interest of the public , with the hope that congress might affirm the action of the executive by laws adapted to the new conditions .
unfortunately , congress has not thus far fully acted on the recommendations of the executive , and the question as to what the executive is to do is , under the circumstances , full of difficulty .
it seems to me that it is the duty of congress now , by a statute , to validate the withdrawals which have been made by the secretary of the interior and the president , and to authorize the secretary of the interior temporarily to withdraw lands pending submission to congress of recommendations as to legislation to meet conditions or emergencies as they arise .
one of the most pressing needs in the matter of public - land reform is that lands should be classified according to their principal value or use .
this ought to be done by that department whose force is best adapted to that work .
it should be done by the interior department through the geological survey .
much of the confusion , fraud , and contention which has existed in the past has arisen from the lack of an official and determinative classification of the public lands and their contents .
it is now proposed to dispose of agricultural lands as such , and at the same time to reserve for other disposition the treasure of coal , oil , asphaltum , natural gas , and phosphate contained therein .
this may be best accomplished by separating the right to mine from the title to the surface , giving the necessary use of so much of the latter as may be required for the extraction of the deposits .
the surface might be disposed of as agricultural land under the general agricultural statutes , while the coal or other mineral could be disposed of by lease on a royalty basis , with provisions requiring a certain amount of development each year ; and in order to prevent the use and cession of such lands with others of similar character so as to constitute a monopoly forbidden by law , the lease should contain suitable provision subjecting to forfeiture the interest of persons participating in such monopoly .
such law should apply to alaska as well as to the united states .
it is exceedingly difficult to frame a statute to retain government control over a property to be developed by private capital in such manner as to secure the governmental purpose and at the same time not to frighten away the investment of the necessary capital .
hence , it may be necessary by laws that are really only experimental to determine from their practical operation what is the best method of securing the result aimed at .
the extent of the value of phosphate is hardly realized , and with the need that there will be for it as the years roll on and the necessity for fertilizing the land shall become more acute , this will be a product which will probably attract the greed of monopolists .
with respect to the public land which lies along the streams offering opportunity to convert water power into transmissible electricity , another important phase of the public - land question is presented .
there are valuable water - power sites through all the public - land states .
the opinion is held that the transfer of sovereignty from the federal government to the territorial government as they become states included the water power in the rivers except so far as that owned by riparian proprietors .
i do not think it necessary to go into a discussion of this somewhat mooted question of law .
it seems to me sufficient to say that the man who owns and controls the land along the stream from which the power is to be converted and transmitted owns land which is indispensable to the conversion and use of that power .
i can not conceive how the power in streams flowing through public lands can be made available at all except by using the land itself as the site for the construction of the plant by which the power is generated and converted and securing a right of way thereover for transmission lines .
under these conditions , if the government owns the adjacent land - indeed , if the government is the riparian owner -- it may control the use of the water power by imposing proper conditions on the disposition of land necessary in the creation and utilization of the water power .
the development in electrical appliances for the conversion of the water power into electricity to be transmitted long distances has progressed so far that it is no longer problematical , but it is a certain inference that in the future the power of the water falling in the streams to a large extent will take the place of natural fuels .
in the disposition of that domain already granted , many water - power sites have come under absolute ownership , and may drift into one ownership , so that all the water power under private ownership shall be a monopoly .
if , however , the water - power sites now owned by the government -- and there are enough of them -- shall be disposed of to private persons for the investment of their capital in such a way as to prevent their union for purposes of monopoly with other waterpower sites , and under conditions that shall limit the right of use to not exceeding fifty years with proper means for determining a reasonable graduated rental , and with some equitable provision for fixing terms of renewal , it would seem entirely possible to prevent the absorption of these most useful lands by a power monopoly .
as long as the government retains control and can prevent their improper union with other plants , competition must be maintained and prices kept reasonable .
in considering the conservation of the natural resources of the country , the feature that transcends all others , including woods , waters , minerals , is the soil of the country .
it is incumbent upon the government to foster by all available means the resources of the country that produce the food of the people .
to this end the conservation of the soils of the country should be cared for with all means at the government 's disposal .
their productive powers should have the attention of our scientists that we may conserve the new soils , improve the old soils , drain wet soils , ditch swamp soils , levee river overflow soils , grow trees on thin soils , pasture hillside soils , rotate crops on all soils , discover methods for cropping dry - land soils , find grasses and legumes for all soils , feed grains and mill feeds on the farms where they originate , that the soils from which they come may be enriched .
a work of the utmost importance to inform and instruct the public on this chief branch of the conservation of our resources is being carried on successfully in the department of agriculture ; but it ought not to escape public attention that state action in addition to that of the department of agriculture ( as for instance in the drainage of swamp lands ) is essential to the best treatment of the soils in the manner above indicated .
the act by which , in semiarid parts of the public domain , the area of the homestead has been enlarged from 160 to 320 acres has resulted most beneficially in the extension of " dry farming , " and in the demonstration which has been made of the possibility , through a variation in the character and mode of culture , of raising substantial crops without the presence of such a supply of water as heretofore has been thought to be necessary for agriculture .
but there are millions of acres of completely arid land in the public domain which , by the establishment of reservoirs for the storing of water and the irrigation of the lands , may be made much more fruitful and productive than the best lands in a climate where the moisture comes from the clouds .
congress recognized the importance of this method of artificial distribution of water on the arid lands by the passage of the reclamation act .
the proceeds of the public lands creates the fund to build the works needed to store and furnish the necessary water , and it was left to the secretary of the interior to determine what projects should be selected among those suggested , and to direct the reclamation service , with the funds at hand and through the engineers in its employ , to construct the works .
no one can visit the far west and the country of arid and semiarid lands without being convinced that this is one of the most important methods of the conservation of our natural resources that the government has entered upon .
it would appear that over 30 projects have been undertaken , and that a few of these are likely to be unsuccessful because of lack of water , or for other reasons , but generally the work which has been done has been well done , and many important engineering problems have been met and solved .
one of the difficulties which has arisen is that too many projects in view of the available funds have been set on foot .
the funds available under the reclamation statute are inadequate to complete these projects within a reasonable time .
and yet the projects have been begun ; settlers have been invited to take up and , in many instances , have taken up , the public land within the projects , relying upon their prompt completion .
the failure to complete the projects for their benefit is , in effect , a breach of faith and leaves them in a most distressed condition .
i urge that the nation ought to afford the means to lift them out of the very desperate condition in which they now are .
this condition does not indicate any excessive waste or any corruption on the part of the reclamation service .
it only indicates an overzealous desire to extend the benefit of reclamation to as many acres and as many states as possible .
i recommend therefore that authority be given to issue not exceeding $ 30,000,000 of bonds from time to time , as the secretary of the interior shall find it necessary , the proceeds to be applied to the completion of the projects already begun and their proper extension , and the bonds running ten years or more to be taken up by the proceeds of returns to the reclamation fund , which returns , as the years go on , will increase rapidly in amount .
there is no doubt at all that if these bonds were to be allowed to run ten years , the proceeds from the public lands , together with the rentals for water furnished through the completed enterprises , would quickly create a sinking fund large enough to retire the bonds within the time specified .
i hope that , while the statute shall provide that these bonds are to be paid out of the reclamation fund , it will be drawn in such a way as to secure interest at the lowest rate , and that the credit of the united states will be pledged for their redemption .
i urge consideration of the recommendations of the secretary of the interior in his annual report for amendments of the reclamation act , proposing other relief for settlers on these projects .
respecting the comparatively small timbered areas on the public domain not included in national forests because of their isolation or their special value for agricultural or mineral purposes , it is apparent from the evils resulting by virtue of the imperfections of existing laws for the disposition of timber lands that the acts of june 3 , 1878 , should be repealed and a law enacted for the disposition of the timber at public sale , the lands after the removal of the timber to be subject to appropriation under the agricultural or mineral land laws .
what i have said is really an epitome of the recommendations of the secretary of the interior in respect to the future conservation of the public domain in his present annual report .
he has given close attention to the problem of disposition of these lands under such conditions as to invite the private capital necessary to their development on the one hand , and the maintenance of the restrictions necessary to prevent monopoly and abuse from absolute ownership on the other .
these recommendations are incorporated in bills he has prepared , and they are at the disposition of the congress .
i earnestly recommend that all the suggestions which he has made with respect to these lands shall be embodied in statutes , and , especially , that the withdrawals already made shall be validated so far as necessary and that the authority of the secretary of the interior to withdraw lands for the purpose of submitting recommendations as to future disposition of them where new legislation is needed shall be made complete and unquestioned .
the forest reserves of the united states , some 190,000,000 acres in extent , are under the control of the department of agriculture , with authority adequate to preserve them and to extend their growth so far as that may be practicable .
the importance of the maintenance of our forests can not be exaggerated .
the possibility of a scientific treatment of forests so that they shall be made to yield a large return in timber without really reducing the supply has been demonstrated in other countries , and we should work toward the standard set by them as far as their methods are applicable to our conditions .
upwards of 400,000,000 acres of forest land in this country are in private ownership , but only 3 per cent .
of it is being treated scientifically and with a view to the maintenance of the forests .
the part played by the forests in the equalization of the supply of water on watersheds is a matter of discussion and dispute , but the general benefit to be derived by the public from the extension of forest lands on watersheds and the promotion of the growth of trees in places that are now denuded and that once had great flourishing forests , goes without saying .
the control to be exercised over private owners in their treatment of the forests which they own is a matter for state and not national regulation , because there is nothing in the constitution that authorizes the federal government to exercise any control over forests within a state , unless the forests are owned in a proprietary way by the federal government .
it has been proposed , and a bill for the purpose passed the lower house in the last congress , that the national government appropriate a certain amount each year out of the receipts from the forestry business of the government to institute reforestation at the sources of certain navigable streams , to be selected by the geological survey , with a view to determining the practicability of thus improving and protecting the streams for federal purposes .
i think a moderate expenditure for each year for this purpose , for a period of five or ten years , would be of the utmost benefit in the development of our forestry system .
i come now to the improvement of the inland waterways .
he would be blind , indeed , who did not realize that the people of the entire west , and especially those of the mississippi valley , have been aroused to the need there is for the improvement of our inland waterways .
the mississippi river , with the missouri on the one hand and the ohio on the other , would seem to offer a great natural means of interstate transportation and traffic .
how far , if properly improved , they would relieve the railroads or supplement them in respect to the bulkier and cheaper commodities is a matter of conjecture .
no enterprise ought to be undertaken the cost of which is not definitely ascertained and the benefit and advantages of which are not known and assured by competent engineers and other authority .
when , however , a project of a definite character for the improvement of a waterway has been developed so that the plans have been drawn , the cost definitely estimated , and the traffic which will be accommodated is reasonably probable , i think it is the duty of congress to undertake the project and make provision therefor in the proper appropriation bill .
one of the projects which answers the description i have given is that of introducing dams into the ohio river from pittsburg to cairo , so as to maintain at all seasons of the year , by slack water , a depth of 9 feet .
upward of seven of these dams have already been constructed and six are under construction , while the total required is fifty - four .
the remaining cost is known to be $ 63,000,000 .
it seems to me that in the development of our inland waterways it would be wise to begin with this particular project and carry it through as rapidly as may be .
i assume from reliable information that it can be constructed economically in twelve years .
what has been said of the ohio river is true in a less complete way of the improvement of the upper mississippi from st. paul to st. louis , to a constant depth of 6 feet , and of the missouri , from kansas city to st. louis , to a constant depth of 6 feet and from st. louis to cairo to a depth of 8 feet .
these projects have been pronounced practical by competent boards of army engineers , their cost has been estimated , and there is business which will follow the improvement .
i recommend , therefore , that the present congress , in the river and harbor bill , make provision for continuing contracts to complete these improvements .
as these improvements are being made , and the traffic encouraged by them shows itself of sufficient importance , the improvement of the mississippi beyond cairo down to the gulf , which is now going on with the maintenance of a depth of 9 feet everywhere , may be changed to another and greater depth if the necessity for it shall appear to arise out of the traffic which can be delivered on the river at cairo .
i am informed that the investigation by the waterways commission in europe shows that the existence of a waterway by no means assures traffic unless there is traffic adapted to water carriage at cheap rates at one end or the other of the stream .
it also appears in europe that the depth of the non - tidal streams is rarely more than 6 feet , and never more than 10 .
but it is certain that enormous quantities of merchandise are transported over the rivers and canals in germany and france and england , and it is also certain that the existence of such methods of traffic materially affects the rates which the railroads charge , and it is the best regulator of those rates that we have , not even excepting the governmental regulation through the interstate commerce commission .
for this reason , i hope that this congress will take such steps that it may be called the inaugurator of the new system of inland waterways .
for reasons which it is not necessary here to state , congress has seen fit to order an investigation into the interior department and the forest service of the agricultural department .
the results of that investigation are not needed to determine the value of , and the necessity for , the new legislation which i have recommended in respect to the public lands and in respect to reclamation .
i earnestly urge that the measures recommended be taken up and disposed of promptly , without awaiting the investigation which has been determined upon .

to the senate and house of representatives : 
 in my annual message of december 6 , 1910 , i stated that the policy of broader and closer trade relations with the dominion of canada , which was initiated in the adjustment of the maximum and minimum provisions of the tariff act of august 5 , 1909 , had proved mutually beneficial and that it justified further efforts for the readjustment of the commercial relations of the two countries .
i also informed you that , by my direction , the secretary of state had dispatched two representatives of the department of state as special commissioners to ottawa to confer with representatives of the dominion government , that they were authorized to take steps to formulate a reciprocal trade agreement , and that the ottawa conferences thus begun , had been adjourned to be resumed in washington .
on the 7th of the present month two cabinet ministers came to washington as representatives of the dominion government , and the conferences were continued between them and the secretary of state .
the result of the negotiations was that on the 21st instant a reciprocal trade agreement was reached , the text of which is herewith transmitted with accompanying correspondence and other data .
one by one the controversies resulting from the uncertainties which attended the partition of british territory on the american continent at the close of the revolution , and which were inevitable under the then conditions , have been eliminated -- some by arbitration and some by direct negotiation .
the merits of these disputes , many of them extending through a century , need not now be reviewed .
they related to the settlement of boundaries , the definition of rights of navigation , the interpretation of treaties , and many other subjects .
through the friendly sentiments , the energetic efforts , and the broadly patriotic views of successive administrations , and especially of that of my immediate predecessor , all these questions have been settled .
the most acute related to the atlantic fisheries , and this longstanding controversy , after amicable negotiation , was referred to the hague tribunal .
the judgment of that august international court has been accepted by the people of both countries and a satisfactory agreement in pursuance of the judgment has ended completely the controversy .
an equitable arrangement has recently been reached between our interstate commerce commission and the similar body in canada in regard to through rates on the transportation lines between the two countries .
the path having been thus opened for the improvement of commercial relations , a reciprocal trade agreement is the logical sequence of all that has been accomplished in disposing of matters of a diplomatic and controversial character .
the identity of interest of two peoples linked together by race , language , political institutions , and geographical proximity offers the foundation .
the contribution to the industrial advancement of our own country by the migration across the boundary of the thrifty and industrious canadians of english , scotch , and french origin is now repaid by the movement of large numbers of our own sturdy farmers to the northwest of canada , thus giving their labor , their means , and their experience to the development of that section ; with its agricultural possibilities .
the guiding motive in seeking adjustment of trade relations between two countries so situated geographically should be to give play to productive forces as far as practicable , regardless of political boundaries .
while equivalency should be sought in an arrangement of this character , an exact balance of financial gain is neither imperative nor attainable .
no yardstick can measure the benefits to the two peoples of this freer commercial intercourse and no trade agreement should be judged wholly by custom house statistics .
we have reached a stage in our own development that calls for a statesmanlike and broad view of our future economic status and its requirements .
we have drawn upon our natural resources in such a way as to invite attention to their necessary limit .
this has properly aroused effort to conserve them , to avoid their waste , and to restrict their use to our necessities .
we have so increased in population and in our consumption of food products and the other necessities of life , hitherto supplied largely from our own country , that unless we materially increase our production we can see before us a change in our economic position , from that of a country selling to the world food and natural products of the farm and forest , to one consuming and importing them .
excluding cotton , which is exceptional , a radical change is already shown in our exports in the falling off in the amount of our agricultural products sold abroad and a corresponding marked increase in our manufactures exported .
a farsighted policy requires that if we can enlarge our supply of natural resources , and especially of food products and the necessities of life , without substantial injury to any of our producing and manufacturing classes , we should take steps to do so now .
we have on the north of us a country contiguous to ours for three thousand miles , with natural resources of the same character as ours which have not been drawn upon as ours have been , and in the development of which the conditions as to wages and character of the wage earner and transportation to market differ but little from those prevailing with us .
the difference is not greater than it is between different states of our own country or between different provinces of the dominion of canada .
ought we not , then , to arrange a commercial agreement with canada , if we can , by which we shall have direct access to her great supply of natural products without an obstructing or prohibitory tariff ?
this is not a violation of the protective principle , as that has been authoritatively announced by those who uphold it , because that principle does not call for a tariff between this country and one whose conditions as to production , population , and wages are so like ours , and when our common boundary line of three thousand miles in itself must make a radical distinction between our commercial treatment of canada and of any other country .
the dominion has greatly prospered .
it has an active , aggressive , and intelligent people .
they are coming to the parting of the ways .
they must soon decide , whether they are to regard themselves as isolated permanently from our markets by a perpetual wall or whether we are to be commercial friends .
if we give them reason to take the former view , can we complain if they adopt methods denying access to certain of their natural resources except upon conditions quite unfavorable to us ?
a notable instance of such a possibility may be seen in the conditions surrounding the supply of pulp wood and the manufacture of print paper , for which we have made a conditional provision in the agreement , believed to be equitable .
should we not now , therefore , before their policy has become too crystallized and fixed for change , meet them in a spirit of real concession , facilitate commerce between the two countries , and thus greatly increase the natural resources available to our people ?
i do not wish to hold out the prospect that the unrestricted interchange of food products will greatly and at once reduce their cost to the people of this country .
moreover , the present small amount of canadian surplus for export as compared with that of our own production and consumption would make the reduction gradual .
excluding the element of transportation , the price of staple food products , especially of cereals , is much the same the world over , and the recent increase in price has been the result of a world - wide cause .
but a source of supply as near as canada would certainly help to prevent speculative fluctuations , would steady local price movements , and would postpone the effect of a further world increase in the price of leading commodities entering into the cost of living , if that be inevitable .
in the reciprocal trade agreement numerous additions are made to the free list .
these include not only food commodities , such as cattle , fish , wheat and other grains , fresh vegetables , fruits , and dairy products , but also rough lumber and raw materials useful to our own industries .
free lumber we ought to have .
by giving our people access to canadian forests we shall reduce the consumption of our own , which , in the hands of comparatively few owners , now have a value that requires the enlargement of our available timber resources .
natural , and especially food , products being placed on the free list , the logical development of a policy of reciprocity in rates on secondary food products , or foodstuffs partly manufactured , is , where they can not also be entirely exempted from duty , to lower the duties in accord with the exemption of the raw material from duty .
this has been followed in the trade agreement which has been negotiated .
as an example , wheat is made free and the rate on flour is equalized on a lower basis .
in the same way , live animals being made free , the duties on fresh meats and on secondary meat products and on canned meats are substantially lowered .
fresh fruits and vegetables being placed on the free list , the duties on canned goods of these classes are reduced .
both countries in their industrial development have to meet the competition of lower priced labor in other parts of the world .
both follow the policy of encouraging the development of home industries by protective duties within reasonable limits .
this has made it difficult to extend the principle of reciprocal rates to many manufactured commodities , but after much negotiation and effort we have succeeded in doing so in various and important instances .
the benefit to our widespread agricultural implement industry from the reduction of canadian duties in the agreement is clear .
similarly the new , widely distributed and expanding motor vehicle industry of the united states is given access to the dominion market on advantageous terms .
my purpose in making a reciprocal trade agreement with canada has been not only to obtain one which would be mutually advantageous to both countries , but one which also would be truly national in its scope as applied to our own country and would be of benefit to all sections .
the currents of business and the transportation facilities that will be established forward and back across the border can not but inure to the benefit of the boundary states .
some readjustments may be needed , but in a very short period the advantage of the free commercial exchange between communities separated only by short distances will strikingly manifest itself .
that the broadening of the sources of food supplies , that the opening of the timber resources of the dominion to our needs , that the addition to the supply of raw materials , will be limited to no particular section does not require demonstration .
the same observation applies to the markets which the dominion offers us in exchange .
as an illustration , it has been found possible to obtain free entry into canada for fresh fruits and vegetables -- a matter of special value to the south and to the pacific coast in disposing of their products in their season .
it also has been practicable to obtain free entry for the cottonseed oil of the south-- a most important product with a rapidly expanding consumption in the dominion .
the entire foreign trade of canada in the last fiscal year , 1910 , was $ 655,000,000 .
the imports were $ 376,000,000 , and of this amount the united states contributed more than $ 223,000,000 .
the reduction in the duties imposed by canada will largely increase this amount and give us even a larger share of her market than we now enjoy , great as that is .
the data accompanying the text of the trade agreement exhibit in detail the facts which are here set forth briefly and in outline only .
they furnish full information on which the legislation recommended may be based .
action on the agreement submitted will not interfere with such revision of our own tariff on imports from all countries as congress may decide to adopt .
reciprocity with canada must necessarily be chiefly confined in its effect on the cost of living to food and forest products .
the question of the cost of clothing as affected by duty on textiles and their raw materials , so much mooted , is not within the scope of an agreement with canada , because she raises comparatively few wool sheep , and her textile manufactures are unimportant .
this trade agreement , if entered into , will cement the friendly relations with the dominion which have resulted from the satisfactory settlement of the controversies that have lasted for a century , and further promote good feeling between kindred peoples .
it will extend the market for numerous products of the united states among the inhabitants of a prosperous neighboring country with an increasing population and an increasing purchasing power .
it will deepen and widen the sources of food supply in contiguous territory , and will facilitate the movement and distribution of these foodstuffs .
the geographical proximity , the closer relation of blood , common sympathies , and identical moral and social ideas furnish very real and striking reasons why this agreement ought to be viewed from a high plane .
since becoming a nation , canada has been our good neighbor , immediately contiguous across a wide continent without artificial or natural barrier except navigable waters used in common .
she has cost us nothing in the way of preparations for defense against her possible assault , and she never will .
she has sought to agree with us quickly when differences have disturbed our relations .
she shares with us common traditions and aspirations .
i feel i have correctly interpreted the wish of the american people by expressing in the arrangement now submitted to congress for its approval , their desire for a more intimate and cordial relationship with canada .
i therefore earnestly hope that the measure will be promptly enacted into law .

the relations of the united states with all foreign governments have continued upon the normal basis of amity and good understanding , and are very generally satisfactory .
pursuant to the provisions of the general treaty of arbitration concluded between the united states and great britain , april 4 , 1908 , a special agreement was entered into between the two countries on january 27 , 1909 , for the submission of questions relating to the fisheries on the north atlantic coast to a tribunal to be formed from members of the permanent court of arbitration at the hague .
in accordance with the provisions of the special agreement the printed case of each government was , on october 4 last , submitted to the other and to the arbitral tribunal at the hague , and the counter case of the united states is now in course of preparation .
the american rights under the fisheries article of the treaty of 1818 have been a cause of difference between the united states and great britain for nearly seventy years .
the interests involved are of great importance to the american fishing industry , and the final settlement of the controversy will remove a source of constant irritation and complaint .
this is the first case involving such great international questions which has been submitted to the permanent court of arbitration at the hague .
the treaty between the united states and great britain concerning the canadian international boundary , concluded april 11 , 1908 , authorizes the appointment of two commissioners to define and mark accurately the international boundary line between the united states and the dominion of canada in the waters of the passamaquoddy bay , and provides for the exchange of briefs within the period of six months .
the briefs were duly presented within the prescribed period , but as the commissioners failed to agree within six months after the exchange of the printed statements , as required by the treaty , it has now become necessary to resort to the arbitration provided for in the article .
the international fisheries commission appointed pursuant to and under the authority of the convention of april 11 , 1908 , between the united states and great britain , has completed a system of uniform and common international regulations for the protection and preservation of the food fishes in international boundary waters of the united states and canada .
the regulations will be duly submitted to congress with a view to the enactment of such legislation as will be necessary under the convention to put them into operation .
the convention providing for the settlement of international differences between the united states and canada , including the apportionment between the two countries of certain of the boundary waters and the appointment of commissioners to adjust certain other questions , signed on the 11th day of january , 1909 , and to the ratification of which the senate gave its advice and consent on march 3 , 1909 , has not yet been ratified on the part of great britain .
commissioners have been appointed on the part of the united states to act jointly with commissioners on the part of canada in examining into the question of obstructions in the st. john river between maine and new brunswick , and to make recommendations for the regulation of the uses thereof , and are now engaged in this work .
negotiations for an international conference to consider and reach an arrangement providing for the preservation and protection of the fur seals in the north pacific are in progress with the governments of great britain , japan , and russia .
the attitude of the governments interested leads me to hope for a satisfactory settlement of this question as the ultimate outcome of the negotiations .
the second peace conference recently held at the hague adopted a convention for the establishment of an international prize court upon the joint proposal of delegations of the united states , france , germany and great britain .
the law to be observed by the tribunal in the decision of prize cases was , however , left in an uncertain and therefore unsatisfactory state .
article 7 of the convention provided that the court was to be governed by the provisions of treaties existing between the belligerents , but that " in the absence of such provisions , the court shall apply the rules of international law .
if no generally recognized rule exists , the court shall give judgment in accordance with the general principles of justice and equity . "
as , however , many questions in international maritime law are understood differently and therefore interpreted differently in various countries , it was deemed advisable not to intrust legislative powers to the proposed court , but to determine the rules of law properly applicable in a conference of the representative maritime nations .
pursuant to an invitation of great britain a conference was held at london from december 2 , 1908 , to february 26 , 1909 , in which the following powers participated : the united states , austria - hungary , france , germany , great britain , italy , japan , the netherlands , russia and spain .
the conference resulted in the declaration of london , unanimously agreed to and signed by the participating powers , concerning among other matters , the highly important subjects of blockade , contraband , the destruction of neutral prizes , and continuous voyages .
the declaration of london is an eminently satisfactory codification of the international maritime law , and it is hoped that its reasonableness and fairness will secure its general adoption , as well as remove one of the difficulties standing in the way of the establishment of an international prize court .
under the authority given in the sundry civil appropriation act , approved march 4 , 1909 , the united states was represented at the international conference on maritime law at brussels .
the conference met on the 28th of september last and resulted in the signature ad referendum of a convention for the unification of certain regulations with regard to maritime assistance and salvage and a convention for the unification of certain rules with regard to collisions at sea .
two new projects of conventions which have not heretofore been considered in a diplomatic conference , namely , one concerning the limitation of the responsibility of shipowners , and the other concerning marine mortgages and privileges , have been submitted by the conference to the different governments .
the conference adjourned to meet again on april 11 , 1910 .
the international conference for the purpose of promoting uniform legislation concerning letters of exchange , which was called by the government of the netherlands to meet at the hague in september , 1909 , has been postponed to meet at that capital in june , 1910 .
the united states will be appropriately represented in this conference under the provision therefor already made by congress .
the cordial invitation of belgium to be represented by a fitting display of american progress in the useful arts and inventions at the world 's fair to be held at brussels in 1910 remains to be acted upon by the congress .
mindful of the advantages to accrue to our artisans and producers in competition with their continental rivals , i renew the recommendation heretofore made that provision be made for acceptance of the invitation and adequate representation in the exposition .
the question arising out of the belgian annexation of the independent state of the congo , which has so long and earnestly preoccupied the attention of this government and enlisted the sympathy of our best citizens , is still open , but in a more hopeful stage .
this government was among the foremost in the great work of uplifting the uncivilized regions of africa and urging the extension of the benefits of civilization , education , and fruitful open commerce to that vast domain , and is a party to treaty engagements of all the interested powers designed to carry out that great duty to humanity .
the way to better the original and adventitious conditions , so burdensome to the natives and so destructive to their development , has been pointed out , by observation and experience , not alone of american representatives , but by cumulative evidence from all quarters and by the investigations of belgian agents .
the announced programmes of reforms , striking at many of the evils known to exist , are an augury of better things .
the attitude of the united states is one of benevolent encouragement , coupled with a hopeful trust that the good work , responsibly undertaken and zealously perfected to the accomplishment of the results so ardently desired , will soon justify the wisdom that inspires them and satisfy the demands of humane sentiment throughout the world .
a convention between the united states and germany , under which the nonworking provisions of the german patent law are made inapplicable to the patents of american citizens , was concluded on february 23 , 1909 , and is now in force .
negotiations for similar conventions looking to the placing of american inventors on the same footing as nationals have recently been initiated with other european governments whose laws require the local working of foreign patents .
under an appropriation made at the last session of the congress , a commission was sent on american cruisers to monrovia to investigate the interests of the united states and its citizens in liberia .
upon its arrival at monrovia the commission was enthusiastically received , and during its stay in liberia was everywhere met with the heartiest expressions of good will for the american government and people and the hope was repeatedly expressed on all sides that this government might see its way clear to do something to relieve the critical position of the republic arising in a measure from external as well as internal and financial embarrassments .
the liberian government afforded every facility to the commission for ascertaining the true state of affairs .
the commission also had conferences with representative citizens , interested foreigners and the representatives of foreign governments in monrovia .
visits were made to various parts of the republic and to the neighboring british colony of sierra leone , where the commission was received by and conferred with the governor .
it will be remembered that the interest of the united states in the republic of liberia springs from the historical fact of the foundation of the republic by the colonization of american citizens of the african race .
in an early treaty with liberia there is a provision under which the united states may be called upon for advice or assistance .
pursuant to this provision and in the spirit of the moral relationship of the united states to liberia , that republic last year asked this government to lend assistance in the solution of certain of their national problems , and hence the commission was sent .
the report of our commissioners has just been completed and is now under examination by the department of state .
it is hoped that there may result some helpful measures , in which case it may be my duty again to invite your attention to this subject .
the norwegian government , by a note addressed on january 26 , 1909 , to the department of state , conveyed an invitation to the government of the united states to take part in a conference which it is understood will be held in february or march , 1910 , for the purpose of devising means to remedy existing conditions in the spitzbergen islands .
this invitation was conveyed under the reservation that the question of altering the status of the islands as countries belonging to no particular state , and as equally open to the citizens and subjects of all states , should not be raised .
the european powers invited to this conference by the government of norway were belgium , denmark , france , germany , great britain , russia , sweden and the netherlands .
the department of state , in view of proofs filed with it in 1906 , showing the american possession , occupation , and working of certain coal - bearing lands in spitzbergen , accepted the invitation under the reservation above stated , and under the further reservation that all interests in those islands already vested should be protected and that there should be equality of opportunity for the future .
it was further pointed out that membership in the conference on the part of the united states was qualified by the consideration that this government would not become a signatory to any conventional arrangement concluded by the european members of the conference which would imply contributory participation by the united states in any obligation or responsibility for the enforcement of any scheme of administration which might be devised by the conference for the islands .
his majesty mehmed v , sultan of turkey , recently sent to this country a special embassy to announce his accession .
the quick transition of the government of the ottoman empire from one of retrograde tendencies to a constitutional government with a parliament and with progressive modern policies of reform and public improvement is one of the important phenomena of our times .
constitutional government seems also to have made further advance in persia .
these events have turned the eyes of the world upon the near east .
in that quarter the prestige of the united states has spread widely through the peaceful influence of american schools , universities and missionaries .
there is every reason why we should obtain a greater share of the commerce of the near east since the conditions are more favorable now than ever before .
one of the happiest events in recent pan - american diplomacy was the pacific , independent settlement by the governments of bolivia and peru of a boundary difference between them , which for some weeks threatened to cause war and even to entrain embitterments affecting other republics less directly concerned .
from various quarters , directly or indirectly concerned , the intermediation of the united states was sought to assist in a solution of the controversy .
desiring at all times to abstain from any undue mingling in the affairs of sister republics and having faith in the ability of the governments of peru and bolivia themselves to settle their differences in a manner satisfactory to themselves which , viewed with magnanimity , would assuage all embitterment , this government steadily abstained from being drawn into the controversy and was much gratified to find its confidence justified by events .
on the 9th of july next there will open at buenos aires the fourth pan - american conference .
this conference will have a special meaning to the hearts of all americans , because around its date are clustered the anniversaries of the independence of so many of the american republics .
it is not necessary for me to remind the congress of the political , social and commercial importance of these gatherings .
you are asked to make liberal appropriation for our participation .
if this be granted , it is my purpose to appoint a distinguished and representative delegation , qualified fittingly to represent this country and to deal with the problems of intercontinental interest which will there be discussed .
the argentine republic will also hold from may to november , 1910 , at buenos aires , a great international agricultural exhibition in which the united states has been invited to participate .
considering the rapid growth of the trade of the united states with the argentine republic and the cordial relations existing between the two nations , together with the fact that it provides an opportunity to show deference to a sister republic on the occasion of the celebration of its national independence , the proper departments of this government are taking steps to apprise the interests concerned of the opportunity afforded by this exhibition , in which appropriate participation by this country is so desirable .
the designation of an official representative is also receiving consideration .
to - day , more than ever before , american capital is seeking investment in foreign countries , and american products are more and more generally seeking foreign markets .
as a consequence , in all countries there are american citizens and american interests to be protected , on occasion , by their government .
these movements of men , of capital , and of commodities bring peoples and governments closer together and so form bonds of peace and mutual dependency , as they must also naturally sometimes make passing points of friction .
the resultant situation inevitably imposes upon this government vastly increased responsibilities .
this administration , through the department of state and the foreign service , is lending all proper support to legitimate and beneficial american enterprises in foreign countries , the degree of such support being measured by the national advantages to be expected .
a citizen himself can not by contract or otherwise divest himself of the right , nor can this government escape the obligation , of his protection in his personal and property rights when these are unjustly infringed in a foreign country .
to avoid ceaseless vexations it is proper that in considering whether american enterprise should be encouraged or supported in a particular country , the government should give full weight not only to the national , as opposed to the individual benefits to accrue , but also to the fact whether or not the government of the country in question is in its administration and in its diplomacy faithful to the principles of moderation , equity and justice upon which alone depend international credit , in diplomacy as well as in finance .
the pan - american policy of this government has long been fixed in its principles and remains unchanged .
with the changed circumstances of the united states and of the republics to the south of us , most of which have great natural resources , stable government and progressive ideals , the apprehension which gave rise to the monroe doctrine may be said to have nearly disappeared , and neither the doctrine as it exists nor any other doctrine of american policy should be permitted to operate for the perpetuation of irresponsible government , the escape of just obligations , or the insidious allegation of dominating ambitions on the part of the united states .
beside the fundamental doctrines of our pan - american policy there have grown up a realization of political interests , community of institutions and ideals , and a flourishing commerce .
all these bonds will be greatly strengthened as time goes on and increased facilities , such as the great bank soon to be established in latin america , supply the means for building up the colossal intercontinental commerce of the future .
my meeting with president diaz and the greeting exchanged on both american and mexican soil served , i hope , to signalize the close and cordial relations which so well bind together this republic and the great republic immediately to the south , between which there is so vast a network of material interests .
i am happy to say that all but one of the cases which for so long vexed our relations with venezuela have been settled within the past few months and that , under the enlightened regime now directing the government of venezuela , provision has been made for arbitration of the remaining case before the hague tribunal .
on july 30 , 1909 , the government of panama agreed , after considerable negotiation , to indemnify the relatives of the american officers and sailors who were brutally treated , one of them having , indeed , been killed by the panaman police this year .
the sincere desire of the government of panama to do away with a situation where such an accident could occur is manifest in the recent request in compliance with which this government has lent the services of an officer of the army to be employed by the government of panama as instructor of police .
the sanitary improvements and public works undertaken in cuba prior to the present administration of that government , in the success of which the united states is interested under the treaty , are reported to be making good progress and since the congress provided for the continuance of the reciprocal commercial arrangement between cuba and the united states assurance has been received that no negotiations injuriously affecting the situation will be undertaken without consultation .
the collection of the customs of the dominican republic through the general receiver of customs appointed by the president of the united states in accordance with the convention of february 8 , 1907 , has proceeded in an uneventful and satisfactory manner .
the customs receipts have decreased owing to disturbed political and economic conditions and to a very natural curtailment of imports in view of the anticipated revision of the dominican tariff schedule .
the payments to the fiscal agency fund for the service of the bonded debt of the republic , as provided by the convention , have been regularly and promptly made , and satisfactory progress has been made in carrying out the provisions of the convention looking towards the completion of the adjustment of the debt and the acquirement by the dominican government of certain concessions and monopolies which have been a burden to the commerce of the country .
in short , the receivership has demonstrated its ability , even under unfavorable economic and political conditions , to do the work for which it was intended .
this government was obliged to intervene diplomatically to bring about arbitration or settlement of the claim of the emery company against nicaragua , which it had long before been agreed should be arbitrated .
a settlement of this troublesome case was reached by the signature of a protocol on september 18 , 1909 .
many years ago diplomatic intervention became necessary to the protection of the interests in the american claim of alsop and company against the government of chile .
the government of chile had frequently admitted obligation in the case and had promised this government to settle .
there had been two abortive attempts to do so through arbitral commissions , which failed through lack of jurisdiction .
now , happily , as the result of the recent diplomatic negotiations , the governments of the united states and of chile , actuated by the sincere desire to free from any strain those cordial and friendly relations upon which both set such store , have agreed by a protocol to submit the controversy to definitive settlement by his britannic majesty , edward vii .
since the washington conventions of 1907 were communicated to the government of the united states as a consulting and advising party , this government has been almost continuously called upon by one or another , and in turn by all the five central american republics , to exert itself for the maintenance of the conventions .
nearly every complaint has been against the zelaya government of nicaragua , which has kept central america in constant tension or turmoil .
the responses made to the representations of central american republics , as due from the united states on account of its relation to the washington conventions , have been at all times conservative and have avoided , so far as possible , any semblance of interference , although it is very apparent that the considerations of geographic proximity to the canal zone and of the very substantial american interests in central america give to the united states a special position in the zone of these republics and the caribbean sea .
i need not rehearse here the patient efforts of this government to promote peace and welfare among these republics , efforts which are fully appreciated by the majority of them who are loyal to their true interests .
it would be no less unnecessary to rehearse here the sad tale of unspeakable barbarities and oppression alleged to have been committed by the zelaya government .
recently two americans were put to death by order of president zelaya himself .
they were reported to have been regularly commissioned officers in the organized forces of a revolution which had continued many weeks and was in control of about half of the republic , and as such , according to the modern enlightened practice of civilized nations , they were entitled to be dealt with as prisoners of war .
at the date when this message is printed this government has terminated diplomatic relations with the zelaya government , for reasons made public in a communication to the former nicaraguan charge ' d'affaires , and is intending to take such future steps as may be found most consistent with its dignity , its duty to american interests , and its moral obligations to central america and to civilization .
it may later be necessary for me to bring this subject to the attention of the congress in a special message .
the international bureau of american republics has carried on an important and increasing work during the last year .
in the exercise of its peculiar functions as an international agency , maintained by all the american republics for the development of pan - american commerce and friendship , it has accomplished a great practical good which could be done in the same way by no individual department or bureau of one government , and is therefore deserving of your liberal support .
the fact that it is about to enter a new building , erected through the munificence of an american philanthropist and the contributions of all the american nations , where both its efficiency of administration and expense of maintenance will naturally be much augmented , further entitles it to special consideration .
in the far east this government preserves unchanged its policy of supporting the principle of equality of opportunity and scrupulous respect for the integrity of the chinese empire , to which policy are pledged the interested powers of both east and west .
by the treaty of 1903 china has undertaken the abolition of likin with a moderate and proportionate raising of the customs tariff along with currency reform .
these reforms being of manifest advantage to foreign commerce as well as to the interests of china , this government is endeavoring to facilitate these measures and the needful acquiescence of the treaty powers .
when it appeared that chinese likin revenues were to be hypothecated to foreign bankers in connection with a great railway project , it was obvious that the governments whose nationals held this loan would have a certain direct interest in the question of the carrying out by china of the reforms in question .
because this railroad loan represented a practical and real application of the open door policy through cooperation with china by interested powers as well as because of its relations to the reforms referred to above , the administration deemed american participation to be of great national interest .
happily , when it was as a matter of broad policy urgent that this opportunity should not be lost , the indispensable instrumentality presented itself when a group of american bankers , of international reputation and great resources , agreed at once to share in the loan upon precisely such terms as this government should approve .
the chief of those terms was that american railway material should be upon an exact equality with that of the other nationals joining in the loan in the placing of orders for this whole railroad system .
after months of negotiation the equal participation of americans seems at last assured .
it is gratifying that americans will thus take their share in this extension of these great highways of trade , and to believe that such activities will give a real impetus to our commerce and will prove a practical corollary to our historic policy in the far east .
the imperial chinese government in pursuance of its decision to devote funds from the portion of the indemnity remitted by the united states to the sending of students to this country has already completed arrangements for carrying out this purpose , and a considerable body of students have arrived to take up their work in our schools and universities .
no one can doubt the happy effect that the associations formed by these representative young men will have when they return to take up their work in the progressive development of their country .
the results of the opium conference held at shanghai last spring at the invitation of the united states have been laid before the government .
the report shows that china is making remarkable progress and admirable efforts toward the eradication of the opium evil and that the governments concerned have not allowed their commercial interests to interfere with a helpful cooperation in this reform .
collateral investigations of the opium question in this country lead me to recommend that the manufacture , sale and use of opium and its derivatives in the united states should be so far as possible more rigorously controlled by legislation .
in one of the chinese - japanese conventions of september 4 of this year there was a provision which caused considerable public apprehension in that upon its face it was believed in some quarters to seek to establish a monopoly of mining privileges along the south manchurian and antung - mukden railroads , and thus to exclude americans from a wide field of enterprise , to take part in which they were by treaty with china entitled .
after a thorough examination of the conventions and of the several contextual documents , the secretary of state reached the conclusion that no such monopoly was intended or accomplished .
however , in view of the widespread discussion of this question , to confirm the view it had reached , this government made inquiry of the imperial chinese and japanese governments and received from each official assurance that the provision had no purpose inconsistent with the policy of equality of opportunity to which the signatories , in common with the united states , are pledged .
our traditional relations with the japanese empire continue cordial as usual .
as the representative of japan , his imperial highness prince kuni visited the hudson - fulton celebration .
the recent visit of a delegation of prominent business men as guests of the chambers of commerce of the pacific slope , whose representatives had been so agreeably received in japan , will doubtless contribute to the growing trade across the pacific , as well as to that mutual understanding which leads to mutual appreciation .
the arrangement of 1908 for a cooperative control of the coming of laborers to the united states has proved to work satisfactorily .
the matter of a revision of the existing treaty between the united states and japan which is terminable in 1912 is already receiving the study of both countries .
the department of state is considering the revision in whole or in part , of the existing treaty with siam , which was concluded in 1856 , and is now , in respect to many of its provisions , out of date .
i earnestly recommend to the favorable action of the congress the estimates submitted by the department of state and most especially the legislation suggested in the secretary of state 's letter of this date whereby it will be possible to develop and make permanent the reorganization of the department upon modern lines in a manner to make it a thoroughly efficient instrument in the furtherance of our foreign trade and of american interests abroad .
the plan to have divisions of latin - american and far eastern affairs and to institute a certain specialization in business with europe and the near east will at once commend itself .
these politico - geographical divisions and the detail from the diplomatic or consular service to the department of a number of men , who bring to the study of complicated problems in different parts of the world practical knowledge recently gained on the spot , clearly is of the greatest advantage to the secretary of state in foreseeing conditions likely to arise and in conducting the great variety of correspondence and negotiation .
it should be remembered that such facilities exist in the foreign offices of all the leading commercial nations and that to deny them to the secretary of state would be to place this government at a great disadvantage in the rivalry of commercial competition .
the consular service has been greatly improved under the law of april 5 , 1906 , and the executive order of june 27 , 1906 , and i commend to your consideration the question of embodying in a statute the principles of the present executive order upon which the efficiency of our consular service is wholly dependent .
in modern times political and commercial interests are interrelated , and in the negotiation of commercial treaties , conventions and tariff agreements , the keeping open of opportunities and the proper support of american enterprises , our diplomatic service is quite as important as the consular service to the business interests of the country .
impressed with this idea and convinced that selection after rigorous examination , promotion for merit solely and the experience only to be gained through the continuity of an organized service are indispensable to a high degree of efficiency in the diplomatic service , i have signed an executive order as the first step toward this very desirable result .
its effect should be to place all secretaries in the diplomatic service in much the same position as consular officers are now placed and to tend to the promotion of the most efficient to the grade of minister , generally leaving for outside appointments such posts of the grade of ambassador or minister as it may be expedient to fill from without the service .
it is proposed also to continue the practice instituted last summer of giving to all newly appointed secretaries at least one month 's thorough training in the department of state before they proceed to their posts .
this has been done for some time in regard to the consular service with excellent results .
under a provision of the act of august 5 , 1909 , i have appointed three officials to assist the officers of the government in collecting information necessary to a wise administration of the tariff act of august 5 , 1909 .
as to questions of customs administration they are cooperating with the officials of the treasury department and as to matters of the needs and the exigencies of our manufacturers and exporters , with the department of commerce and labor , in its relation to the domestic aspect of the subject of foreign commerce .
in the study of foreign tariff treatment they will assist the bureau of trade relations of the department of state .
it is hoped thus to coordinate and bring to bear upon this most important subject all the agencies of the government which can contribute anything to its efficient handling .
as a consequence of section 2 of the tariff act of august 5 , 1909 , it becomes the duty of the secretary of state to conduct as diplomatic business all the negotiations necessary to place him in a position to advise me as to whether or not a particular country unduly discriminates against the united states in the sense of the statute referred to .
the great scope and complexity of this work , as well as the obligation to lend all proper aid to our expanding commerce , is met by the expansion of the bureau of trade relations as set forth in the estimates for the department of state .
i have thus in some detail described the important transactions of the state department since the beginning of this administration for the reason that there is no provision either by statute or custom for a formal report by the secretary of state to the president or to congress , and a presidential message is the only means by which the condition of our foreign relations is brought to the attention of congress and the public .
in dealing with the affairs of the other departments , the heads of which all submit annual reports , i shall touch only those matters that seem to me to call for special mention on my part without minimizing in any way the recommendations made by them for legislation affecting their respective departments , in all of which i wish to express my general concurrence .
perhaps the most important question presented to this administration is that of economy in expenditures and sufficiency of revenue .
the deficit of the last fiscal year , and the certain deficit of the current year , prompted congress to throw a greater responsibility on the executive and the secretary of the treasury than had heretofore been declared by statute .
this declaration imposes upon the secretary of the treasury the duty of assembling all the estimates of the executive departments , bureaus , and offices , of the expenditures necessary in the ensuing fiscal year , and of making an estimate of the revenues of the government for the same period ; and if a probable deficit is thus shown , it is made the duty of the president to recommend the method by which such deficit can be met .
the report of the secretary shows that the ordinary expenditures for the current fiscal year ending june 30 , 1910 , will exceed the estimated receipts by $ 34,075,620 .
if to this deficit is added the sum to be disbursed for the panama canal , amounting to $ 38,000,000 , and $ 1,000,000 to be paid on the public debt , the deficit of ordinary receipts and expenditures will be increased to a total deficit of $ 73,075,620 .
this deficit the secretary proposes to meet by the proceeds of bonds issued to pay the cost of constructing the panama canal .
i approve this proposal .
the policy of paying for the construction of the panama canal , not out of current revenue , but by bond issues , was adopted in the spooner act of 1902 , and there seems to be no good reason for departing from the principle by which a part at least of the burden of the cost of the canal shall fall upon our posterity who are to enjoy it ; and there is all the more reason for this view because the actual cost to date of the canal , which is now half done and which will be completed january 1 , 1915 , shows that the cost of engineering and construction will be $ 297,766,000 , instead of $ 139,705,200 , as originally estimated .
in addition to engineering and construction , the other expenses , including sanitation and government , and the amount paid for the properties , the franchise , and the privilege of building the canal , increase the cost by $ 75,435,000 , to a total of $ 375,201,000 .
the increase in the cost of engineering and construction is due to a substantial enlargement of the plan of construction by widening the canal 100 feet in the culebra cut and by increasing the dimensions of the locks , to the underestimate of the quantity of the work to be done under the original plan , and to an underestimate of the cost of labor and materials both of which have greatly enhanced in price since the original estimate was made .
in order to avoid a deficit for the ensuing fiscal year , i directed the heads of departments in the preparation of their estimates to make them as low as possible consistent with imperative governmental necessity .
the result has been , as i am advised by the secretary of the treasury , that the estimates for the expenses of the government for the next fiscal year ending june 30 , 1911 , are less than the appropriations for this current fiscal year by $ 42,818,000 .
so far as the secretary of the treasury is able to form a judgment as to future income , and compare it with the expenditures for the next fiscal year ending june 30 , 1911 , and excluding payments on account of the panama canal , which will doubtless be taken up by bonds , there will be a surplus of $ 35,931,000 .
in the present estimates the needs of the departments and of the government have been cut to the quick , so to speak , and any assumption on the part of congress , so often made in times past , that the estimates have been prepared with the expectation that they may be reduced , will result in seriously hampering proper administration .
the secretary of the treasury points out what should be carefully noted in respect to this reduction in governmental expenses for the next fiscal year , that the economies are of two kinds -- first , there is a saving in the permanent administration of the departments , bureaus , and offices of the government ; and , second , there is a present reduction in expenses by a postponement of projects and improvements that ultimately will have to be carried out but which are now delayed with the hope that additional revenue in the future will permit their execution without producing a deficit .
it has been impossible in the preparation of estimates greatly to reduce the cost of permanent administration .
this can not be done without a thorough reorganization of bureaus , offices , and departments .
for the purpose of securing information which may enable the executive and the legislative branches to unite in a plan for the permanent reduction of the cost of governmental administration , the treasury department has instituted an investigation by one of the most skilled expert accountants in the united states .
the result of his work in two or three bureaus , which , if extended to the entire government , must occupy two or more years , has been to show much room for improvement and opportunity for substantial reductions in the cost and increased efficiency of administration .
the object of the investigation is to devise means to increase the average efficiency of each employee .
there is great room for improvement toward this end , not only by the reorganization of bureaus and departments and in the avoidance of duplication , but also in the treatment of the individual employee .
under the present system it constantly happens that two employees receive the same salary when the work of one is far more difficult and important and exacting than that of the other .
superior ability is not rewarded or encouraged .
as the classification is now entirely by salary , an employee often rises to the highest class while doing the easiest work , for which alone he may be fitted .
an investigation ordered by my predecessor resulted in the recommendation that the civil service he reclassified according to the kind of work , so that the work requiring most application and knowledge and ability shall receive most compensation .
i believe such a change would be fairer to the whole force and would permanently improve the personnel of the service .
more than this , every reform directed toward the improvement in the average efficiency of government employees must depend on the ability of the executive to eliminate from the government service those who are inefficient from any cause , and as the degree of efficiency in all the departments is much lessened by the retention of old employees who have outlived their energy and usefulness , it is indispensable to any proper system of economy that provision be made so that their separation from the service shall be easy and inevitable .
it is impossible to make such provision unless there is adopted a plan of civil pensions .
most of the great industrial organizations , and many of the well - conducted railways of this country , are coming to the conclusion that a system of pensions for old employees , and the substitution therefor of younger and more energetic servants , promotes both economy and efficiency of administration .
i am aware that there is a strong feeling in both houses of congress , and possibly in the country , against the establishment of civil pensions , and that this has naturally grown out of the heavy burden of military pensions , which it has always been the policy of our government to assume ; but i am strongly convinced that no other practical solution of the difficulties presented by the superannuation of civil servants can be found than that of a system of civil pensions .
the business and expenditures of the government have expanded enormously since the spanish war , but as the revenues have increased in nearly the same proportion as the expenditures until recently , the attention of the public , and of those responsible for the government , has not been fastened upon the question of reducing the cost of administration .
we can not , in view of the advancing prices of living , hope to save money by a reduction in the standard of salaries paid .
indeed , if any change is made in that regard , an increase rather than a decrease will be necessary ; and the only means of economy will be in reducing the number of employees and in obtaining a greater average of efficiency from those retained in the service .
close investigation and study needed to make definite recommendations in this regard will consume at least two years .
i note with much satisfaction the organization in the senate of a committee on public expenditures , charged with the duty of conducting such an investigation , and i tender to that committee all the assistance which the executive branch of the government can possibly render .
i regret to refer to the fact of the discovery of extensive frauds in the collections of the customs revenue at new york city , in which a number of the subordinate employees in the weighing and other departments were directly concerned , and in which the beneficiaries were the american sugar refining company and others .
the frauds consisted in the payment of duty on underweights of sugar .
the government has recovered from the american sugar refining company all that it is shown to have been defrauded of .
the sum was received in full of the amount due , which might have been recovered by civil suit against the beneficiary of the fraud , but there was an express reservation in the contract of settlement by which the settlement should not interfere with , or prevent the criminal prosecution of everyone who was found to be subject to the same .
criminal prosecutions are now proceeding against a number of the government officers .
the treasury department and the department of justice are exerting every effort to discover all the wrongdoers , including the officers and employees of the companies who may have been privy to the fraud .
it would seem to me that an investigation of the frauds by congress at present , pending the probing by the treasury department and the department of justice , as proposed , might by giving immunity and otherwise prove an embarrassment in securing conviction of the guilty parties .
two features of the new tariff act call for special reference .
by virtue of the clause known as the " maximum and minimum " clause , it is the duty of the executive to consider the laws and practices of other countries with reference to the importation into those countries of the products and merchandise of the united states , and if the executive finds such laws and practices not to be unduly discriminatory against the united states , the minimum duties provided in the bill are to go into force .
unless the president makes such a finding , then the maximum duties provided in the bill , that is , an increase of twenty - five per cent .
ad valorem over the minimum duties , are to be in force .
fear has been expressed that this power conferred and duty imposed on the executive is likely to lead to a tariff war .
i beg to express the hope and belief that no such result need be anticipated .
the discretion granted to the executive by the terms " unduly discriminatory " is wide .
in order that the maximum duty shall be charged against the imports from a country , it is necessary that he shall find on the part of that country not only discriminations in its laws or the practice under them against the trade of the united states , but that the discriminations found shall be undue ; that is , without good and fair reason .
i conceive that this power was reposed in the president with the hope that the maximum duties might never be applied in any case , but that the power to apply them would enable the president and the state department through friendly negotiation to secure the elimination from the laws and the practice under them of any foreign country of that which is unduly discriminatory .
no one is seeking a tariff war or a condition in which the spirit of retaliation shall be aroused .
the new tariff law enables me to appoint a tariff board to assist me in connection with the department of state in the administration of the minimum and maximum clause of the act and also to assist officers of the government in the administration of the entire law .
an examination of the law and an understanding of the nature of the facts which should be considered in discharging the functions imposed upon the executive show that i have the power to direct the tariff board to make a comprehensive glossary and encyclopedia of the terms used and articles embraced in the tariff law , and to secure information as to the cost of production of such goods in this country and the cost of their production in foreign countries .
i have therefore appointed a tariff board consisting of three members and have directed them to perform all the duties above described .
this work will perhaps take two or three years , and i ask from congress a continuing annual appropriation equal to that already made for its prosecution .
i believe that the work of this board will be of prime utility and importance whenever congress shall deem it wise again to readjust the customs duties .
if the facts secured by the tariff board are of such a character as to show generally that the rates of duties imposed by the present tariff law are excessive under the principles of protection as described in the platform of the successful party at the late election , i shall not hesitate to invite the attention of congress to this fact and to the necessity for action predicated thereon .
nothing , however , halts business and interferes with the course of prosperity so much as the threatened revision of the tariff , and until the facts are at hand , after careful and deliberate investigation , upon which such revision can properly be undertaken , it seems to me unwise to attempt it .
the amount of misinformation that creeps into arguments pro and con in respect to tariff rates is such as to require the kind of investigation that i have directed the tariff board to make , an investigation undertaken by it wholly without respect to the effect which the facts may have in calling for a readjustment of the rates of duty .
in the interest of immediate economy and because of the prospect of a deficit , i have required a reduction in the estimates of the war department for the coming fiscal year , which brings the total estimates down to an amount forty - five millions less than the corresponding estimates for last year .
this could only be accomplished by cutting off new projects and suspending for the period of one year all progress in military matters .
for the same reason i have directed that the army shall not be recruited up to its present authorized strength .
these measures can hardly be more than temporary -- to last until our revenues are in better condition and until the whole question of the expediency of adopting a definite military policy can be submitted to congress , for i am sure that the interests of the military establishment are seriously in need of careful consideration by congress .
the laws regulating the organization of our armed forces in the event of war need to be revised in order that the organization can be modified so as to produce a force which would be more consistently apportioned throughout its numerous branches .
to explain the circumstances upon which this opinion is based would necessitate a lengthy discussion , and i postpone it until the first convenient opportunity shall arise to send to congress a special message upon this subject .
the secretary of war calls attention to a number of needed changes in the army in all of which i concur , but the point upon which i place most emphasis is the need for an elimination bill providing a method by which the merits of officers shall have some effect upon their advancement and by which the advancement of all may be accelerated by the effective elimination of a definite proportion of the least efficient .
there are in every army , and certainly in ours , a number of officers who do not violate their duty in any such way as to give reason for a court - martial or dismissal , but who do not show such aptitude and skill and character for high command as to justify their remaining in the active service to be promoted .
provision should be made by which they may be retired on a certain proportion of their pay , increasing with their length of service at the time of retirement .
there is now a personnel law for the navy which itself needs amendment and to which i shall make further reference .
such a law is needed quite as much for the army .
the coast defenses of the united states proper are generally all that could be desired , and in some respects they are rather more elaborate than under present conditions are needed to stop an enemy 's fleet from entering the harbors defended .
there is , however , one place where additional defense is badly needed , and that is at the mouth of chesapeake bay , where it is proposed to make an artificial island for a fort which shall prevent an enemy 's fleet from entering this most important strategical base of operations on the whole atlantic and gulf coasts .
i hope that appropriate legislation will be adopted to secure the construction of this defense .
the military and naval joint board have unanimously agreed that it would be unwise to make the large expenditures which at one time were contemplated in the establishment of a naval base and station in the philippine islands , and have expressed their judgment , in which i fully concur , in favor of making an extensive naval base at pearl harbor , near honolulu , and not in the philippines .
this does not dispense with the necessity for the comparatively small appropriations required to finish the proper coast defenses in the philippines now under construction on the island of corregidor and elsewhere or to complete a suitable repair station and coaling supply station at olongapo , where is the floating dock " dewey . "
i hope that this recommendation of the joint board will end the discussion as to the comparative merits of manila bay and olongapo as naval stations , and will lead to prompt measures for the proper equipment and defense of pearl harbor .
the return of the battle - ship fleet from its voyage around the world , in more efficient condition than when it started , was a noteworthy event of interest alike to our citizens and the naval authorities of the world .
besides the beneficial and far - reaching effect on our personal and diplomatic relations in the countries which the fleet visited , the marked success of the ships in steaming around the world in all weathers on schedule time has increased respect for our navy and has added to our national prestige .
our enlisted personnel recruited from all sections of the country is young and energetic and representative of the national spirit .
it is , moreover , owing to its intelligence , capable of quick training into the modern man - of - warsman .
our officers are earnest and zealous in their profession , but it is a regrettable fact that the higher officers are old for the responsibilities of the modern navy , and the admirals do not arrive at flag rank young enough to obtain adequate training in their duties as flag officers .
this need for reform in the navy has been ably and earnestly presented to congress by my predecessor , and i also urgently recommend the subject for consideration .
early in the coming session a comprehensive plan for the reorganization of the officers of all corps of the navy will be presented to congress , and i hope it will meet with action suited to its urgency .
owing to the necessity for economy in expenditures , i have directed the curtailment of recommendations for naval appropriations so that they are thirty - eight millions less than the corresponding estimates of last year , and the request for new naval construction is limited to two first - class battle ships and one repair vessel .
the use of a navy is for military purposes , and there has been found need in the department of a military branch dealing directly with the military use of the fleet .
the secretary of the navy has also felt the lack of responsible advisers to aid him in reaching conclusions and deciding important matters between coordinate branches of the department .
to secure these results he has inaugurated a tentative plan involving certain changes in the organization of the navy department , including the navy - yards , all of which have been found by the attorney - general to be in accordance with law .
i have approved the execution of the plan proposed because of the greater efficiency and economy it promises .
the generosity of congress has provided in the present naval observatory the most magnificent and expensive astronomical establishment in the world .
it is being used for certain naval purposes which might easily and adequately be subserved by a small division connected with the naval department at only a fraction of the cost of the present naval observatory .
the official board of visitors established by congress and appointed in 1901 expressed its conclusion that the official head of the observatory should be an eminent astronomer appointed by the president by and with the advice and consent of the senate , holding his place by a tenure at least as permanent as that of the superintendent of the coast survey or the head of the geological survey , and not merely by a detail of two or three years ' duration .
i fully concur in this judgment , and urge a provision by law for the appointment of such a director .
it may not be necessary to take the observatory out of the navy department and put it into another department in which opportunity for scientific research afforded by the observatory would seem to be more appropriate , though i believe such a transfer in the long run is the best policy .
i am sure , however , i express the desire of the astronomers and those learned in the kindred sciences when i urge upon congress that the naval observatory be now dedicated to science under control of a man of science who can , if need be , render all the service to the navy department which this observatory now renders , and still furnish to the world the discoveries in astronomy that a great astronomer using such a plant would be likely to make .
the deplorable delays in the administration of civil and criminal law have received the attention of committees of the american bar association and of many state bar associations , as well as the considered thought of judges and jurists .
in my judgment , a change in judicial procedure , with a view to reducing its expense to private litigants in civil cases and facilitating the dispatch of business and final decision in both civil and criminal cases , constitutes the greatest need in our american institutions .
i do not doubt for one moment that much of the lawless violence and cruelty exhibited in lynchings is directly due to the uncertainties and injustice growing out of the delays in trials , judgments , and the executions thereof by our courts .
of course these remarks apply quite as well to the administration of justice in state courts as to that in federal courts , and without making invidious distinction it is perhaps not too much to say that , speaking generally , the defects are less in the federal courts than in the state courts .
but they are very great in the federal courts .
the expedition with which business is disposed of both on the civil and the criminal side of english courts under modern rules of procedure makes the delays in our courts seem archaic and barbarous .
the procedure in the federal courts should furnish an example for the state courts .
i presume it is impossible , without an amendment to the constitution , to unite under one form of action the proceedings at common law and proceedings in equity in the federal courts , but it is certainly not impossible by a statute to simplify and make short and direct the procedure both at law and in equity in those courts .
it is not impossible to cut down still more than it is cut down , the jurisdiction of the supreme court so as to confine it almost wholly to statutory and constitutional questions .
under the present statutes the equity and admiralty procedure in the federal courts is under the control of the supreme court , but in the pressure of business to which that court is subjected , it is impossible to hope that a radical and proper reform of the federal equity procedure can be brought about .
i therefore recommend legislation providing for the appointment by the president of a commission with authority to examine the law and equity procedure of the federal courts of first instance , the law of appeals from those courts to the courts of appeals and to the supreme court , and the costs imposed in such procedure upon the private litigants and upon the public treasury and make recommendation with a view to simplifying and expediting the procedure as far as possible and making it as inexpensive as may be to the litigant of little means .
the platform of the successful party in the last election contained the following : 
 " the republican party will uphold at all times the authority and integrity of the courts , state and federal , and will ever insist that their powers to enforce their process and to protect life , liberty , and property shall be preserved inviolate .
we believe , however , that the rules of procedure in the federal courts with respect to the issuance of the writ of injunction should be more accurately defined by statute , and that no injunction or temporary restraining order should be issued without notice , except where irreparable injury would result from delay , in which case a speedy hearing thereafter should be granted . "
i recommend that in compliance with the promise thus made , appropriate legislation be adopted .
the ends of justice will best be met and the chief cause of complaint against ill - considered injunctions without notice will be removed by the enactment of a statute forbidding hereafter the issuing of any injunction or restraining order , whether temporary or permanent , by any federal court , without previous notice and a reasonable opportunity to he heard on behalf of the parties to be enjoined ; unless it shall appear to the satisfaction of the court that the delay necessary to give such notice and hearing would result in irreparable injury to the complainant and unless also the court shall from the evidence make a written finding , which shall be spread upon the court minutes , that immediate and irreparable injury is likely to ensue to the complainant , and shall define the injury , state why it is irreparable , and shall also endorse on the order issued the date and the hour of the issuance of the order .
moreover , every such injunction or restraining order issued without previous notice and opportunity by the defendant to be heard should by force of the statute expire and be of no effect after seven days from the issuance thereof or within any time less than that period which the court may fix , unless within such seven days or such less period , the injunction or order is extended or renewed after previous notice and opportunity to be heard .
my judgment is that the passage of such an act which really embodies the best practice in equity and is very like the rule now in force in some courts will prevent the issuing of ill - advised orders of injunction without notice and will render such orders when issued much less objectionable by the short time in which they may remain effective .
the jurisdiction of the general government over interstate commerce has led to the passage of the so - called " sherman anti - trust law " and the " interstate commerce law " and its amendments .
the developments in the operation of those laws , as shown by indictments , trials , judicial decisions , and other sources of information , call for a discussion and some suggestions as to amendments .
these i prefer to embody in a special message instead of including them in the present communication , and i shall avail myself of the first convenient opportunity to bring these subjects to the attention of congress .
my predecessor transmitted to the congress a special message on january 11 , 1909 , accompanying the report of commissioners theretofore appointed to investigate the jail , workhouse , etc . ,
in the district of columbia , in which he directed attention to the report as setting forth vividly , " the really outrageous conditions in the workhouse and jail . "
the congress has taken action in pursuance of the recommendations of that report and of the president , to the extent of appropriating funds and enacting the necessary legislation for the establishment of a workhouse and reformatory .
no action , however , has been taken by the congress with respect to the jail , the conditions of which are still antiquated and insanitary .
i earnestly recommend the passage of a sufficient appropriation to enable a thorough remodeling of that institution to be made without delay .
it is a reproach to the national government that almost under the shadow of the capitol dome prisoners should be confined in a building destitute of the ordinary decent appliances requisite to cleanliness and sanitary conditions .
the deficit every year in the post - office department is largely caused by the low rate of postage of 1 cent a pound charged on second - class mail matter , which includes not only newspapers , but magazines and miscellaneous periodicals .
the actual loss growing out of the transmission of this second - class mail matter at 1 cent a pound amounts to about $ 63,000,000 a year .
the average cost of the transportation of this matter is more than 9 cents a pound .
it appears that the average distance over which newspapers are delivered to their customers is 291 miles , while the average haul of magazines is 1,049 , and of miscellaneous periodicals 1,128 miles .
thus , the average haul of the magazine is three and one - half times and that of the miscellaneous periodical nearly four times the haul of the daily newspaper , yet all of them pay the same postage rate of 1 cent a pound .
the statistics of 1907 show that second - class mail matter constituted 63.91 per cent .
of the weight of all the mail , and yielded only 5.19 per cent .
of the revenue .
the figures given are startling , and show the payment by the government of an enormous subsidy to the newspapers , magazines , and periodicals , and congress may well consider whether radical steps should not be taken to reduce the deficit in the post - office department caused by this discrepancy between the actual cost of transportation and the compensation exacted therefor .
a great saving might be made , amounting to much more than half of the loss , by imposing upon magazines and periodicals a higher rate of postage .
they are much heavier than newspapers , and contain a much higher proportion of advertising to reading matter , and the average distance of their transportation is three and a half times as great .
the total deficit for the last fiscal year in the post - office department amounted to $ 17,500,000 .
the branches of its business which it did at a loss were the second - class mail service , in which the loss , as already said , was $ 63,000,000 , and the free rural delivery , in which the loss was $ 28,000,000 .
these losses were in part offset by the profits of the letter postage and other sources of income .
it would seem wise to reduce the loss upon second - class mail matter , at least to the extent of preventing a deficit in the total operations of the post - office .
i commend the whole subject to congress , not unmindful of the spread of intelligence which a low charge for carrying newspapers and periodicals assists .
i very much doubt , however , the wisdom of a policy which constitutes so large a subsidy and requires additional taxation to meet it .
the second subject worthy of mention in the post - office department is the real necessity and entire practicability of establishing postal savings banks .
the successful party at the last election declared in favor of postal savings banks , and although the proposition finds opponents in many parts of the country , i am convinced that the people desire such banks , and am sure that when the banks are furnished they will be productive of the utmost good .
the postal savings banks are not constituted for the purpose of creating competition with other banks .
the rate of interest upon deposits to which they would be limited would be so small as to prevent their drawing deposits away from other banks .
i believe them to be necessary in order to offer a proper inducement to thrift and saving to a great many people of small means who do not now have banking facilities , and to whom such a system would offer an opportunity for the accumulation of capital .
they will furnish a satisfactory substitute , based on sound principle and actual successful trial in nearly all the countries of the world , for the system of government guaranty of deposits now being adopted in several western states , which with deference to those who advocate it seems to me to have in it the seeds of demoralization to conservative banking and certain financial disaster .
the question of how the money deposited in postal savings banks shall be invested is not free from difficulty , but i believe that a satisfactory provision for this purpose was inserted as an amendment to the bill considered by the senate at its last session .
it has been proposed to delay the consideration of legislation establishing a postal savings bank until after the report of the monetary commission .
this report is likely to be delayed , and properly so , cause of the necessity for careful deliberation and close investigation .
i do not see why the one should be tied up with the other .
it is understood that the monetary commission have looked into the systems of banking which now prevail abroad , and have found that by a control there exercised in respect to reserves and the rates of exchange by some central authority panics are avoided .
it is not apparent that a system of postal savings banks would in any way interfere with a change to such a system here .
certainly in most of the countries of europe where control is thus exercised by a central authority , postal savings banks exist and are not thought to be inconsistent with a proper financial and banking system .
following the course of my distinguished predecessor , i earnestly recommend to congress the consideration and passage of a ship subsidy bill , looking to the establishment of lines between our atlantic seaboard and the eastern coast of south america , as well as lines from the west coast of the united states to south america .
china , japan , and the philippines .
the profits on foreign mails are perhaps a sufficient measure of the expenditures which might first be tentatively applied to this method of inducing american capital to undertake the establishment of american lines of steamships in those directions in which we now feel it most important that we should have means of transportation controlled in the interest of the expansion of our trade .
a bill of this character has once passed the house and more than once passed the senate , and i hope that at this session a bill framed on the same lines and with the same purposes may become a law .
the successful party in the last election in its national platform declared in favor of the admission as separate states of new mexico and arizona , and i recommend that legislation appropriate to this end be adopted .
i urge , however , that care be exercised in the preparation of the legislation affecting each territory to secure deliberation in the selection of persons as members of the convention to draft a constitution for the incoming state , and i earnestly advise that such constitution after adoption by the convention shall be submitted to the people of the territory for their approval at an election in which the sole issue shall be the merits of the proposed constitution , and if the constitution is defeated by popular vote means shall be provided in the enabling act for a new convention and the drafting of a new constitution .
i think it vital that the issue as to the merits of the constitution should not be mixed up with the selection of state officers , and that no election of state officers should be had until after the constitution has been fully approved and finally settled upon .
with respect to the territory of alaska , i recommend legislation which shall provide for the appointment by the president of a governor and also of an executive council , the members of which shall during their term of office reside in the territory , and which shall have legislative powers sufficient to enable it to give to the territory local laws adapted to its present growth .
i strongly deprecate legislation looking to the election of a territorial legislature in that vast district .
the lack of permanence of residence of a large part of the present population and the small number of the people who either permanently or temporarily reside in the district as compared with its vast expanse and the variety of the interests that have to be subserved , make it altogether unfitting in my judgment to provide for a popular election of a legislative body .
the present system is not adequate and does not furnish the character of local control that ought to be there .
the only compromise it seems to me which may give needed local legislation and secure a conservative government is the one i propose .
in several departments there is presented the necessity for legislation looking to the further conservation of our national resources , and the subject is one of such importance as to require a more detailed and extended discussion than can be entered upon in this communication .
for that reason i shall take an early opportunity to send a special message to congress on the subject of the improvement of our waterways , upon the reclamation and irrigation of arid , semiarid , and swamp lands ; upon the preservation of our forests and the reforesting of suitable areas ; upon the reclassification of the public domain with a view of separating from agricultural settlement mineral , coal , and phosphate lands and sites belonging to the government bordering on streams suitable for the utilization of water power .
i commend to your careful consideration the report of the secretary of agriculture as showing the immense sphere of usefulness which that department now fills and the wonderful addition to the wealth of the nation made by the farmers of this country in the crops of the current year .
the light - house board now discharges its duties under the department of commerce and labor .
for upwards of forty years this board has been constituted of military and naval officers and two or three men of science , with such an absence of a duly constituted executive head that it is marvelous what work has been accomplished .
in the period of construction the energy and enthusiasm of all the members prevented the inherent defects of the system from interfering greatly with the beneficial work of the board , but now that the work is chiefly confined to maintenance and repair , for which purpose the country is divided into sixteen districts , to which are assigned an engineer officer of the army and an inspector of the navy , each with a light - house tender and the needed plant for his work , it has become apparent by the frequent friction that arises , due to the absence of any central independent authority , that there must be a complete reorganization of the board .
i concede the advantage of keeping in the system the rigidity of discipline that the presence of naval and military officers in charge insures , but unless the presence of such officers in the board can be made consistent with a responsible executive head that shall have proper authority , i recommend the transfer of control over the light - houses to a suitable civilian bureau .
this is in accordance with the judgment of competent persons who are familiar with the workings of the present system .
i am confident that a reorganization can be effected which shall avoid the recurrence of friction between members , instances of which have been officially brought to my attention , and that by such reorganization greater efficiency and a substantial reduction in the expense of operation can be brought about .
i request congressional authority to enable the secretary of commerce and labor to unite the bureaus of manufactures and statistics .
this was recommended by a competent committee appointed in the previous administration for the purpose of suggesting changes in the interest of economy and efficiency , and is requested by the secretary .
i greatly regret to have to say that the investigations made in the bureau of immigration and other sources of information lead to the view that there is urgent necessity for additional legislation and greater executive activity to suppress the recruiting of the ranks of prostitutes from the streams of immigration into this country -- an evil which , for want of a better name , has been called " the white slave trade . "
i believe it to be constitutional to forbid , under penalty , the transportation of persons for purposes of prostitution across national and state lines ; and by appropriating a fund of $ 50,000 to be used by the secretary of commerce and labor for the employment of special inspectors it will be possible to bring those responsible for this trade to indictment and conviction under a federal law .
for a very considerable period a movement has been gathering strength , especially among the members of the medical profession , in favor of a concentration of the instruments of the national government which have to do with the promotion of public health .
in the nature of things , the medical department of the army and the medical department of the navy must be kept separate .
but there seems to be no reason why all the other bureaus and offices in the general government which have to do with the public health or subjects akin thereto should not be united in a bureau to be called the " bureau of public health . "
this would necessitate the transfer of the marine - hospital service to such a bureau .
i am aware that there is wide field in respect to the public health committed to the states in which the federal government can not exercise jurisdiction , but we have seen in the agricultural department the expansion into widest usefulness of a department giving attention to agriculture when that subject is plainly one over which the states properly exercise direct jurisdiction .
the opportunities offered for useful research and the spread of useful information in regard to the cultivation of the soil and the breeding of stock and the solution of many of the intricate problems in progressive agriculture have demonstrated the wisdom of establishing that department .
similar reasons , of equal force , can be given for the establishment of a bureau of health that shall not only exercise the police jurisdiction of the federal government respecting quarantine , but which shall also afford an opportunity for investigation and research by competent experts into questions of health affecting the whole country , or important sections thereof , questions which , in the absence of federal governmental work , are not likely to be promptly solved .
the work of the united states civil service commission has been performed to the general satisfaction of the executive officers with whom the commission has been brought into official communication .
the volume of that work and its variety and extent have under new laws , such as the census act , and new executive orders , greatly increased .
the activities of the commission required by the statutes have reached to every portion of the public domain .
the accommodations of the commission are most inadequate for its needs .
i call your attention to its request for increase in those accommodations as will appear from the annual report for this year .
i urgently recommend to congress that a law be passed requiring that candidates in elections of members of the house of representatives , and committees in charge of their candidacy and campaign , file in a proper office of the united states government a statement of the contributions received and of the expenditures incurred in the campaign for such elections and that similar legislation be enacted in respect to all other elections which are constitutionally within the control of congress 

 recommendations have been made by my predecessors that congress appropriate a sufficient sum to pay the balance -- about 38 per cent .-- of the amounts due depositors in the freedman 's savings and trust company .
i renew this recommendation , and advise also that a proper limitation be prescribed fixing a period within which the claims may be presented , that assigned claims be not recognized , and that a limit be imposed on the amount of fees collectible for services in presenting such claims .
the year 1913 will mark the fiftieth anniversary of the issuance of the emancipation proclamation granting freedom to the negroes .
it seems fitting that this event should be properly celebrated .
already a movement has been started by prominent negroes , encouraged by prominent white people and the press .
the south especially is manifesting its interest in this movement .
it is suggested that a proper form of celebration would be an exposition to show the progress the negroes have made , not only during their period of freedom , but also from the time of their coming to this country .
i heartily indorse this proposal , and request that the executive be authorized to appoint a preliminary commission of not more than seven persons to consider carefully whether or not it is wise to hold such an exposition , and if so , to outline a plan for the enterprise .
i further recommend that such preliminary commission serve without salary , except as to their actual expenses , and that an appropriation be made to meet such expenses .
i have thus , in a message compressed as much as the subjects will permit , referred to many of the legislative needs of the country , with the exceptions already noted .
speaking generally , the country is in a high state of prosperity .
there is every reason to believe that we are on the eve of a substantial business expansion , and we have just garnered a harvest unexampled in the market value of our agricultural products .
the high prices which such products bring mean great prosperity for the farming community , but on the other hand they mean a very considerably increased burden upon those classes in the community whose yearly compensation does not expand with the improvement in business and the general prosperity .
various reasons are given for the high prices .
the proportionate increase in the output of gold , which to - day is the chief medium of exchange and is in some respects a measure of value , furnishes a substantial explanation of at least a part of the increase in prices .
the increase in population and the more expensive mode of living of the people , which have not been accompanied by a proportionate increase in acreage production , may furnish a further reason .
it is well to note that the increase in the cost of living is not confined to this country , but prevails the world over , and that those who would charge increases in prices to the existing protective tariff must meet the fact that the rise in prices has taken place almost wholly in those products of the factory and farm in respect to which there has been either no increase in the tariff or in many instances a very considerable reduction .

to the senate and house of representatives : 
 during the past year the foreign relations of the united states have continued upon a basis of friendship and good understanding .
the year has been notable as witnessing the pacific settlement of two important international controversies before the permanent court of the hague .
the arbitration of the fisheries dispute between the united states and great britain , which has been the source of nearly continuous diplomatic correspondence since the fisheries convention of 1818 , has given an award which is satisfactory to both parties .
this arbitration is particularly noteworthy not only because of the eminently just results secured , but also because it is the first arbitration held under the general arbitration treaty of april 4 , 1908 , between the united states and great britain , and disposes of a controversy the settlement of which has resisted every other resource of diplomacy , and which for nearly ninety years has been the cause of friction between two countries whose common interest lies in maintaining the most friendly and cordial relations with each other .
the united states was ably represented before the tribunal .
the complicated history of the questions arising made the issue depend , more than ordinarily in such cases , upon the care and skill with which our case was presented , and i should be wanting in proper recognition of a great patriotic service if i did not refer to the lucid historical analysis of the facts and the signal ability and force of the argument --six days in length -- presented to the court in support of our case by mr. elihu root .
as secretary of state , mr. root had given close study to the intricate facts bearing on the controversy , and by diplomatic correspondence had helped to frame the issues .
at the solicitation of the secretary of state and myself , mr. root , though burdened by his duties as senator from new york , undertook the preparation of the case as leading counsel , with the condition imposed by himself that , in view of his position as senator , he should not receive any compensation .
the tribunal constituted at the hague by the governments of the united states and venezuela has completed its deliberations and has rendered an award in the case of the orinoco steamship company against venezuela .
the award may be regarded as satisfactory since it has , pursuant to the contentions of the united states , recognized a number of important principles making for a judicial attitude in the determining of international disputes .
in view of grave doubts which had been raised as to the constitutionality of the hague convention for the establishment of an international prize court , now before the senate for ratification , because of that provision of the convention which provides that there may be an appeal to the proposed court from the decisions of national courts , this government proposed in an identic circular note addressed to those powers who had taken part in the london maritime conference , that the powers signatory to the convention , if confronted with such difficulty , might insert a reservation to the effect that appeals to the international prize court in respect to decisions of its national tribunals , should take the form of a direct claim for compensation ; that the proceedings thereupon to be taken should be in the form of a trial de novo , and that judgment of the court should consist of compensation for the illegal capture , irrespective of the decision of the national court whose judgment had thus been internationally involved .
as the result of an informal discussion it was decided to provide such procedure by means of a separate protocol which should be ratified at the same time as the prize court convention itself .
accordingly , the government of the netherlands , at the request of this government , proposed under date of may 24 , 1910 , to the powers signatory to the hague convention , the negotiation of a supplemental protocol embodying stipulations providing for this alternative procedure .
it is gratifying to observe that this additional protocol is being signed without objection , by the powers signatory to the original convention , and there is every reason to believe that the international prize court will be soon established .
the identic circular note also proposed that the international prize court when established should be endowed with the functions of an arbitral court of justice under and pursuant to the recommendation adopted by the last hague conference .
the replies received from the various powers to this proposal inspire the hope that this also may be accomplished within the reasonably near future .
it is believed that the establishment of these two tribunals will go a long way toward securing the arbitration of many questions which have heretofore threatened and , at times , destroyed the peace of nations .
appreciating these enlightened tendencies of modern times , the congress at its last session passed a law providing for the appointment of a commission of five members " to be appointed by the president of the united states to consider the expediency of utilizing existing international agencies for the purpose of limiting the armaments of the nations of the world by international agreement , and of constituting the combined navies of the world an international force for the preservation of universal peace , and to consider and report upon any other means to diminish the expenditures of government for military purposes and to lessen the probabilities of war . "
i have not as yet made appointments to this commission because i have invited and am awaiting the expressions of foreign governments as to their willingness to cooperate with us in the appointment of similar commissions or representatives who would meet with our commissioners and by joint action seek to make their work effective .
several important treaties have been negotiated with great britain in the past twelve months .
a preliminary diplomatic agreement has been reached regarding the arbitration of pecuniary claims which each government has against the other .
this agreement , with the schedules of claims annexed , will , as soon as the schedules are arranged , be submitted to the senate for approval .
an agreement between the united states and great britain with regard to the location of the international boundary line between the united states and canada in passamaquoddy bay and to the middle of grand manan channel was reached in a treaty concluded may 21 , 1910 , which has been ratified by both governments and proclaimed , thus making unnecessary the arbitration provided for in the previous treaty of april 11 , 1908 .
the convention concluded january 11 , 1909 , between the united states and great britain providing for the settlement of international differences between the united states and canada including the apportionment between the two countries of certain of the boundary waters and the appointment of commissioners to adjust certain other questions has been ratified by both governments and proclaimed .
the work of the international fisheries commission appointed in 1908 , under the treaty of april 11 , 1908 , between great britain and the united states , has resulted in the formulation and recommendation of uniform regulations governing the fisheries of the boundary waters of canada and the united states for the purpose of protecting and increasing the supply of food fish in such waters .
in completion of this work , the regulations agreed upon require congressional legislation to make them effective and for their enforcement in fulfillment of the treaty stipulations .
in october last the monarchy in portugal was overthrown , a provisional republic was proclaimed , and there was set up a de facto government which was promptly recognized by the government of the united states for purposes of ordinary intercourse pending formal recognition by this and other powers of the governmental entity to be duly established by the national sovereignty .
a disturbance among the native tribes of liberia in a portion of the republic during the early part of this year resulted in the sending , under the treaty of 1862 , of an american vessel of war to the disaffected district , and the liberian authorities , assisted by the good offices of the american naval officers , were able to restore order .
the negotiations which have been undertaken for the amelioration of the conditions found in liberia by the american commission , whose report i transmitted to congress on march 25 last , are being brought to conclusion , and it is thought that within a short time practical measures of relief may be put into effect through the good offices of this government and the cordial cooperation of other governments interested in liberia 's welfare .
to return the visit of the special embassy announcing the accession of his majesty mehemet v , emperor of the ottomans , i sent to constantinople a special ambassador who , in addition to this mission of ceremony , was charged with the duty of expressing to the ottoman government the value attached by the government of the united states to increased and more important relations between the countries and the desire of the united states to contribute to the larger economic and commercial development due to the new regime in turkey .
the rapid development now beginning in that ancient empire and the marked progress and increased commercial importance of bulgaria , roumania , and servia make it particularly opportune that the possibilities of american commerce in the near east should receive due attention .
the national skoupchtina having expressed its will that the principality of montenegro be raised to the rank of kingdom , the prince of montenegro on august 15 last assumed the title of king of montenegro .
it gave me pleasure to accord to the new kingdom the recognition of the united states .
the center of interest in far eastern affairs during the past year has again been china .
it is gratifying to note that the negotiations for a loan to the chinese government for the construction of the trunk railway lines from hankow southward to canton and westward through the yangtse valley , known as the hukuang loan , were concluded by the representatives of the various financial groups in may last and the results approved by their respective governments .
the agreement , already initialed by the chinese government , is now awaiting formal ratification .
the basis of the settlement of the terms of this loan was one of exact equality between america , great britain , france , and germany in respect to financing the loan and supplying materials for the proposed railways and their future branches .
the application of the principle underlying the policy of the united states in regard to the hukuang loan , viz . ,
that of the internationalization of the foreign interest in such of the railways of china as may be financed by foreign countries , was suggested on a broader scale by the secretary of state in a proposal for internationalization and commercial neutralization of all the railways of manchuria .
while the principle which led to the proposal of this government was generally admitted by the powers to whom it was addressed , the governments of russia and japan apprehended practical difficulties in the execution of the larger plan which prevented their ready adherence .
the question of constructing the chinchow - aigun railway by means of an international loan to china is , however , still the subject of friendly discussion by the interested parties .
the policy of this government in these matters has been directed by a desire to make the use of american capital in the development of china an instrument in the promotion of china 's welfare and material prosperity without prejudice to her legitimate rights as an independent political power .
this policy has recently found further exemplification in the assistance given by this government to the negotiations between china and a group of american bankers for a loan of $ 50,000,000 to be employed chiefly in currency reform .
the confusion which has from ancient times existed in the monetary usages of the chinese has been one of the principal obstacles to commercial intercourse with that people .
the united states in its treaty of 1903 with china obtained a pledge from the latter to introduce a uniform national coinage , and the following year , at the request of china , this government sent to peking a member of the international exchange commission , to discuss with the chinese government the best methods of introducing the reform .
in 1908 china sent a commissioner to the united states to consult with american financiers as to the possibility of securing a large loan with which to inaugurate the new currency system , but the death of their majesties , the empress dowager and the emperor of china , interrupted the negotiations , which were not resumed until a few months ago , when this government was asked to communicate to the bankers concerned the request of china for a loan of $ 50,000,000 for the purpose under review .
a preliminary agreement between the american group and china has been made covering the loan .
for the success of this loan and the contemplated reforms which are of the greatest importance to the commercial interests of the united states and the civilized world at large , it is realized that an expert will be necessary , and this government has received assurances from china that such an adviser , who shall be an american , will be engaged .
it is a matter of interest to americans to note the success which is attending the efforts of china to establish gradually a system of representative government .
the provincial assemblies were opened in october , 1909 , and in october of the present year a consultative body , the nucleus of the future national parliament , held its first session at peking .
the year has further been marked by two important international agreements relating to far eastern affairs .
in the russo - japanese agreement relating to manchuria , signed july 4 , 1910 , this government was gratified to note an assurance of continued peaceful conditions in that region and the reaffirmation of the policies with respect to china to which the united states together with all other interested powers are alike solemnly committed .
the treaty annexing korea to the empire of japan , promulgated august 29 , 1910 , marks the final step in a process of control of the ancient empire by her powerful neighbor that has been in progress for several years past .
in communicating the fact of annexation the japanese government gave to the government of the united states assurances of the full protection of the rights of american citizens in korea under the changed conditions .
friendly visits of many distinguished persons from the far east have been made during the year .
chief among these were their imperial highnesses princes tsai - tao and tsai - hsun of china ; and his imperial highness prince higashi fushimi , and prince tokugawa , president of the house of peers of japan .
the secretary of war has recently visited japan and china in connection with his tour to the philippines , and a large delegation of american business men are at present traveling in china .
this exchange of friendly visits has had the happy effect of even further strengthening our friendly international relations .
during the past year several of our southern sister republics celebrated the one hundredth anniversary of their independence .
in honor of these events , special embassies were sent from this country to argentina , chile , and mexico , where the gracious reception and splendid hospitality extended them manifested the cordial relations and friendship existing between those countries and the united states , relations which i am happy to believe have never before been upon so high a plane and so solid a basis as at present .
the congressional commission appointed under a concurrent resolution to attend the festivities celebrating the centennial anniversary of mexican independence , together with a special ambassador , were received with the highest honors and with the greatest cordiality , and returned with the report of the bounteous hospitality and warm reception of president diaz and the mexican people , which left no doubt of the desire of the immediately neighboring republic to continue the mutually beneficial and intimate relations which i feel sure the two governments will ever cherish .
at the fourth pan - american conference which met in buenos aires during july and august last , after seven weeks of harmonious deliberation , three conventions were signed providing for the regulation of trade - marks , patents , and copyrights , which when ratified by the different governments , will go far toward furnishing to american authors , patentees , and owners of trade - marks the protection needed in localities where heretofore it has been either lacking or inadequate .
further , a convention for the arbitration of pecuniary claims was signed and a number of important resolutions passed .
the conventions will in due course be transmitted to the senate , and the report of the delegation of the united states will be communicated to the congress for its information .
the special cordiality between representative men from all parts of america which was shown at this conference can not fail to react upon and draw still closer the relations between the countries which took part in it .
the international bureau of american republics is doing a broad and useful work for pan american commerce and comity .
its duties were much enlarged by the international conference of american states at buenos aires and its name was shortened to the more practical and expressive term of pan american union .
located now in its new building , which was specially dedicated april 26 of this year to the development of friendship , trade and peace among the american nations , it has improved instrumentalities to serve the twenty - two republics of this hemisphere .
i am glad to say that the action of the united states in its desire to remove imminent danger of war between peru and ecuador growing out of a boundary dispute , with the cooperation of brazil and the argentine republic as joint mediators with this government , has already resulted successfully in preventing war .
the government of chile , while not one of the mediators , lent effective aid in furtherance of a preliminary agreement likely to lead on to an amicable settlement , and it is not doubted that the good offices of the mediating powers and the conciliatory cooperation of the governments directly interested will finally lead to a removal of this perennial cause of friction between ecuador and peru .
the inestimable value of cordial cooperation between the sister republics of america for the maintenance of peace in this hemisphere has never been more clearly shown than in this mediation , by which three american governments have given to this hemisphere the honor of first invoking the most far - reaching provisions of the hague convention for the pacific settlement of international disputes .
there has been signed by the representatives of the united states and mexico a protocol submitting to the united states - mexican boundary commission ( whose membership for the purpose of this case is to be increased by the addition of a citizen of canada ) the question of sovereignty over the chamizal tract which lies within the present physical boundaries of the city of e1 paso , tex .
the determination of this question will remove a source of no little annoyance to the two governments .
the republic of honduras has for many years been burdened with a heavy bonded debt held in europe , the interest on which long ago fell in arrears .
finally conditions were such that it became imperative to refund the debt and place the finances of the republic upon a sound basis .
last year a group of american bankers undertook to do this and to advance funds for railway and other improvements contributing directly to the country 's prosperity and commerce -- an arrangement which has long been desired by this government .
negotiations to this end have been under way for more than a year and it is now confidently believed that a short time will suffice to conclude an arrangement which will be satisfactory to the foreign creditors , eminently advantageous to honduras , and highly creditable to the judgment and foresight of the honduranean government .
this is much to be desired since , as recognized by the washington conventions , a strong honduras would tend immensely to the progress and prosperity of central america .
during the past year the republic of nicaragua has been the scene of internecine struggle .
general zelaya , for seventeen years the absolute ruler of nicaragua , was throughout his career the disturber of central america and opposed every plan for the promotion of peace and friendly relations between the five republics .
when the people of nicaragua were finally driven into rebellion by his lawless exactions , he violated the laws of war by the unwarranted execution of two american citizens who had regularly enlisted in the ranks of the revolutionists .
this and other offenses made it the duty of the american government to take measures with a view to ultimate reparation and for the safeguarding of its interests .
this involved the breaking off of all diplomatic relations with the zelaya government for the reasons laid down in a communication from the secretary of state , which also notified the contending factions in nicaragua that this government would hold each to strict accountability for outrages on the rights of american citizens .
american forces were sent to both coasts of nicaragua to be in readiness should occasion arise to protect americans and their interests , and remained there until the war was over and peace had returned to that unfortunate country .
these events , together with zelaya 's continued exactions , brought him so clearly to the bar of public opinion that he was forced to resign and to take refuge abroad .
in the above - mentioned communication of the secretary of state to the charge ' d'affaires of the zelaya government , the opinion was expressed that the revolution represented the wishes of the majority of the nicaraguan people .
this has now been proved beyond doubt by the fact that since the complete overthrow of the madriz government and the occupation of the capital by the forces of the revolution , all factions have united to maintain public order and as a result of discussion with an agent of this government , sent to managua at the request of the provisional government , comprehensive plans are being made for the future welfare of nicaragua , including the rehabilitation of public credit .
the moderation and conciliatory spirit shown by the various factions give ground for the confident hope that nicaragua will soon take its rightful place among the law - abiding and progressive countries of the world .
it gratifies me exceedingly to announce that the argentine republic some months ago placed with american manufacturers a contract for the construction of two battle - ships and certain additional naval equipment .
the extent of this work and its importance to the argentine republic make the placing of the bid an earnest of friendly feeling toward the united states .
the new tariff law , in section 2 , respecting the maximum and minimum tariffs of the united states , which provisions came into effect on april 1 , 1910 , imposed upon the president the responsibility of determining prior to that date whether or not any undue discrimination existed against the united states and its products in any country of the world with which we sustained commercial relations .
in the case of several countries instances of apparent undue discrimination against american commerce were found to exist .
these discriminations were removed by negotiation .
prior to april 1 , 1910 , when the maximum tariff was to come into operation with respect to importations from all those countries in whose favor no proclamation applying the minimum tariff should be issued by the president , one hundred and thirty - four such proclamations were issued .
this series of proclamations embraced the entire commercial world , and hence the minimum tariff of the united states has been given universal application , thus testifying to the satisfactory character of our trade relations with foreign countries .
marked advantages to the commerce of the united states were obtained through these tariff settlements .
foreign nations are fully cognizant of the fact that under section 2 of the tariff act the president is required , whenever he is satisfied that the treatment accorded by them to the products of the united states is not such as to entitle them to the benefits of the minimum tariff of the united states , to withdraw those benefits by proclamation giving ninety days ' notice , after which the maximum tariff will apply to their dutiable products entering the united states .
in its general operation this section of the tariff law has thus far proved a guaranty of continued commercial peace , although there are unfortunately instances where foreign governments deal arbitrarily with american interests within their jurisdiction in a manner injurious and inequitable .
the policy of broader and closer trade relations with the dominion of canada which was initiated in the adjustment of the maximum and minimum provisions of the tariff act of august , 1909 , has proved mutually beneficial .
it justifies further efforts for the readjustment of the commercial relations of the two countries so that their commerce may follow the channels natural to contiguous countries and be commensurate with the steady expansion of trade and industry on both sides of the boundary line .
the reciprocation on the part of the dominion government of the sentiment which was expressed by this government was followed in october by the suggestion that it would be glad to have the negotiations , which had been temporarily suspended during the summer , resumed .
in accordance with this suggestion the secretary of state , by my direction , dispatched two representatives of the department of state as special commissioners to ottawa to confer with representatives of the dominion government .
they were authorized to take such steps for formulating a reciprocal trade agreement as might be necessary and to receive and consider any propositions which the dominion government might care to submit .
pursuant to the instructions issued conferences were held by these commissioners with officials of the dominion government at ottawa in the early part of november .
the negotiations were conducted on both sides in a spirit of mutual accommodation .
the discussion of the common commercial interests of the two countries had for its object a satisfactory basis for a trade arrangement which offers the prospect of a freer interchange for the products of the united states and of canada .
the conferences were adjourned to be resumed in washington in january , when it is hoped that the aspiration of both governments for a mutually advantageous measure of reciprocity will be realized .
all these tariff negotiations , so vital to our commerce and industry , and the duty of jealously guarding the equitable and just treatment of our products , capital , and industry abroad devolve upon the department of state .
the argentine battle - ship contracts , like the subsequent important one for argentine railway equipment , and those for cuban government vessels , were secured for our manufacturers largely through the good offices of the department of state .
the efforts of that department to secure for citizens of the united states equal opportunities in the markets of the world and to expand american commerce have been most successful .
the volume of business obtained in new fields of competition and upon new lines is already very great and congress is urged to continue to support the department of state in its endeavors for further trade expansion .
our foreign trade merits the best support of the government and the most earnest endeavor of our manufacturers and merchants , who , if they do not already in all cases need a foreign market , are certain soon to become dependent on it .
therefore , now is the time to secure a strong position in this field .
i can not leave this subject without emphasizing the necessity of such legislation as will make possible and convenient the establishment of american banks and branches of american banks in foreign countries .
only by such means can our foreign trade be favorably financed , necessary credits be arranged , and proper avail be made of commercial opportunities in foreign countries , and most especially in latin america .
another instrumentality indispensable to the unhampered and natural development of american commerce is merchant marine .
all maritime and commercial nations recognize the importance of this factor .
the greatest commercial nations , our competitors , jealously foster their merchant marine .
perhaps nowhere is the need for rapid and direct mail , passenger and freight communication quite so urgent as between the united states and latin america .
we can secure in no other quarter of the world such immediate benefits in friendship and commerce as would flow from the establishment of direct lines of communication with the countries of latin america adequate to meet the requirements of a rapidly increasing appreciation of the reciprocal dependence of the countries of the western hemisphere upon each other 's products , sympathies and assistance .
i alluded to this most important subject in my last annual message ; it has often been before you and i need not recapitulate the reasons for its recommendation .
unless prompt action be taken the completion of the panama canal will find this the only great commercial nation unable to avail in international maritime business of this great improvement in the means of the world 's commercial intercourse .
quite aside from the commercial aspect , unless we create a merchant marine , where can we find the seafaring population necessary as a natural naval reserve and where could we find , in case of war , the transports and subsidiary vessels without which a naval fleet is arms without a body ?
for many reasons i can not too strongly urge upon the congress the passage of a measure by mail subsidy or other subvention adequate to guarantee the establishment and rapid development of an american merchant marine , and the restoration of the american flag to its ancient place upon the seas .
of course such aid ought only to be given under conditions of publicity of each beneficiary 's business and accounts which would show that the aid received was needed to maintain the trade and was properly used for that purpose .
with our increasing international intercourse , it becomes incumbent upon me to repeat more emphatically than ever the recommendation which i made in my inaugural address that congress shall at once give to the courts of the united states jurisdiction to punish as a crime the violation of the rights of aliens secured by treaty with the united states , in order that the general government of the united states shall be able , when called upon by a friendly nation , to redeem its solemn promise by treaty to secure to the citizens or subjects of that nation resident in the united states , freedom from violence and due process of law in respect to their life , liberty and property .
i also strongly commend to the favorable action of the congress the enactment of a law applying to the diplomatic and consular service the principles embodied in section 1753 of the revised statutes of the united states , in the civil service act of january 16 , 1883 , and the executive orders of june 27 , 1906 , and of november 26 , 1909 .
the excellent results which have attended the partial application of civil service principles to the diplomatic and consular services are an earnest of the benefit to be wrought by a wider and more permanent extension of those principles to both branches of the foreign service .
the marked improvement in the consular service during the four years since the principles of the civil service act were applied to that service in a limited way , and the good results already noticeable from a similar application of civil service principles to the diplomatic service a year ago , convince me that the enactment into law of the general principles of the existing executive regulations could not fail to effect further improvement of both branches of the foreign service , offering as it would by its assurance of permanency of tenure and promotion on merit , an inducement for the entry of capable young men into the service and an incentive to those already in to put forth their best efforts to attain and maintain that degree of efficiency which the interests of our international relations and commerce demand .
during many years past appeals have been made from time to time to congress in favor of government ownership of embassy and legation premises abroad .
the arguments in favor of such ownership have been many and oft repeated and are well known to the congress .
the acquisition by the government of suitable residences and offices for its diplomatic officers , especially in the capitals of the latin - american states and of europe , is so important and necessary to an improved diplomatic service that i have no hesitation in urging upon the congress the passage of some measure similar to that favorably reported by the house committee on foreign affairs on february 14 , 1910 ( report no .
438 ) , that would authorize the gradual and annual acquisition of premises for diplomatic use .
the work of the diplomatic service is devoid of partisanship ; its importance should appeal to every american citizen and should receive the generous consideration of the congress .
every effort has been made by each department chief to reduce the estimated cost of his department for the ensuing fiscal year ending june 30 , 1912 .
i say this in order that congress may understand that these estimates thus made present the smallest sum which will maintain the departments , bureaus , and offices of the government and meet its other obligations under existing law , and that a cut of these estimates would result in embarrassing the executive branch of the government in the performance of its duties .
this remark does not apply to the river and harbor estimates , except to those for expenses of maintenance and the meeting of obligations under authorized contracts , nor does it apply to the public building bill nor to the navy building program .
of course , as to these congress could withhold any part or all of the estimates for them without interfering with the discharge of the ordinary obligations of the government or the performance of the functions of its departments , bureaus , and offices .
a fifty - two million cut .
the final estimates for the year ending june 30 , 1912 , as they have been sent to the treasury , on november 29 of this year , for the ordinary expenses of the government , including those for public buildings , rivers and harbors , and the navy building program , amount to $ 630,494,013.12 .
this is $ 52,964,887.36 less than the appropriations for the fiscal year ending june 30 , 1911 .
it is $ 16,883,153.44 less than the total estimates , including supplemental estimates submitted to congress by the treasury for the year 1911 , and is $ 5,574,659.39 less than the original estimates submitted by the treasury for 1911 .
these figures do not include the appropriations for the panama canal , the policy in respect to which ought to be , and is , to spend as much each year as can be economically and effectively expended in order to complete the canal as promptly as possible , and , therefore , the ordinary motive for cutting down the expense of the government does not apply to appropriations for this purpose .
it will be noted that the estimates for the panama canal for the ensuing year are more than fifty - six millions of dollars , an increase of twenty millions over the amount appropriated for this year -- a difference due to the fact that the estimates for 1912 include something over nineteen millions for the fortification of the canal .
against the estimated expenditures of $ 630,494,013.12 , the treasury has estimated receipts for next year $ 680,000,000 , making a probable surplus of ordinary receipts over ordinary expenditures of about $ 50,000,000 .
a table showing in detail the estimates and the comparisons referred to follows .
the treasury department is one of the original departments of the government .
with the changes in the monetary system made from time to time and with the creation of national banks , it was thought necessary to organize new bureaus and divisions which were added in a somewhat haphazard way and resulted in a duplication of duties which might well now be ended .
this lack of system and economic coordination has attracted the attention of the head of that department who has been giving his time for the last two years , with the aid of experts and by consulting his bureau chiefs , to its reformation .
he has abolished four hundred places in the civil service without at all injuring its efficiency .
merely to illustrate the character of the reforms that are possible , i shall comment on some of the specific changes that are being made , or ought to be made by legislative aid .
the auditing system in vogue is as old as the government and the methods used are antiquated .
there are six auditors and seven assistant auditors for the nine departments , and under the present system the only function which the auditor of a department exercises is to determine , on accounts presented by disbursing officers , that the object of the expenditure was within the law and the appropriation made by congress for the purpose on its face , and that the calculations in the accounts are correct .
he does not examine the merits of the transaction or determine the reasonableness of the price paid for the articles purchased , nor does he furnish any substantial check upon disbursing officers and the heads of departments or bureaus with sufficient promptness to enable the government to recoup itself in full measure for unlawful expenditure .
a careful plan is being devised and will be presented to congress with the recommendation that the force of auditors and employees under them be greatly reduced , thereby effecting substantial economy .
but this economy will be small compared with the larger economy that can be effected by consolidation and change of methods .
the possibilities in this regard have been shown in the reduction of expenses and the importance of methods and efficiency in the office of the auditor for the post office department , who , without in the slightest degree impairing the comprehensiveness and efficiency of his work , has cut down the expenses of his office $ 120,000 a year .
statement of estimates of appropriations for the fiscal years 1912 and 1911 , and of appropriations for 1911 , showing increases and decreases .
final estimates for 1912 as of november 29 original estimates submitted by the treasury for 1911 total estimates for 1911 including supplementals appropriations for 1911 increase ( + ) and decrease ( - ) , 1912 estimates against 1911 total estimates increase ( + ) and decrease ( - ) , 1912 estimates against 1911 total appropriations increase ( + ) and decrease ( - ) , 1911 estimates against 1911 total appropriations legislature$13,426,805.73$13,169,679.70$13,169,679.70$12,938,048.00 + $ 257,126.03 + $ 488,757.73 + $ 231,631.70executive998,170.00472,270.00722,270.00870,750.00 + 275,900.00 + 127,420.00- 148,480.00state department:4,875,576.414,875,301.414,749,801.415,046,701.41 + 125,775.00- 171,125.00- 296,900.00treasury department : 
 treasury department proper68,735,451.0069,865,240.0070,393,543.7569,973,434.61- 1,658,092.75- 1,237,983.61 + 420,109.14public buildings and works11,864,545.606,198,365.607,101,465.605,565,164.00 + 4,763,080.00 + 6,299,381.60 + 1,536,301.60territorial governments202,150.00287,350.00292,350.00282,600.00- 90,200.00- 80,450.00 + 9,750.00independent offices2,638,695.122,400,695.122,492,695.122,128,695.12 + 146,000.00 + 510,000.00 + 364,000.00district of columbia13,602,785.9011,884,928.4912,108,878.4911,440,346.99 + 1,492,907.41 + 2,162,439.91 + 668,532.50war department : 
 war department proper120,104,260.12124,165,656.28125,717,204.77122,322,178.12- 5,612,944.65- 2,217,918.00 + 3,395,026.65rivers and harbors28,232,438.0028,232,465.0028,232,465.0049,390,541.50- 27.00 - 21,158,103.50 - 21,158,076.50navy department : 
 navy department proper116,101,730.24117,029,914.38119,768,860.83119,596,870.46- 3,667,130.59- 3,495,140.22 + 171,990.37new navy building program12,840,428.0012,844,122.0012,844,122.0014,790,122.00- 3,694.00- 1,949,694.00- 1,946,000.00interior department189,151,875.00191,224,182.90193,948,582.02214,754,278.00- 4,796,707.02 - 25,602,403.00 - 20,805,698.98post - office department proper1,697,490.001,695,690.001,695,690.002,085,005.33 + 1,800.00- 387,515.33- 389,315.33deficiency in postal revenues---------------10,634,122.6310,634,122.6310,634,122.63 - 10,634,122.65 - 10,634,122.63 - ----------------department of agriculture19,681,066.0017,681,136.0017,753,931.2417,821,836.00 + 1,927,134.76 + 1,859,230.00- 67,904.76department of commerce and 
 labor16,276,970.0014,187,913.0015,789,271.0014,169,969.32 + 487,699.00 + 2,107,000.68 + 1,619,301.68department of justice10,063,576.009,518,640.009,962,233.009,648,237.99 + 101,343.00 + 415,338.01 + 313,995.01total ordinary630,494,013.12636,068,672.51647,377,166.56683,458,900.48 - 16,883,153.44 - 52,964,887.36 - 36,081,733.92panama canal56,920,847.6948,063,524.7052,063,524.7037,855,000.00 + 4,857,322.99 + 19,065,847.69 + 14,208,524.70total 687,414,860.81684,132,197.21699,440,691.26721,313,900.48 - 12,025,830.45 - 33,899,039.67 - 21,873,209.22customs collection .
again , in the collection of the revenues , especially the customs revenues , a very great improvement has been effected , and further improvements are contemplated .
by the detection of frauds in weighing sugar , upwards of $ 3,400,000 have been recovered from the beneficiaries of the fraud , and an entirely new system free from the possibilities of such abuse has been devised .
the department has perfected the method of collecting duties at the port of new york so as to save the government upwards of ten or eleven million dollars ; and the same spirit of change and reform has been infused into the other customs offices of the country .
the methods used at many places are archaic .
there would seem to be no reason at all why the surveyor of the port , who really acts for the collector , should not be a subordinate of the collector at a less salary and directly under his control , and there is but little reason for the existence of the naval officer , who is a kind of local auditor .
his work is mainly an examination of accounts which is conducted again in washington and which results in no greater security to the government .
the naval officers in the various ports are presidential appointees , many of them drawing good salaries , and those offices should be abolished or with reduced force made part of the central auditing system .
there are entirely too many customs districts and too many customs collectors .
these districts should be consolidated and the collectors in charge of them , who draw good salaries , many of them out of proportion to the collections made , should be abolished or treated as mere branch offices , in accordance with the plan of the treasury department , which will be presented for the consideration of congress .
as an illustration , the cost of collecting $ 1 of revenue at typical small ports like the port of york , me . ,
was $ 50.04 .
at the port of annapolis , md. , it cost $ 309.41 to collect $ 1 of revenue ; at natchez , $ 52.76 ; at alexandria .
va. , $ 122.49 .
it is not essential to the preventing of smuggling that customs districts should be increased in number .
the violation of the customs laws can be quite as easily prevented , and much more economically , by the revenue - cutter service and by the use of the special agent traveling force of the treasury department .
a reorganization of the special customs agents has been perfected with a view to retaining only those who have special knowledge of the customs laws , regulations , and usual methods of evasion , and with this improvement , there will be no danger to the government from the recommended consolidation and abolition of customs districts .
an investigation of the appraising system now in vogue in new york city has shown a sacrifice of the interests of the government by under - appraisement , which is in the course of being remedied by reorganization and the employment of competent experts .
prosecutions have been instituted growing out of the frauds there discovered and are now awaiting hearing in the federal courts .
very great improvements have been made in respect to the mints and assay offices .
diminished appropriations have been asked for those whose continuance is unnecessary , and this year 's estimate of expenses is $ 326,000 less than two years ago .
there is an opportunity for further saving in the abolition of several mints and assay offices that have now become unnecessary .
modern machinery has been installed there , more and better work has been done , and the appropriations have been consequently diminished .
in the bureau of engraving and printing , great economies have been effected .
useless divisions have been abolished with the result of saving $ 440,000 this year in the total expenses of the bureau despite increased business .
the treasurer 's office and that of the division of public moneys in part cover the same functions and this is also true of the office of the register and the division of loans and currency .
plans for the elimination of the duplication in these offices will be presented to congress .
the office of the comptroller of the currency is one most important in the preservation of proper banking methods in the national banking system of the united states , and the present comptroller has impressed his subordinates with the necessity of so conducting their investigations as to establish the principle that every bank failure is unnecessary because proper inspection and notice of threatening conditions to the responsible directors and officers can prevent it .
in our public buildings we still suffer from the method of appropriation , which has been so much criticized in connection with our rivers and harbors .
some method should be devised for controlling the supply of public buildings , so that they will harmonize with the actual needs of the government .
then , when it comes to the actual construction , there has been in the past too little study of the building plans and sites with a view to the actual needs of the government .
post - office buildings which are in effect warehouses for the economical handling of transportation of thousands of tons of mail have been made monumental structures , and often located far from the convenient and economical spot .
in the actual construction of the buildings , a closer scrutiny of the methods employed by the government architects or by architects employed by the government have resulted in decided economies .
it is hoped that more time will give opportunity for a more thorough reorganization .
the last public building bill carried authorization for the ultimate expenditure of $ 33,011,500 and i approved it because of the many good features it contained , just as i approved the river and harbor bill , but it was drawn upon a principle that ought to be abandoned .
it seems to me that the wiser method of preparing a public building bill would be the preparation of a report by a commission of government experts whose duty it should be to report to congress the government 's needs in the way of the construction of public buildings in every part of the country , just as the army engineers make report with reference to the utility of proposed improvements in rivers and harbors , with the added function which i have recommended for the army engineers of including in their recommendation the relative importance of the various projects found to be worthy of approval and execution .
as the treasury department is the one through which the income of the government is collected and its expenditures are disbursed , this seems a proper place to consider the operation of the existing tariff bill , which became a law august 6 , 1909 .
as an income - producing measure , the existing tariff bill has never been exceeded by any customs bill in the history of the country .
the corporation excise tax , proportioned to the net income of every business corporation in the country , has worked well .
the tax has been easily collected .
its prompt payment indicates that the incidence of the tax has not been heavy .
it offers , moreover , an opportunity for knowledge by the government of the general condition and business of all corporations , and that means by far the most important part of the business of the country .
in the original act provision was made for the publication of returns .
this provision was subsequently amended by congress , and the matter left to the regulation of the president .
i have directed the issue of the needed regulations , and have made it possible for the public generally to know from an examination of the record , the returns of all corporations , the stock of which is listed on any public stock exchange or is offered for sale to the general public by advertisement or otherwise .
the returns of those corporations whose stock is not so listed or offered for sale are directed to be open to the inspection and examination of creditors and stockholders of the corporation whose record is sought .
the returns of all corporations are subject to the inspection of any government officer or to the examination of any court , in which the return made by the corporation is relevant and competent evidence .
the schedules of the rates of duty in the payne tariff act have been subjected to a great deal of criticism , some of it just , more of it unfounded , and to much misrepresentation .
the act was adopted in pursuance of a declaration by the party which is responsible for it that a customs bill should be a tariff for the protection of home industries , the measure of the protection to be the difference between the cost of producing the imported article abroad and the cost of producing it at home , together with such addition to that difference as might give a reasonable profit to the home producer .
the chief criticism of this tariff is a charge that in respect to a number of the schedules the declared measure was not followed , but a higher difference retained or inserted by way of undue discrimination in favor of certain industries and manufactures .
little , if any , of the criticism of the tariff has been directed against the protective principle above stated .
the time in which the tariff was prepared undoubtedly was so short as to make it impossible for the congress and its experts to acquire all the information necessary strictly to conform to the declared measure .
in order to avoid criticism of this kind in the future and for the .purpose of more nearly conforming to the party promise , congress at its last session made provision at my request for the continuance of a board created under the authority of the maximum and minimum clause of the tariff bill , and authorized this board to expend the money appropriated under my direction for the ascertainment of the cost of production at home and abroad of the various articles included in the schedules of the tariff .
the tariff board thus appointed and authorized has been diligent in preparing itself for the necessary investigations .
the hope of those who have advocated the use of this board for tariff purposes is that the question of the rate of a duty imposed shall become more of a business question and less of a political question , to be ascertained by experts of long training and accurate ' knowledge .
the halt in business and the shock to business , due to the announcement that a new tariff bill is to be prepared and put in operation , will be avoided by treating the schedules one by one as occasion shall arise for a change in the rates of each , and only after a report upon the schedule by the tariff board competent to make such report .
it is not likely that the board will be able to make a report during the present session of congress on any of the schedules , because a proper examination involves an enormous amount of detail and a great deal of care ; but i hope to be able at the opening of the new congress , or at least during the session of that congress , to bring to its attention the facts in regard to those schedules in the present tariff that may prove to need amendment .
the carrying out of this plan , of course , involves the full cooperation of congress in limiting the consideration in tariff matters to one schedule at a time , because if a proposed amendment to a tariff bill is to involve a complete consideration of all the schedules and another revision , then we shall only repeat the evil from which the business of this country has in times past suffered most grievously by stagnation and uncertainty , pending a resettlement of a law affecting all business directly or indirectly .
i can not too much emphasize the importance and benefit of the plan above proposed for the treatment of the tariff .
it facilitates the removal of noteworthy defects in an important law without a disturbance of business prosperity , which is even more important to the happiness and the comfort of the people than the elimination of instances of injustice in the tariff .
the inquiries which the members of the tariff board made during the last summer into the methods pursued by other governments with reference to the fixing of tariffs and the determination of their effect upon trade , show that each government maintains an office or bureau , the officers and employees of which have made their life work the study of tariff matters , of foreign and home prices and cost of articles imported , and the effect of the tariff upon trade , so that whenever a change is thought to be necessary in the tariff law this office is the source of the most reliable information as to the propriety of the change and its effect .
i am strongly convinced that we need in this government just such an office , and that it can be secured by making the tariff board already appointed a permanent tariff commission , with such duties , powers , and emoluments as it may seem wise to congress to give .
it has been proposed to enlarge the board from three to five .
the present number is convenient , but i do not know that an increase of two members would be objectionable .
whether or not the protective policy is to be continued , and the degree of protection to be accorded to our home industries , are questions which the people must decide through their chosen representatives ; but whatever policy is adopted , it is clear that the necessary legislation should be based on an impartial , thorough , and continuous study of the facts .
the method of impartial scientific study by experts as a preliminary to legislation , which i hope to see ultimately adopted as our fixed national policy with respect to the tariff , rivers and harbors , waterways , and public buildings , is also being pursued by the nonpartisan monetary commission of congress .
an exhaustive and most valuable study of the banking and currency systems of foreign countries has been completed .
a comparison of the business methods and institutions of our powerful and successful commercial rivals with our own is sure to be of immense value .
i urge upon congress the importance of a nonpartisan and disinterested study and consideration of our banking and currency system .
it is idle to dream of commercial expansion , and of the development of our national trade on a scale that measures up to our matchless opportunities , unless we can lay a solid foundation in a sound and enduring banking and currency system .
the problem is not partisan , is not sectional -- it is national .
the war department has within its jurisdiction the management of the army , and , in connection therewith , the coast defenses ; the government of the dependencies of the philippines and of porto rico ; the recommendation of plans for the improvement of harbors and waterways , and their execution when adopted ; and , by virtue of an executive order , the supervision of the construction of the panama canal .
the army of the united states is a small body compared with the total number of people for the preservation of whose peace and good order it is a last resource .
the army now numbers about 80,000 men , of whom about 18,000 are engaged in the coast artillery and detailed to the management and use of the guns in the forts and batteries that protect our coasts .
the rest of the army , or about 60,000 , is the mobile part of our national forces and is divided into 31 regiments of infantry , including the porto rican regiment , 15 regiments of cavalry , 6 regiments of field artillery , a corps of ordnance , of engineers , and of signal , a quartermaster 's department , a commissary department , and a medical corps .
the general plan for an army of the united states at peace should be that of a skeleton organization with an excess of trained officers and thus capable of rapid enlargement by enlistments , to be supplemented in emergency by the national militia and a volunteer force .
in some measure this plan has been adopted in the very large proportion of cavalry and field artillery as compared with infantry in the present army and on a peace basis .
an infantry force can be trained in six months ; a cavalry or a light artillery force not under one and one - half or two years ; hence the importance of having ready a larger number of the more skilled soldiers .
the militia system , for which congress by the constitution is authorized to provide , was developed by the so - called dick law , under which the discipline , the tactics , the drill , the rank , the uniform , and the various branches of the militia are assimilated as far as possible to those of the regular army .
under the militia law , as the constitution provides , the governors of the states appoint the militia officers , but , by appropriations from congress , states have been induced to comply with the rules of assimilation between the regular army and the militia , so that now there is a force , the efficiency of which differs in different states , which could be incorporated under a single command with the regular army , and which for some time each year receives the benefit of drill and maneuvers with conditions approximating actual military service , under the supervision of regular army officers .
in the army of the united states , in addition to the regular forces and the militia forces which may be summoned to the defense of the nation by the president , there is also the volunteer force , which made up a very large part of the army in the civil war , and which in any war of long continuance would become its most important constituent .
there is an act which dates from the civil war , known as the volunteer act , which makes provision for the enlistment of volunteers in the army of the united states in time of war .
this was found to be so defective in the philippine war that a special act for the organization of volunteer regiments to take part in that war was adopted , and it was much better adapted to the necessities of the case .
there is now pending in congress a bill repealing the present volunteer act and making provision for the organization of volunteer forces in time of war , which is admirably adapted to meet the exigencies which would be then presented .
the passage of the bill would not entail a dollar 's expense upon the government at this time , or in the future , until war comes , but when war does come the methods therein directed are in accordance with the best military judgment as to what they ought to be , and the act would prevent the necessity for the discussion of new legislation and the delays incident to its consideration and adoption .
i earnestly urge the passage of this volunteer bill .
i further recommend that congress establish a commission to determine as early as practicable a comprehensive policy for the organization , mobilization and administration of the regular army , the organized militia , and the volunteer forces in the event of war .
one of the great difficulties in the prompt organization and mobilization of militia and volunteer forces is the absence of competent officers of the rank of captain to teach the new army , by the unit of the company , the business of being soldiers and of taking care of themselves so as to render effective service .
this need of army officers can only be supplied by provisions of law authorizing the appointment of a greater number of army officers than are needed to supply the commands of regular army troops now enlisted in the service .
there are enough regular army officers to command the troops now enlisted , but congress has authorized , and the department has followed the example of congress and exercised the authority conferred by detailing these army officers to duty other than that of the command of troops .
for instance , there are a large number of army officers assigned to duty with military colleges or in colleges in which military training is given .
then a large number of officers are assigned to general staff duty , and there are various other places to which army officers can be and are legally assigned , which take them away from their regiments and companies .
in order that the militia of each state should be properly drilled and made more like the regular army , regular army officers should be detailed to assist the adjutant - general of each state in the supervision of the state militia ; but this is impossible unless provision is made by congress for a very considerable increase in the number of company and field officers of the army .
a bill is pending in congress for this purpose , and i earnestly hope that , in the interest of the proper development of a republican army , an army , small in the time of peace but possible of prompt and adequate enlargement in time of war , shall become possible under the laws of the united states .
a bill , the strong argument for which can be based on the ground quite similar to that of the increased officers bill , is a bill for the increase of sixty in the army engineers .
the army engineers are largely employed in the expenditure of the moneys appropriated for the improvement of rivers and harbors and in the construction of the panama canal .
this , in addition to their military duties , which include the building of fortifications both on our coasts and in our dependencies , requires many more engineers than the army has , and public works , civil and military , are , therefore , much delayed .
i earnestly recommend the passage of this bill , which passed the house at the last session and is now pending in the senate .
i have directed that the estimates for appropriation for the improvement of coast defenses in the united states should be reduced to a minimum , while those for the completion of the needed fortifications at corregidor in the philippine islands and at pearl harbor in the hawaiian islands should be expedited as much as possible .
the proposition to make olongapo and subig bay the naval base for the pacific was given up , and it is to be treated merely as a supply station , while the fortifications in the philippines are to be largely confined to corregidor island and the adjacent islands which command entrance to manila bay and which are being rendered impregnable from land and sea attack .
the pacific naval base has been transferred to pearl harbor in the hawaiian islands .
this necessitates the heavy fortification of the harbor and the establishment of an important military station near honolulu .
i urge that all the estimates made by the war department for these purposes be approved by congressional appropriation .
during the last summer , at my request , the secretary of war visited the philippine islands and has described his trip in his report .
he found the islands in a state of tranquillity and growing prosperity , due largely to the change in the tariff laws , which has opened the markets of america to the products of the philippines , and has opened the philippine markets to american manufactures .
the rapid increase in the trade between the two countries is shown in the following table : 
 philippine exports , fiscal years 1908 - 1910 .
[ exclusive of gold and silver . ]
fiscal year to : united states to : other countries total 1908$10,323,233$22,493,334$32,816,567190910,215,33120,778,23230,993,563191018,741,77121,122,39839,864,169note .-- latest monthly returns show exports for the year ending august , 1910 , to the united states $ 20,035,902 , or 49 per cent of the $ 41,075,738 total , against 031,275 to the united states , or 34 per cent of the $ 32,183,871 total for the year ending august , 1909 .
philippine imports , fiscal years 1908 - 1910 .
[ exclusive of gold and silver and government supplies . ]
fiscal year from : united states from : other countries total 1908$5,079,487$25,838,870$30,918,35719094,691,77023,100,27027,792,397191010,775,30126,292,32937,067,630note .-- latest monthly returns show imports for the year ending august , 1910 , from the united states $ 11,615,982 , or 30 per cent of the $ 39,025,667 total , against $ 5,193,419 from the united states , or 18 per cent of the $ 28,948,011 total for the year ending august , 1909 .
the year has been one of prosperity and progress in porto rico .
certain political changes are embodied in the bill " to provide a civil government for porto rico and for other purposes , " which passed the house of representatives on june 15 , 1910 , at the last session of congress , and is now awaiting the action of the senate .
the importance of those features of this bill relating to public health and sanitation can not be overestimated .
the removal from politics of the judiciary by providing for the appointment of the municipal judges is excellent , and i recommend that a step further be taken by providing therein for the appointment of secretaries and marshals of these courts .
the provision in the bill for a partially elective senate , the number of elective members being progressively increased , is of doubtful wisdom , and the composition of the senate as provided in the bill when introduced in the house , seems better to meet conditions existing in porto rico .
this is an important measure , and i recommend its early consideration and passage .
i have already expressed my opinion to congress in respect to the character of the river and harbor bills which should be enacted into law ; and i have exercised as much power as i could under the law in directing the chief of engineers to make his report to congress conform to the needs of the committee framing such a bill in determining which of the proposed improvements is the more important and ought to be completed first , and promptly .
at the instance of colonel goethals , the army engineer officer in charge of the work on the panama canal , i have just made a visit to the isthmus to inspect the work done and to consult with him on the ground as to certain problems which are likely to arise in the near future .
the progress of the work is most satisfactory .
if no unexpected obstacle presents itself , the canal will be completed well within the time fixed by colonel goethals , to wit , january 1 , 1915 , and within the estimate of cost , $ 375,000,000 .
press reports have reached the united states from time to time giving accounts of slides of earth of very large yardage in the culebra cut and elsewhere along the line , from which it might be inferred that the work has been much retarded and that the time of completion has been necessarily postponed .
the report of doctor hayes , of the geological survey , whom i sent within the last month to the isthmus to make an investigation , shows that this section of the canal zone is composed of sedimentary rocks of rather weak structure and subject to almost immediate disintegration when exposed to the air .
subsequent to the deposition of these sediments , igneous rocks , harder and more durable , have been thrust into them , and being cold at the time of their intrusion united but indifferently with the sedimentary rock at the contacts .
the result of these conditions is that as the cut is deepened , causing unbalanced pressures , slides from the sides of the cut have occurred .
these are in part due to the flowing of surface soil and decomposed sedimentary rocks upon inclined surfaces of the underlying undecomposed rock and in part by the crushing of structurally weak beds under excessive pressure .
these slides occur on one side or the other of the cut through a distance of 4 or 5 miles , and now that their character is understood , allowance has been made in the calculations of yardage for the amount of slides which will have to be removed and the greater slope that will have to be given to the bank in many places in order to prevent their recurrence .
such allowance does not exceed ten millions of yards .
considering that the number of yards removed from this cut on an average of each month through the year is 1,300,000 , and that the total remaining to be excavated , including slides , is about 30,000,000 yards , it is seen that this addition to the excavation does not offer any great reason for delay .
while this feature of the material to be excavated in the cut will not seriously delay or obstruct the construction of a canal of the lock type , the increase of excavation due to such slides in the cut made 85 feet deeper for a sea - level canal would certainly have been so great as to delay its completion to a time beyond the patience of the american people .
among questions arising for present solution is whether the canal shall be fortified .
i have already stated to the congress that i strongly favor fortification and i now reiterate this opinion and ask your consideration of the subject in the light of the report already before you made by a competent board .
if , in our discretion , we believe modern fortifications to be necessary to the adequate protection and policing of the canal , then it is our duty to construct them .
we have built the canal .
it is our property .
by convention we have indicated our desire for , and indeed undertaken , its universal and equal use .
it is also well known that one of the chief objects in the construction of the canal has been to increase the military effectiveness of our navy .
failure to fortify the canal would make the attainment of both these aims depend upon the mere moral obligations of the whole international public -- obligations which we would be powerless to enforce and which could never in any other way be absolutely safeguarded against a desperate and irresponsible enemy .
another question which arises for consideration and possible legislation is the question of tolls in the canal .
this question is necessarily affected by the probable tonnage which will go through the canal .
it is all a matter of estimate , but one of the government commission in 1900 investigated the question and made a report .
he concluded that the total tonnage of the vessels employed in commerce that could use the isthmian canal in 1914 would amount to 6,843,805 tons net register , and that this traffic would increase 25.1 per cent per decade ; that it was not probable that all the commerce included in the totals would at once abandon the routes at present followed and make use of the new canal , and that it might take some time , perhaps two years , to readjust trade with reference to the new conditions which the canal would establish .
he did not include , moreover , the tonnage of war vessels , although it is to be inferred that such vessels would make considerable use of the canal .
in the matter of tolls he reached the conclusion that a dollar a net ton would not drive business away from the canal , but that a higher rate would do so .
in determining what the tolls should be we certainly ought not to insist that they should at once amount to enough to pay the interest on the investment of $ 400,000,000 which the united states has made in the construction of the canal .
we ought not to do this , first , because the benefit to be derived by the united states from this expenditure is not to be measured solely by a return upon the investment .
if it were , then the construction might well have been left to private enterprise .
it was because an adequate return upon the money invested could not be expected immediately , or in the near future , and because there were peculiar political advantages to be derived from the construction of the canal that it fell to the government to advance the money and perform the work .
in addition to the benefit to our naval strength , the canal greatly increases the trade facilities of the united states .
it will undoubtedly cheapen the rates of transportation in all freight between the eastern and western seaboard .
then , if we are to have a world canal , and if we are anxious that the world 's trade shall use it , we must recognize that we have an active competitor in the suez canal and that there are other means of carriage between the two oceans -- by the tehuantepec railroad and by other railroads and freight routes in central america .
in all these cases the question whether the panama canal is to be used and its tonnage increased will be determined mainly by the charge for its use .
my own impression is that the tolls ought not to exceed $ 1 per net ton .
on january 1 , 1911 , the tolls in the suez canal are to be 7 francs and 25 centimes for i net ton by suez canal measurement , which is a modification of danube measurement a dollar a ton will secure under the figures above a gross income from the panama canal of nearly $ 7,000,000 .
the cost of maintenance and operation is estimated to exceed $ 3,000,000 .
ultimately , of course , with the normal increase in trade , we hope the income will approximate the interest charges upon the investment .
the inquiries already made of the chief engineer of the canal show that the present consideration of this question is necessary in order that the commerce of the world may have time to adjust itself to the new conditions resulting from the opening of this new highway .
on the whole i should recommend that within certain limits the president be authorized to fix the tolls of the canal and adjust them to what seems to be commercial necessity .
the next question that arises is as to the maintenance , management , and general control of the canal after its completion .
it should be premised that it is an essential part of our navy establishment to have the coal , oil and other ship supplies , a dry dock , and repair shops , conveniently located with reference to naval vessels passing through the canal .
now , if the government , for naval purposes , is to undertake to furnish these conveniences to the navy , and they are conveniences equally required by commercial vessels , there would seem to be strong reasons why the government should take over and include in its management the furnishing , not only to the navy but to the public , dry - dock and repair - shop facilities , and the sale of coal , oil , and other ship supplies .
the maintenance of a lock canal of this enormous size in a sparsely populated country and in the tropics , where the danger from disease is always present , requires a large and complete and well - trained organization with full police powers , exercising the utmost care .
the visitor to the canal who is impressed with the wonderful freedom from tropical diseases on the isthmus must not be misled as to the constant vigilance that is needed to preserve this condition .
the vast machinery of the locks , the necessary amount of dredging , the preservation of the banks of the canal from slides , the operation and the maintenance of the equipment of the railway -- will all require a force , not , of course , to be likened in any way to the present organization for construction , but a skilled body of men who can keep in a state of usefulness this great instrument of commerce .
such an organization makes it easy to include within its functions the furnishing of dry - dock , fuel , repairs and supply facilities to the trade of the world .
these will be more essential at the isthmus of panama than they are at port said or suez , because there are no depots for coal , supplies , and other commercial necessities within thousands of miles of the isthmus .
another important reason why these ancillary duties may well be undertaken by the government is the opportunity for discrimination between patrons of the canal that is offered where private concessions are granted for the furnishing of these facilities .
nothing would create greater prejudice against the canal than the suspicion that certain lines of traffic were favored in the furnishing of supplies or that the supplies were controlled by any large interest that might have a motive for increasing the cost of the use of the canal .
it may be added that the termini are not ample enough to permit the fullest competition in respect to the furnishing of these facilities and necessities to the world 's trade even if it were wise to invite such competition and the granting of the concession would necessarily , under these circumstances , take on the appearance of privilege or monopoly .
i can not close this reference to the canal without suggesting as a wise amendment to the interstate commerce law a provision prohibiting interstate commerce railroads from owning or controlling ships engaged in the trade through the panama canal .
i believe such a provision may be needed to save to the people of the united states the benefits of the competition in trade between the eastern and western seaboards which this canal was constructed to secure .
the duties of the department of justice have been greatly increased by legislation of congress enacted in the interest of the general welfare of the people and extending its activities into avenues plainly within its constitutional jurisdiction , but which it has not been thought wise or necessary for the general government heretofore to occupy .
i am glad to say that under the appropriations made for the department , the attorney - general has so improved its organization that a vast amount of litigation of a civil and criminal character has been disposed of during the current year .
this will explain the necessity for slightly increasing the estimates for the expenses of the department .
his report shows the recoveries made on behalf of the government , of duties fraudulently withheld , public lands improperly patented , fines and penalties for trespass , prosecutions and convictions under the antitrust law , and prosecutions under the interstate - commerce law .
i invite especial attention to the prosecutions under the federal law of the so - called " bucket shops , " and of those schemes to defraud in which the use of the mail is an essential part of the fraudulent conspiracy , prosecutions which have saved ignorant and weak members of the public and are saving them hundreds of millions of dollars .
the violations of the antitrust law present perhaps the most important litigation before the department , and the number of cases filed shows the activity of the government in enforcing that statute .
in a special message last year i brought to the attention of congress the propriety and wisdom of enacting a general law providing for the incorporation of industrial and other companies engaged in interstate commerce , and i renew my recommendation in that behalf .
i invite the attention of congress to the great number of claims which , at the instance of congress , have been considered by the court of claims and decided to be valid claims against the government .
the delay that occurs in the payment of the money due under the claims injures the reputation of the government as an honest debtor , and i earnestly recommend that those claims which come to congress with the judgment and approval of the court of claims should be promptly paid .
one great crying need in the united states is cheapening the cost of litigation by simplifying judicial procedure and expediting final judgment .
under present conditions the poor man is at a woeful disadavantage in a legal contest with a corporation or a rich opponent .
the necessity for the reform exists both in the united states courts and in all state courts .
in order to bring it about , however , it naturally falls to the general government by its example to furnish a model to all states .
a legislative commission appointed by joint resolution of congress to revise the procedure in the united states courts has as yet made no report .
under the law the supreme court of the united states has the power and is given the duty to frame the equity rules of procedure which are to obtain in the federal courts of first instance .
in view of the heavy burden of pressing litigation which that court has had to carry , with one or two of its members incapacitated through ill health , it has not been able to take up problems of improving the equity procedure , which has practically remained the same since the organization of the court in 1789 .
it is reasonable to expect that with all the vacancies upon the court filled , it will take up the question of cheapening and simplifying the procedure in equity in the courts of the united states .
the equity business is much the more important in the federal courts , and i may add much the more expensive .
i am strongly convinced that the best method of improving judicial procedure at law is to empower the supreme court to do it through the medium of the rules of the court , as in equity .
this is the way in which it has been done in england , and thoroughly done .
the simplicity and expedition of procedure in the english courts today make a model for the reform of other systems .
several of the lord chancellors of england and of the chief justices have left their lasting impress upon the history of their country by their constructive ability in proposing and securing the passage of remedial legislation effecting law reforms .
i can not conceive any higher duty that the supreme court could perform than in leading the way to a simplification of procedure in the united states courts .
no man ought to have , as a matter of right , a review of his case by the supreme court .
he should be satisfied by one hearing before a court of first instance and one review by a court of appeals .
the proper and chief usefulness of a supreme court , and especially of the supreme court of the united states , is , in the cases which come before it , so to expound the law , and especially the fundamental law -- the constitution -- as to furnish precedents for the inferior courts in future litigation and for the executive officers in the construction of statutes and the performance of their legal duties .
therefore , any provisions for review of cases by the supreme court that cast upon that court the duty of passing on questions of evidence and the construction of particular forms of instruments , like indictments , or wills , or contracts , decisions not of general application or importance , merely clog and burden the court and render more difficult its higher function , which makes it so important a part of the framework of our government .
the supreme court is now carrying an unnecessary burden of appeals of this kind , and i earnestly urge that it be removed .
the statutes respecting the review by the supreme court of the united states of decisions of the court of appeals of the district of columbia ought to be so amended as to place that court in the same position with respect to the review of its decisions as that of the various united states circuit courts of appeals .
the act of march 2 , 1907 , authorizing appeals by the government from certain judgments in criminal cases where the defendant has not been put in jeopardy , within the meaning of the constitution , should be amended so that such appeals should be taken to the circuit courts of appeals instead of to the supreme court in all cases except those involving the construction of the constitution or the constitutionality of a statute , with the same power in the supreme court to review on certiorari as is now exercised by that court over determinations of the several circuit courts of appeals .
appeals in copyright cases should reach final judgment in the courts of appeals instead of the supreme court as now .
the decision of the courts of appeals should be made final also in all cases wherein jurisdiction rests on both diverse citizenship and the existence of a federal question , and not as now be reviewable in the supreme court when the case involves more than one thousand dollars .
appeals from the united states court in porto rico should run to the circuit court of appeals of the third circuit instead of to the supreme court .
these suggested changes would , i am advised , relieve the supreme court of the consideration of about 100 cases annually .
the american bar association has had before it the question of reducing the burden of litigation involved in reversals on review and new trials or re - hearings and in frivolous appeals in habeas corpus and criminal cases .
their recommendations have been embodied in bills now pending in congress .
the recommendations are not radical , but they will accomplish much if adopted into law , and i earnestly recommend the passage of the bills embodying them .
i wish to renew my urgent recommendation made in my last annual message in favor of the passage of a law which shall regulate the issuing of injunctions in equity without notice in accordance with the best practice now in vogue in the courts of the united states .
i regard this of especial importance , first because it has been promised , and second because it will deprive those who now complain of certain alleged abuses in the improper issuing of injunctions without notice of any real ground for further amendment and will take away all semblance of support for the extremely radical legislation they propose , which will be most pernicious if adopted , will sap the foundations of judicial power , and legalize that cruel social instrument , the secondary boycott .
i further recommend to congress the passage of the bill now pending for the increase in the salaries of the federal judges , by which the chief justice of the united states shall receive $ 17,500 and the associate justices of the supreme court $ 17,000 ; the circuit judges constituting the circuit court of appeals shall receive $ 10,000 , and the district judges $ 9,000 .
these judges exercise a wise jurisdiction and their duties require of them a profound knowledge of the law , great ability in the dispatch of business , and care and delicacy in the exercise of their jurisdiction so as to avoid conflict whenever possible between the federal and the state courts .
the positions they occupy ought to be filled by men who have shown the greatest ability in their professional work at the bar , and it is the poorest economy possible for the government to pay salaries so low for judicial service as not to be able to command the best talent of the legal profession in every part of the country .
the cost of living is such , especially in the large cities , that even the salaries fixed in the proposed bill will enable the incumbents to accumulate little , if anything , to support their families after their death .
nothing is so important to the preservation of our country and its beloved institutions as the maintenance of the independence of the judiciary , and next to the life tenure an adequate salary is the most material contribution to the maintenance of independence on the part of our judges .
at its last session congress made provision for the establishment of savings banks by the post - office department of this government , by which , under the general control of trustees , consisting of the postmaster - general , the secretary of the treasury and the attorney - general , the system could be begun in a few cities and towns , and enlarged to cover within its operations as many cities and towns and as large a part of the country as seemed wise .
the initiation and establishment of such a system has required a great deal of study on the part of the experts in the post - office and treasury departments , but a system has now been devised which is believed to be more economical and simpler in its operation than any similar system abroad .
arrangements have been perfected so that savings banks will be opened in some cities and towns on the 1st of january , and there will be a gradual extension of the benefits of the plan to the rest of the country .
as i have said , the post - office department is a great business department , and i am glad to note the fact that under its present management principles of business economy and efficiency are being applied .
for many years there has been a deficit in the operations of the post - office department which has been met by appropriation from the treasury .
the appropriation estimated for last year from the treasury over and above the receipts of the department was $ 17,500,000 .
i am glad to record the fact that of that $ 17,500,000 estimated for , $ 11,500,000 were saved and returned to the treasury .
the personal efforts of the postmaster - general secured the effective cooperation of the thousands of postmasters and other postal officers throughout the country in carrying out his plans of reorganization and retrenchment .
the result is that the postmaster - general has been able to make his estimate of expenses for the present year so low as to keep within the amount the postal service is expected to earn .
it is gratifying to report that the reduction in the deficit has been accomplished without any curtailment of postal facilities .
on the contrary the service has been greatly extended during the year in all its branches .
a principle which the postmaster - general has recommended and sought to have enforced in respect to all appointments has been that those appointees who have rendered good service should be reappointed .
this has greatly strengthened the interest of postmasters throughout the country in maintaining efficiency and economy in their offices , because they believed generally that this would secure for them a further tenure .
upon the recommendation of the postmaster - general , i have included in the classified service all assistant postmasters , and i believe that this giving a secure tenure to those who are the most important subordinates of postmasters will add much to the efficiency of their offices and an economical administration .
a large number of the fourth - class postmasters are now in the classified service .
i think it would be wise to put in the classified service the first , second , and third class postmasters .
it is more logical to do this than to classify the fourth - class postmasters , for the reason that the fourth - class post - offices are invariably small , and the postmasters are necessarily men who must combine some other business with the postmastership , whereas the first , second , and third class postmasters are paid a sufficient amount to justify the requirement that they shall have no other business and that they shall devote their attention to their post - office duties .
to classify first , second , and third class postmasters would require the passage of an act changing the method of their appointment so as to take away the necessity for the advice and consent of the senate .
i am aware that this is inviting from the senate a concession in respect to its quasi executive power that is considerable , but i believe it to be in the interest of good administration and efficiency of service .
to make this change would take the postmasters out of politics ; would relieve congressmen who now are burdened with the necessity of making recommendations for these places of a responsibility that must be irksome and can create nothing but trouble ; and it would result in securing from postmasters greater attention to business , greater fidelity , and consequently greater economy and efficiency in the post - offices which they conduct .
the unrestricted manner in which the franking privilege is now being used by the several branches of the federal service and by congress has laid it open to serious abuses , a fact clearly established through investigations recently instituted by the department .
while it has been impossible without a better control of franking to determine the exact expense to the government of this practice , there can be no doubt that it annually reaches into the millions .
it is believed that many abuses of the franking system could be prevented , and consequently a marked economy effected , by supplying through the agencies of the postal service special official envelopes and stamps for the free mail of the government , all such envelopes and stamps to be issued on requisition to the various branches of the federal service requiring them , and such records to be kept of all official stamp supplies as will enable the post - office department to maintain a proper postage account covering the entire volume of free government mail .
as the first step in the direction of this reform , special stamps and stamped envelopes have been provided for use instead of franks in the free transmission of the official mail resulting from the business of the new postal savings system .
by properly recording the issuance of such stamps and envelopes accurate records can be kept of the cost to the government of handling the postal savings mail , which is certain to become an important item of expense and one that should be separately determined .
in keeping with this plan it is hoped that congress will authorize the substitution of special official stamps and stamped envelopes for the various forms of franks now used to carry free of postage the vast volume of departmental and congressional mail matter .
during the past year methods of accounting similar to those employed in the most progressive of our business establishments have been introduced in the postal service and nothing has so impeded the department 's plan in this regard as the impossibility of determining with any exactness how far the various expenses of the postal service are increased by the present unrestricted use of the franking privilege .
it is believed that the adoption of a more exact method of dealing with this problem as proposed will prove to be of tremendous advantage in the work of placing the postal service on a strictly businesslike basis .
in my last annual message i invited the attention of congress to the inadequacy of the postal rate imposed upon second - class mail matter in so far as that includes magazines , and showed by figures prepared by experts of the post - office department that the government was rendering a service to the magazines , costing many millions in excess of the compensation paid .
an answer was attempted to this by the representatives of the magazines , and a reply was filed to this answer by the post - office department .
the utter inadequacy of the answer , considered in the light of the reply of the post - office department , i think must appeal to any fair - minded person .
whether the answer was all that could be said in behalf of the magazines is another question .
i agree that the question is one of fact ; but i insist that if the fact is as the experts of the post - office department show , that we are furnishing to the owners of magazines a service worth millions more than they pay for it , then justice requires that the rate should be increased .
the increase in the receipts of the department resulting from this change may be devoted to increasing the usefulness of the department in establishing a parcels post and in reducing the cost of first - class postage to one cent .
it has been said by the postmaster - general that a fair adjustment might be made under which the advertising part of the magazine should be charged for at a different and higher rate from that of the reading matter .
this would relieve many useful magazines that are not circulated at a profit , and would not shut them out from the use of the mails by a prohibitory rate .
with respect to the parcels post , i respectfully recommend its adoption on all rural - delivery routes , and that 11 pounds -- the international limit -- be made the limit of carriage in such post , and this , with a view to its general extension when the income of the post - office will permit it and the postal savings banks shall have been fully established .
the same argument is made against the parcels post that was made against the postal savings bank -- that it is introducing the government into a business which ought to be conducted by private persons , and is paternalism .
the post - office department has a great plant and a great organization , reaching into the most remote hamlet of the united states , and with this machinery it is able to do a great many things economically that if a new organization were necessary it would be impossible to do without extravagant expenditure .
that is the reason why the postal savings bank can be carried on at a small additional cost , and why it is possible to incorporate at a very inconsiderable expense a parcels post in the rural - delivery system .
a general parcels post will involve a much greater outlay .
in the last annual report of the secretary of the navy and in my annual message , attention was called to the new detail of officers in the navy department by which officers of flag rank were assigned to duty as aides to the secretary in respect to naval operations , personnel , inspection , and material .
this change was a substantial compliance with the recommendation of the commission on naval reorganization , headed by mr. justice moody , and submitted to president roosevelt on february 26 , 1909 .
through the advice of this committee of line officers , the secretary is able to bring about a proper coordination of all the branches of the naval department with greater military efficiency .
the secretary of the navy recommends that this new organization be recognized by legislation and thus made permanent .
i concur in the recommendation .
the secretary , in view of the conclusions of a recent court of inquiry on certain phases of marine corps administration , recommends that the major - general commandant of the marine corps be appointed for a four years ' term , and that officers of the adjutant and inspector 's department be detailed from the line .
he also asks for legislation to improve the conditions now existing in the personnel of officers of the navy , particularly with regard to the age and experience of flag officers and captains , and points out that it is essential to the highest efficiency of the navy that the age of our officers be reduced and that flag officers , particularly , should gain proper experience as flag officers , in order to enable them to properly command fleets .
i concur in the secretary 's recommendations .
i commend to your attention the report of the secretary on the change in the system of cost accounting in navy - yards , and also to the history of the naval supply fund and the present conditions existing in regard to that matter .
under previous practice and what now seems to have been an erroneous construction of the law , the supply fund of the navy was increased from $ 2,700,000 to something over $ 14,000,000 , and a system of accounting was introduced which prevented the striking of a proper balance and a knowledge of the exact cost of maintaining the naval establishment .
the system has now been abandoned and a naval supply account established by law july 1 , 1910 .
the naval supply fund of $ 2,700,000 is now on deposit in the treasury to the credit of the department .
the secretary recommends that the naval supply account be made permanent by law and that the $ 2,700,000 of the naval supply fund be covered into the treasury as unnecessary , and i ask for legislative authority to do this .
this sum when covered into the treasury will be really a reduction in the recorded naval cost for this year .
the estimates of the navy department are $ 5,000,000 less than the appropriations for the same purpose last year , and included in this is the building program of the same amount as that submitted for your consideration last year .
it is merely carrying out the plan of building two battleships a year , with a few needed auxiliary vessels .
i earnestly hope that this program will be adopted .
the secretary of the navy has given personal examination to every navy - yard and has studied the uses of the navy - yards with reference to the necessities of our fleet .
with a fleet considerably less than half the size of that of the british navy , we have shipyards more than double the number , and there are several of these shipyards , expensively equipped with modern machinery , which after investigation the secretary of the navy believes to be entirely useless for naval purposes .
he asks authority to abandon certain of them and to move their machinery to other places where it can be made of use .
in making these recommendations the secretary is following directly along progressive lines which have been adopted in our great commercial and manufacturing consolidations in this country ; that is , of dismantling unnecessary and inadequate plants and discontinuing their existence where it has been demonstrated that it is unprofitable to continue their maintenance at an expense not commensurate to their product .
the secretary points out that the most important naval base in the west indies is guantanamo , in the southeastern part of cuba .
its geographical situation is admirably adapted to protect the commercial paths to the panama canal , and he shows that by the expenditure of less than half a million dollars , with the machinery which he shall take from other navy - yards , he can create a naval station at guantanamo of sufficient size and equipment to serve the purpose of an emergency naval base .
i earnestly join in the recommendation that he be given the authority which he asks .
i am quite aware that such action is likely to arouse local opposition ; but i conceive it to be axiomatic that in legislating in the interest of the navy , and for the general protection of the country by the navy , mere local pride or pecuniary interest in the establishment of a navy - yard or station ought to play no part .
the recommendation of the secretary is based upon the judgment of impartial naval officers , entirely uninfluenced by any geographical or sectional considerations .
i unite with the secretary in the recommendation that an appropriation be made to construct a suitable crypt at annapolis for the custody of the remains of john paul jones .
the complete success of our country in arctic exploration should not remain unnoticed .
for centuries there has been friendly rivalry in this field of effort between the foremost nations and between the bravest and most accomplished men .
expeditions to the unknown north have been encouraged by enlightened governments and deserved honors have been granted to the daring men who have conducted them .
the unparalleled accomplishment of an american in reaching the north pole , april 6 , 1909 , approved by critical examination of the most expert scientists , has added to the distinction of our navy , to which he belongs , and reflects credit upon his country .
his unique success has received generous acknowledgment from scientific bodies and institutions of learning in europe and america .
i recommend fitting recognition by congress of the great achievement of robert edwin peary .
the secretary of the interior recommends a change of the law in respect to the procedure in adjudicating claims for lands , by which appeals can be taken from the decisions of the department to the court of appeals of the district of columbia for a judicial consideration of the rights of the claimant .
this change finds complete analogy in the present provision for appeals from the decisions of the commissioner of patents .
the judgments of the court in such cases would be of decisive value to land claimants generally and to the department of the interior in the administration of the law , would enable claimants to bring into court the final consideration of issues as to the title to government land and would , i think , obviate a good deal of the subsequent litigation that now arises in our western courts .
the bill is pending , i believe , in the house , having been favorably reported from the committee on public lands , and i recommend its enactment .
one of the difficulties in the interior department and in the land office has been the delays attendant upon the consideration by the land office and the secretary of the interior of claims for patents of public lands to individuals .
i am glad to say that under the recent appropriations of the congress and the earnest efforts of the secretary and his subordinates , these arrears have been disposed of , and the work of the department has been brought more nearly up to date in respect to the pending business than ever before in its history .
economies have been effected where possible without legislative assistance , and these are shown in the reduced estimates for the expenses of the department during the current fiscal year and during the year to come .
the subject of the conservation of the public domain has commanded the attention of the people within the last two or three years .
there is no need for radical reform in the methods of disposing of what are really agricultural lands .
the present laws have worked well .
the enlarged homestead law has encouraged the successful farming of lands in the semiarid regions .
the total sum already accumulated in the fund provided by the act for the reclamation of arid lands is about $ 69,449,058.76 , and of this , all but $ 6,241,058.76 has been allotted to the various projects , of which there are thirty .
congress at its last session provided for the issuing of certificates of indebtedness not exceeding twenty millions of dollars , to be redeemed from the reclamation fund when the proceeds of lands sold and from the water - rents should be sufficient .
meantime , in accordance with the provisions of the law , i appointed a board of army engineers to examine the projects and to ascertain which are feasible and worthy of completion .
that board has made a report upon the subject , which i shall transmit in a separate message within a few days .
in september last conservation congress was held at st. paul , at which i delivered an address on the subject of conservation so far as it was within the jurisdiction and possible action of the federal government .
in that address i assembled from the official records the statistics and facts as to what had been done in this behalf in the administration of my predecessor and in my own , and indicated the legislative measures which i believed to be wise in order to secure the best use , in the public interest , of what remains of our national domain .
there was in this address a very full discussion of the reasons which led me to the conclusions stated .
for the purpose of saving in an official record a comprehensive resume of the statistics and facts gathered with some difficulty in that address , and to avoid their repetition in the body of this message , i venture to make the address an accompanying appendix .
the statistics are corrected to november 15th last .
for the reasons stated in the conservation address , i recommend : 
 first , that the limitation now imposed upon the executive which forbids his reserving more forest lands in oregon , washington , idaho , montana , colorado , and wyoming , be repealed .
second , that the coal deposits of the government be leased after advertisement inviting competitive bids , for terms not exceeding fifty years , with a minimum rental and royalties upon the coal mined , to be readjusted every ten or twelve years , and with conditions as to maintenance which will secure proper mining , and as to assignment which will prevent combinations to monopolize control of the coal in any one district or market .
i do not think that coal measures under 2,500 acres of surface would be too large an amount to lease to any one lessee .
the secretary of the interior thinks there are difficulties in the way of leasing public coal lands , which objections he has set forth in his report , the force of which i freely concede .
i entirely approved his stating at length in his report the objections in order that the whole subject may be presented to congress , but after a full consideration i favor a leasing system and recommend it .
third , that the law should provide the same separation in respect to government phosphate lands of surface and mineral rights that now obtains in coal lands and that power to lease such lands upon terms and limitations similar to those above recommended for coal leases , with an added condition enabling the government to regulate , and if need be to prohibit , the export to foreign countries of the product .
fourth , that the law should allow a prospector for oil or gas to have the right to prospect for two years over a certain tract of government land , the right to be evidenced by a license for which he shall pay a small sum ; and that upon discovery , a lease may be granted upon terms securing a minimum rental and proper royalties to the government , and also the conduct of the oil or gas well in accord with the best method for husbanding the supply of oil in the district .
the period of the leases should not be as long as those of coal , but they should contain similar provisions as to assignment to prevent monopolistic combinations .
fifth , that water - power sites be directly leased by the federal government , after advertisement and bidding , for not exceeding fifty years upon a proper rental and with a condition fixing rates charged to the public for units of electric power , both rental and rates to be readjusted equitably every ten years by arbitration or otherwise , with suitable provisions against assignment to prevent monopolistic combinations .
or , that the law shall provide that upon application made by the authorities of the state where the water - power site is situated , it may be patented to the state on condition that the state shall dispose of it under terms like those just described , and shall enforce those terms , or upon failure to comply with the condition the water - power site and all the plant and improvement on the site shall be forfeited and revert to the united states , the president being given the power to declare the forfeiture and to direct legal proceedings for its enforcement .
either of these methods would , i think , accomplish the proper public purpose in respect to water - power sites , but one or the other should be promptly adopted .
i earnestly urge upon congress that at this session general conservation legislation of the character indicated be adopted .
at its last session this congress took most useful and proper steps in the cause of conservation by allowing the executive , through withdrawals , to suspend the action of the existing laws in respect to much of the public domain .
i have not thought that the danger of disposing of coal lands in the united states under the present laws in large quantities was so great as to call for their withdrawal , because under the present provisions it is reasonably certain that the government will receive the real value of the land .
but , in respect to oil lands , or phosphate lands , and of gas lands in the united states , and in respect to coal lands in alaska , i have exercised the full power of withdrawal with the hope that the action of congress would follow promptly and prevent that tying up of the resources of the country in the western and less settled portion and in alaska , which means stagnation and retrogression .
the question of conservation is not a partisan one , and i sincerely hope that even in the short time of the present session consideration may be given to those questions which have now been much discussed , and that action may be taken upon them .
with reference to the government of alaska , i have nothing to add to the recommendations i made in my last message on the subject .
i am convinced that the migratory character of the population , its unequal distribution , and its smallness of number , which the new census shows to be about 50,000 , in relation to the enormous expanse of the territory , make it altogether impracticable to give to those people who are in alaska to - day and may not be there a year hence , the power to elect a legislature to govern an immense territory to which they have a relation so little permanent .
it is far better for the development of the territory that it be committed to a commission to be appointed by the executive , with limited legislative powers sufficiently broad to meet the local needs , than to continue the present insufficient government with few remedial powers , or to make a popular government where there is not proper foundation upon which to rest it .
the suggestion that the appointment of a commission will lead to the control of the government by corporate or selfish and exploiting interests has not the slightest foundation in fact .
such a government worked well in the philippines , and would work well in alaska , and those who are really interested in the proper development of that territory for the benefit of the people who live in it and the benefit of the people of the united states , who own it , should support the institution of such a government .
i have been asked to recommend that the credit of the government be extended to aid the construction of railroads in alaska .
i am not ready now to do so .
a great many millions of dollars have already been expended in the construction of at least two railroads , and if laws be passed providing for the proper development of the resources of alaska , especially for the opening up of the coal lands , i believe that the capital already invested will induce the investment of more capital , sufficient to complete the railroads building , and to furnish cheap coal not only to alaska but to the whole pacific coast .
the passage of a law permitting the leasing of government coal lands in alaska after public competition , and the appointment of a commission for the government of the territory , with enabling powers to meet the local needs , will lead to an improvement in alaska and the development of her resources that is likely to surprise the country .
our national parks have become so extensive and involve so much detail of action in their control that it seems to me there ought to be legislation creating a bureau for their care and control .
the greatest natural wonder of this country and the surrounding territory should be included in another national park .
i refer to the grand canyon of the colorado .
the uniform policy of the government in the matter of granting pensions to those gallant and devoted men who fought to save the life of the nation in the perilous days of the great civil war , has always been of the most liberal character .
those men are now rapidly passing away .
the best obtainable official statistics show that they are dying at the rate of something over three thousand a month , and , in view of their advancing years , this rate must inevitably , in proportion , rapidly increase .
to the man who risked everything on the field of battle to save the nation in the hour of its direst need , we owe a debt which has not been and should not be computed in a begrudging or parsimonious spirit .
but while we should be actuated by this spirit to the soldier himself , care should be exercised not to go to absurd lengths , or distribute the bounty of the government to classes of persons who may , at this late day , from a mere mercenary motive , seek to obtain some legal relation with an old veteran now tottering on the brink of the grave .
the true spirit of the pension laws is to be found in the noble sentiments expressed by mr. lincoln in his last inaugural address , wherein , in speaking of the nation 's duty to its soldiers when the struggle should be over , he said we should " care for him who shall have borne the battle , and for his widow and orphans . "
the report of the secretary of agriculture invites attention to the stupendous value of the agricultural products of this country , amounting in all to $ 8,926,000,000 for this year .
this amount is larger than that of 1909 by $ 305,000,000 .
the existence of such a crop indicates a good prospect for business throughout the country .
a notable change for the better is commented upon by the secretary in the fact that the south , especially in those regions where the boll weevil has interfered with the growth of cotton , has given more attention to the cultivation of corn and other cereals , so that there is a greater diversification of crops in the south than ever before -- and all to the great advantage of that section .
the report contains a most interesting account of the activities of the department in its various bureaus , showing how closely the agricultural progress in this country is following along the lines of improvement recommended by the department through its publications and the results of its experiment stations in every state , and by the instructions given through the agricultural schools aided by the federal government and following the general curriculum urged by the head and bureau chiefs of the department .
the activities of the department have been greatly increased by the enactment of recent legislation , by the pure - food act , the meat - inspection act , the cattle - transportation act , and the act concerning the interstate shipment of game .
this department is one of those the scope of whose action is constantly widening , and therefore it is impossible under existing legislation to reduce the cost and their estimates below those of preceding years .
an interesting review of the results of an examination made by the department into statistics and prices , shows that on the average since 1891 , farm products have increased in value 72 per cent while the things which the farmer buys for use have increased but 12 per cent , an indication that present conditions are favorable to the farming community .
i have already referred to the forests of the united states and their extent , and have urged , as i do again , the removal of the limitation upon the power of the executive to reserve other tracts of land in six western states in which withdrawal for this purpose is now forbidden .
the secretary of agriculture gives a very full description of the disastrous fires that occurred during the last summer in the national forests .
a drought more intense than any recorded in the history of the west had introduced a condition into the forests which made fires almost inevitable , and locomotive sparks , negligent campers , and in some cases incendiaries furnished the needed immediate cause .
at one time the fires were so extended that they covered a range of a hundred miles , and the secretary estimates that standing timber of the value of 25 millions of dollars was destroyed .
seventy - six persons in the employ of the forest service were killed and many more injured , and i regret to say that there is no provision in the law by which the expenses for their hospital treatment or of their interment could be met out of public funds .
the red cross contributed a thousand dollars , and the remainder of the necessary expenses was made up by private contribution , chiefly from the force of the forest service and its officials .
i recommend that suitable legislation be adopted to enable the secretary of agriculture to meet the moral obligations of the government in this respect .
the specific fund for fighting fires was only about $ 135,000 , but there existed discretion in the secretary in case of an emergency to apply other funds in his control to this purpose , and he did so to the extent of nearly a million of dollars , which will involve the presentation of a deficiency estimate for the current fiscal year of over $ 900,000 .
the damage done was not therefore due to the lack of an appropriation by congress available to meet the emergency , but the difficulty of fighting it lay in the remote points where the fires began and where it was impossible with the roads and trails as they now exist promptly to reach them .
proper protection necessitates , as the secretary points out , the expenditure of a good deal more money in the development of roads and trails in the forests , the establishment of lookout stations , and telephone connection between them and places where assistance can be secured .
the amount of reforestation shown in the report of the forest service -- only about 15,000 acres as compared with the 150 millions of acres of national forests -- seems small , and i am glad to note that in this regard the secretary of agriculture and the chief of the forest service are looking forward to far greater activity in the use of available government land for this purpose .
progress has been made in learning by experiment the best methods of reforesting .
congress is appealed to now by the secretary of agriculture to make the appropriations needed for enlarging the usefulness of the forest service in this regard .
i hope that congress will approve and adopt the estimate of the secretary for this purpose .
the secretary of the department of commerce and labor has had under his immediate supervision the application of the merit system of promotion to a large number of employees , and his discussion of this method of promotions based on actual experience , i commend to the attention of congress .
the taking of the census has proceeded with promptness and efficiency .
the secretary believes , and i concur , that it will be more thorough and accurate than any census which has heretofore been taken , but it is not perfect .
the motive that prompts men with a false civic pride to induce the padding of census returns in order to increase the population of a particular city has been strong enough to lead to fraud in respect to a few cities in this country , and i have directed the attorney - general to proceed with all the vigor possible against those who are responsible for these frauds .
they have been discovered and they will not interfere with the accuracy of the census , but it is of the highest importance that official inquiry of this sort should not be embarrassed by fraudulent conspiracies in some private or local interest .
the reorganization of the light - house board has effected a very considerable saving in the administration , and the estimates for that service for the present year are $ 428,000 less than for the preceding year .
in addition , three tenders , for which appropriations were made , are not being built because they are not at present needed for the service .
the secretary is now asking for a large sum for the addition of lights and other aids to the commerce of the seas , including a number in alaska .
the trade along that coast is becoming so important that i respectfully urge the necessity for following his recommendation .
the commissioner of corporations has just completed the first part of a report on the lumber industry in the united states .
this part does not find the existence of a trust or combination in the manufacture of lumber .
the commissioner does find , however , a condition in the ownership of the standing timber of the united states , other than the government timber , that calls for serious attention .
the direct investigation made by the commissioner covered an area which contains 80 per cent of the privately owned timber of the country .
his report shows that one - half of the timber in this area is owned by 200 individuals and corporations ; that 14 per cent is owned by 3 corporations , and that there is very extensive interownership of stock , as well as other circumstances , all pointing to friendly relations among those who own a majority of this timber , a relationship which might lead to a combination for the maintenance of a price that would be very detrimental to the public interest , and would create the necessity of removing all tariff obstacles to the free importations of lumber from other countries .
i am glad to note in the secretary 's report the satisfactory progress which is being made in respect to the preservation of the seals of the pribiloff islands .
very active steps are being taken by the department of state to secure an arrangement which shall protect the pribiloff herd from the losses due to pelagic sealing .
meantime the government has secured seal pelts of the bachelor seals ( the killing of which does not interfere with the maintenance of the herd ) , from the sale of which next month it is expected to realize about $ 450,000 , a sum largely in excess of the rental paid by the lessee of the government under the previous contract .
the coast and geodetic survey has been engaged in surveying the coasts of the philippine archipelago .
this is a heavy work , because of the extended character of the coast line in those islands , but i am glad to note that about half of the needed survey has been completed .
so large a part of the coast line of the archipelago has been unsurveyed as to make navigation in the neighborhood of a number of the islands , and especially on the east side , particularly dangerous .
the commissioner of labor has been actively engaged in composing the differences between employers and employees engaged in interstate transportation , under the erdman act , jointly with the chairman of the interstate commerce commission .
i can not speak in too high terms of the success of these two officers in conciliation and settlement of controversies which , but for their interposition , would have resulted disastrously to all interests .
i invite attention to the very serious injury caused to all those who are engaged in the manufacture of phosphorous matches .
the diseases incident to this are frightful , and as matches can be made from other materials entirely innocuous , i believe that the injurious manufacture could be discouraged and ought to be discouraged by the imposition of a heavy federal tax .
i recommend the adoption of this method of stamping out a very serious abuse .
since 1868 it has been the declared purpose of this government to favor the movement for an eight - hour day by a provision of law that none of the employees employed by or on behalf of the government should work longer than eight hours in every twenty - four .
the first declaration of this view was not accompanied with any penal clause or with any provision for its enforcement , and , though president grant by a proclamation twice attempted to give it his sanction and to require the officers of the government to carry it out , the purpose of the framers of the law was ultimately defeated by a decision of the supreme court holding that the statute as drawn was merely a direction of the government to its agents and did not invalidate a contract made in behalf of the government which provided in the contract for labor for a day of longer hours than eight .
thereafter , in 1892 , the present eight - hour law was passed , which provides that the services and employment of all laborers and mechanics who are now or may hereafter be employed by the government of the united states , by the district of columbia , or by any contractor or subcontractor on any of the public works of the united states and of the said district of columbia is hereby restricted to eight hours in any one calendar day .
this law has been construed to limit the application of the requirement to those who are directly employed by the government or to those who are employed upon public works situate upon land owned by the united states .
this construction prevented its application to government battle ships and other vessels built in private shipyards and to heavy guns and armor plate contracted for and made at private establishments .
the proposed act provides that no laborer or mechanic doing any part of the work contemplated by a contract with the united states in the employ of the contractor or any subcontractor shall be required or permitted to work more than eight hours a day in any one calendar day .
it seems to me from the past history that the government has been committed to a policy of encouraging the limitation of the day 's work to eight hours in all works of construction initiated by itself , and it seems to me illogical to maintain a difference between government work done on government soil and government work done in a private establishment , when the work is of such large dimensions and involves the expenditure of much labor for a considerable period , so that the private manufacturer may adjust himself and his establishment to the special terms of employment that he must make with his workmen for this particular job .
to require , however , that every small contract of manufacture entered into by the government should be carried out by the contractor with men working at eight hours would be to impose an intolerable burden upon the government by limiting its sources of supply and excluding altogether the great majority of those who would otherwise compete for its business .
the proposed act recognizes this in the exceptions which it makes to contracts 
 " for transportation by land or water , for the transmission of intelligence , and for such materials or articles as may usually be bought in the open market whether made to conform to particular specifications or not , or for the purchase of supplies by the government , whether manufactured to conform to particular specifications or not . "
i recommend that instead of enacting the proposed bill , the meaning of which is not clear and definite and might be given a construction embarrassing to the public interest , the present act be enlarged by providing that public works shall be construed to include not only buildings and work upon public ground , but also ships , armor , and large guns when manufactured in private yards or factories .
one of the great difficulties in enforcing this eight - hour law is that its application under certain emergencies becomes exceedingly oppressive and there is a great temptation to subordinate officials to evade it .
i think that it would be wiser to allow the president , by executive order , to declare an emergency in special instances in which the limitation might not apply and , in such cases , to permit the payment by the government of extra compensation for the time worked each day in excess of eight hours .
i may add that my suggestions in respect to this legislation have the full concurrence of the commissioner of labor .
in view of the keen , widespread interest now felt in the united states in a system of compensation for industrial accidents to supplant our present thoroughly unsatisfactory system of employers ' liability ( a subject the importance of which congress has already recognized by the appointment of a commission ) , i recommend that the international congress on industrial insurance be invited to hold its meeting in 1913 in washington , and that an appropriation of $ 10,000 be made to cover the necessary expenses of organizing and carrying on the meeting .
the immigration into this country is increasing each year .
a large part of it comes through the immigrant station at ellis island in the city of new york .
an examination of the station and the methods pursued satisfies me that a difficult task is there performed by the commissioner and his force with common sense , the strictest fairness , and with the most earnest desire to enforce the law equitably and mercifully .
it has been proposed to enlarge the accommodations so as to allow more of the immigrants to come by that port .
i do not think it wise policy to do this .
i have no objection to -- on the contrary , i recommend -- the construction of additional buildings for the purpose of facilitating a closer and more careful examination of each immigrant as he comes in , but i deprecate the enlargement of the buildings and of the force for the purpose of permitting the examination of more immigrants per day than are now examined .
if it is understood that no more immigrants can be taken in at new york than are now taken in , and the steamship companies thus are given a reason and a motive for transferring immigrants to other ports , we can be confident that they will be better distributed through the country and that there will not be that congestion in the city of new york which does not make for the better condition of the immigrant or increase his usefulness as a new member of this community .
everything which tends to send the immigrants west and south into rural life helps the country .
i concur with the secretary in his recommendations as to the amendments to the immigration law in increasing the fine against the companies for violation of the regulations , and in giving greater power to the commissioner to enforce more care on the part of the steamship companies in accepting immigrants .
the recommendation of the secretary , in which he urges that the law may be amended so as to discourage the separation of families , is , i think , a good one .
in my message of last year i recommended the creation of a bureau of health , in which should be embraced all those government agencies outside of the war and navy departments which are now directed toward the preservation of public health or exercise functions germane to that subject .
i renew this recommendation .
i greatly regret that the agitation in favor of this bureau has aroused a counteragitation against its creation , on the ground that the establishment of such a bureau is to be in the interest of a particular school of medicine .
it seems to me that this assumption is wholly unwarranted , and that those responsible for the government can be trusted to secure in the personnel of the bureau the appointment of representatives of all recognized schools of medicine , and in the management of the bureau entire freedom from narrow prejudice in this regard .
by an act passed by congress the president was authorized to expend a million dollars to construct the needed work to prevent injury to the lands of the imperial valley from the overflow of the colorado river .
i appointed a competent engineer to examine the locality and to report a plan for construction .
he has done so .
in order to complete the work it is necessary to secure the consent of mexico , for part of the work must be constructed in mexican territory .
negotiations looking to the securing of such authority are quite near success .
the southern pacific railroad company proposes to assist us in the work by lending equipment and by the transportation of material at cost price , and it is hoped that the work may be completed before any danger shall arise from the spring floods in the river .
the work is being done under the supervision of the secretary of the interior and his consulting engineer , general marshall , late chief of engineers , now retired .
this leads me to invite the attention of congress to the claim made by the southern pacific railroad company for an amount expended in a similar work of relief called for by a flood and great emergency .
this work , as i am informed , was undertaken at the request of my predecessor and under promise to reimburse the railroad company .
it seems to me the equity of this claim is manifest , and the only question involved is the reasonable value of the work done .
i recommend the payment of the claim in a sum found to be just .
the government of the district of columbia is a good government .
the police force , while perhaps it might be given , or acquire , more military discipline in bearing and appearance , is nevertheless an efficient body of men , free from graft , and discharges its important duties in this capital of the nation effectively .
the parks and the streets of the city and the district are generally kept clean and in excellent condition .
the commissioners of the district have its affairs well in hand , and , while not extravagant , are constantly looking to those municipal improvements that are expensive but that must be made in a modern growing city like washington .
while all this is true , nevertheless the fact that washington is governed by congress , and that the citizens are not responsible and have no direct control through popular election in district matters , properly subjects the government to inquiry and criticism by its citizens , manifested through the public press and otherwise ; such criticism should command the careful attention of congress .
washington is the capital of the nation and its maintenance as a great and beautiful city under national control , every lover of his country has much at heart ; and it should present in every way a model in respect of economy of expenditure , of sanitation , of tenement reform , of thorough public instruction , of the proper regulation of public utilities , of sensible and extended charities , of the proper care of criminals and of youth needing reform , of healthful playgrounds and opportunity for popular recreation , and of a beautiful system of parks .
i am glad to think that progress is being made in all these directions , but i venture to point out certain specific improvements toward these ends which congress in its wisdom might adopt .
speaking generally , i think there ought to be more concentration of authority in respect to the accomplishment of some of these purposes with more economy of expenditure .
attention is invited to the peculiar situation existing in regard to the parks of washington .
the park system proper , comprising some 343 different areas , is under the office of public buildings and grounds , which , however , has nothing to do with the control of rock creek park , the zoological park , the grounds of the department of agriculture , the botanic garden , the grounds of the capitol , and other public grounds which are regularly open to the public and ought to be part of the park system .
exclusive of the grounds of the soldiers ' home and of washington barracks , the public grounds used as parks in the district of columbia comprise over 3,100 acres , under ten different controlling officials or bodies .
this division of jurisdiction is most unfortunate .
large sums of money are spent yearly in beautifying and keeping in good condition these parks and the grounds connected with government buildings and institutions .
the work done on all of them is of the same general character -- work for which the office of public buildings and grounds has been provided by congress with a special organization and equipment , which are lacking for the grounds not under that office .
there can be no doubt that if all work of care and improvement upon the grounds belonging to the united states in the district of columbia were put , as far as possible , under one responsible head , the result would be not only greater efficiency and economy in the work itself , but greater harmony in the development of the public parks and gardens of the city .
congress at its last session provided for two more parks , called the meridian hill and montrose parks , and the district commissioners have also included in their estimates a sum to be used for the acquisition of much needed park land adjoining the zoological park , known as the klingle ford tract .
the expense of these three parks , included in the estimates of the commissioners , aggregates $ 900,000 .
i think it would lead to economy if the improvement and care of all these parks and other public grounds above described should be transferred to the office of public buildings and grounds , which has an equipment well and economically adapted to carrying out the public purpose in respect to improvements of this kind .
to prevent encroachments upon the park area it is recommended that the erection of any permanent structure on any lands in the district of columbia belonging to the united states be prohibited except by specific authority of congress .
i have already in previous communications to congress referred to the importance of acquiring for the district of columbia at least a part of the territory on the other side of the potomac in virginia which was originally granted for the district by the state of virginia , and then was retroceded by act of congress in 1846 .
it is very evident from conferences that i have had with the senators and representatives from virginia that there is no hope of a regranting by the state of the land thus given back ; and i am frank to say that in so far as the tract includes the town of alexandria and land remote from the potomac river there would be no particular advantage in bringing that within national control .
but the land which lies along the potomac river above the railroad bridge and across the potomac , including arlington cemetery , fort myer , the government experiment farm , the village of rosslyn , and the palisades of the potomac , reaching to where the old district line intersects the river , is very sparsely settled and could be admirably utilized for increasing the system of the parks of washington .
it has been suggested to me by the same virginia senators and representatives that if the government were to acquire for a government park the land above described , which is not of very great value , the present law of virginia would itself work the creation of federal jurisdiction over it , and if that were not complete enough , the legislature of virginia would in all probability so enlarge the jurisdiction as to enable congress to include it within the control of the government of the district of columbia and actually make it a part of washington .
i earnestly recommend that steps be taken to carry out this plan .
there are a sufficient number of corporations enjoying the use of public utilities in the district of columbia to justify and require the enactment of a law providing for their supervision and regulation in the public interest consistent with the vested rights secured to them by their charters .
a part of these corporations , to wit , the street railways , have been put under the control of the interstate commerce commission , but that commission recommends that the power be taken from it , and intimates broadly that its other and more important duties make it impossible for it to give the requisite supervision .
it seems to me wise to place this general power of supervision and regulation in the district commissioners .
it is said that their present duties are now absorbing and would prevent the proper discharge by them of these new functions , but their present jurisdiction brings them so closely and frequently in contact with these corporations and makes them to know in such detail how the corporations are discharging their duties under the law and how they are serving the public interest that the commissioners are peculiarly fitted to do this work , and i hope that congress will impose it upon them by intrusting them with powers in respect to such corporations similar to those of the public utilities commission of new york city or similar boards in massachusetts .
i do not think the present control of the school system of washington commends itself as the most efficient and economical and thorough instrument for the carrying on of public instruction .
the cost of education in the district of columbia is excessive as compared with the cost in other cities of similar size , and it is not apparent that the results are in general more satisfactory .
the average cost per pupil per day in washington is about 38 cents , while the average cost in 13 other american cities fairly comparable with washington in population and standard of education is about 25.5 cents .
for each dollar spent in salaries of school teachers and officers in the district about 4.4 days of instruction per pupil are given , while in the 13 cities above referred to each dollar expended for salaries affords on the average 6.8 days of instruction .
for the current fiscal year the estimates of the board of education amounted to about three - quarters of the entire revenue locally collected for district purposes .
if i may say so , there seems to be a lack of definite plan in the expansion of the school system and the erection of new buildings and of proper economy in the use of these buildings that indicates the necessity for the concentration of control .
all plans for improvement and expansion in the school system are with the school board , while the limitation of expenses is with the district commissioners .
i think it would be much better to put complete control and responsibility in the district commissioners , and then provide a board of school visitors , to be appointed by the supreme court of the district or by the president , from the different school districts of washington , who , representing local needs , shall meet and make recommendations to the commissioners and to the superintendent of education -- an educator of ability and experience who should be an appointee of and responsible to the district commissioners .
among other items for permanent improvements appearing in the district estimates for 1912 is one designed to substitute for willow tree alley , notorious in the records of the police and health departments , a playground with a building containing baths , a gymnasium , and other helpful features , and i hope congress will approve this estimate .
fair as washington seems with her beautiful streets and shade trees , and free , as the expanse of territory which she occupies would seem to make her , from slums and insanitary congestion of population , there are centers in the interior of squares where the very poor , and the criminal classes as well , huddle together in filth and noisome surroundings , and it is of primary importance that these nuclei of disease and suffering and vice should be removed , and that there should be substituted for them small parks as breathing spaces , and model tenements having sufficient air space and meeting other hygienic requirements .
the estimate for the reform of willow tree alley , the worst of these places in the city , is the beginning of a movement that ought to attract the earnest attention and support of congress , for congress can not escape its responsibility for the existence of these human pest holes .
the estimates for the district of columbia for the fiscal year 1912 provide for the repayment to the united states of $ 616,000 , one - fourth of the floating debt that will remain on june 30 , 1911 .
the bonded debt will be reduced in 1912 by about the same amount .
the district of columbia is now in an excellent financial condition .
its own share of indebtedness will , it is estimated , be less than $ 6,000,000 on june 30 , 1912 , as compared with about $ 9,00,000 on june 30 , 1909 .
the bonded debt , owed half and half by the united states and the district , will be extinguished by 1924 , and the floating debt of the district probably long before that time .
the revenues have doubled in the last ten years , while the population during the same period has increased but 18.78 per cent .
it is believed that , if due economy be practiced , the district can soon emerge from debt , even while financing its permanent improvements with reasonable rapidity from current revenues .
to this end , i recommend the enactment into law of a bill now before congress -- and known as the judson bill -- which will insure the gradual extinguishment of the district 's debt , while at the same time requiring that the many permanent improvements needed to complete a fitting capital city shall be carried on from year to year and at a proper rate of progress with funds derived from the rapidly increasing revenues .
i renew my recommendation that the claims of the depositors in the freedmen 's bank be recognized and paid by the passage of the pending bill on that subject .
i also renew my recommendation that steps be taken looking to the holding of a negro exposition in celebration of the fiftieth anniversary of the issuing by mr. lincoln of the emancipation proclamation .
the civil service commission has continued its useful duties during the year .
the necessity for the maintenance of the provisions of the civil service law was never greater than to - day .
officers responsible for the policy of the administration , and their immediate personal assistants or deputies , should not be included within the classified service ; but in my judgment , public opinion has advanced to the point where it would support a bill providing a secure tenure during efficiency for all purely administrative officials .
i entertain the profound conviction that it would greatly aid the cause of efficient and economical government , and of better politics if congress could enact a bill providing that the executive shall have the power to include in the classified service all local offices under the treasury department , the department of justice , the post - office department , the interior department , and the department of commerce and labor , appointments to which now require the confirmation of the senate , and that upon such classification the advice and consent of the senate shall cease to be required in such appointments .
by their certainty of tenure , dependent on good service , and by their freedom from the necessity for political activity , these local officers would be induced to become more efficient public servants .
the civil service law is an attempt to solve the problem of the proper selection of those who enter the service .
a better system under that law for promotions ought to be devised , but , given the selected employee , there remains still the question of promoting his efficiency and his usefulness to the government , and that can be brought about only by a careful comparison of unit work done by the individual and a pointing out of the necessity for improvement in this regard where improvement is possible .
the increase in the activities and in the annual expenditures of the federal government has been so rapid and so great that the time has come to check the expansion of government activities in new directions until we have tested the economy and efficiency with which the government of to - day is being carried on .
the responsibility rests upon the head of the administration .
he is held accountable by the public , and properly so .
despite the unselfish and patriotic efforts of the heads of departments and others charged with responsibility of government , there has grown up in this country a conviction that the expenses of government are too great .
the fundamental reason for the existence undetected of waste , duplication , and bad management is the lack of prompt , accurate information .
the president of a private corporation doing so vast a business as the government transacts would , through competent specialists , maintain the closest scrutiny on the comparative efficiency and the comparative costs in each division or department of the business .
he would know precisely what the duties and the activities of each bureau or division are in order to prevent overlapping .
no adequate machinery at present exists for supplying the president of the united states with such information respecting the business for which he is responsible .
for the first time in the history of the government , congress in the last session supplied this need and made an appropriation to enable the president to inquire into the economy and efficiency of the executive departments , and i am now assembling an organization for that purpose .
at the outset i find comparison between departments and bureaus impossible for the reason that in no two departments are the estimates and expenditures displayed and classified alike .
the first step is to reduce all to a common standard for classification and judgment , and this work is now being done .
when it is completed , the foundation will be laid for a businesslike national budget , and for such a just comparison of the economy and efficiency with which the several bureaus and divisions are conducted as will enable the president and the heads of departments to detect waste , eliminate duplication , encourage the intelligent and effective civil servants whose efforts too often go unnoticed , and secure the public service at the lowest possible cost .
the committees on appropriations of congress have diligently worked to reduce the expenses of government and have found their efforts often blocked by lack of accurate information containing a proper analysis of requirements and of actual and reasonable costs .
the result of this inquiry should enable the executive in his communications to congress to give information to which congress is entitled and which will enable it to promote economy .
my experience leads me to believe that while government methods are much criticised , the bad results -- if we do have bad results -- are not due to a lack of zeal or willingness on the part of the civil servants .
on the contrary , i believe that a fine spirit of willingness to work exists in the personnel , which , if properly encouraged , will produce results equal to those secured in the best managed private enterprises .
in handling government expenditure the aim is not profit -- the aim is the maximum of public service at the minimum of cost .
we wish to reduce the expenditures of the government , and we wish to save money to enable the government to go into some of the beneficial projects which we are debarred from taking up now because we ought not to increase our expenditures .
i have requested the head of each department to appoint committees on economy and efficiency in order to secure full cooperation in the movement by the employees of the government themselves .
at a later date i shall send to congress a special message on this general subject .
i urge the continuance of the appropriation of $ 100,000 requested for the fiscal year 1912 .
it is impossible to proceed far in such an investigation without perceiving the need of a suitable means of eliminating from the service the superannuated .
this can be done in one of two ways , either by straight civil pension or by some form of contributory plan .
careful study of experiments made by foreign governments shows that three serious objections to the civil pension payable out of the public treasury may be brought against it by the taxpayer , the administrative officer , and the civil employee , respectively .
a civil pension is bound to become an enormous , continuous , and increasing tax on the public exchequer ; it is demoralizing to the service since it makes difficult the dismissal of incompetent employees after they have partly earned their pension ; and it is disadvantageous to the main body of employees themselves since it is always taken into account in fixing salaries and only the few who survive and remain in the service until pensionable age receive the value of their deferred pay .
for this reason , after a half century of experience under a most liberal pension system , the civil servants of england succeeded , about a year ago , in having the system so modified as to make it virtually a contributory plan with provision for refund of their theoretical contributions .
the experience of england and other countries shows that neither can a contributory plan be successful , human nature being what it is , which does not make provision for the return of contributions , with interest , in case of death or resignation before pensionable age .
followed to its logical conclusion this means that the simplest and most independent solution of the problem for both employee and the government is a compulsory savings arrangement , the employee to set aside from his salary a sum sufficient , with the help of a liberal rate of interest from the government , to purchase an adequate annuity for him on retirement , this accumulation to be inalienably his and claimable if he leaves the service before reaching the retirement age or by his heirs in case of his death .
this is the principle upon which the gillett bill now pending is drawn .
the gillett bill , however , goes further and provides that the government shall contribute to the pension fund of those employees who are now so advanced in age that their personal contributions will not be sufficient to create their annuities before reaching the retirement age .
in my judgment this provision should be amended so that the annuities of those employees shall be paid out of the salaries appropriated for the positions vacated by retirement , and that the difference between the annuities thus granted and the salaries may be used for the employment of efficient clerks at the lower grades .
if the bill can be thus amended i recommend its passage , as it will initiate a valuable system and ultimately result in a great saving in the public expenditures .
there has not been time to test the benefit and utility of the amendments to the interstate commerce law contained in the act approved june 18 , 1910 .
the law as enacted did not contain all the features which i recommended .
it did not specifically denounce as unlawful the purchase by one of two parallel and competing roads of the stock of the other .
nor did it subject to the restraining influence of the interstate commerce commission the power of corporations engaged in operating interstate railroads to issue new stock and bonds ; nor did it authorize the making of temporary agreements between railroads , limited to thirty days , fixing the same rates for traffic between the same places .
i do not press the consideration of any of these objects upon congress at this session .
the object of the first provision is probably generally covered by the antitrust law .
the second provision was in the act referred to the consideration of a commission to be appointed by the executive and to report upon the matter to congress .
that commission has been appointed , and is engaged in the investigation and consideration of the question submitted under the law .
it consists of president arthur t. hadley , of yale university , as chairman ; frederick strauss , frederick n. judson , walter l. fisher , and prof .
b. h. meyer , with william e. s. griswold as secretary .
the third proposal led to so much misconstruction of its object , as being that of weakening the effectiveness of the antitrust law , that i am not disposed to press it for further consideration .
it was intended to permit railroad companies to avoid useless rate cutting by a mere temporary acquiescence in the same rates for the same service over competing railroads , with no obligation whatever to maintain those rates for any time .
the protection of railroad employees from personal injury is a subject of the highest importance and demands continuing attention .
there have been two measures pending in congress , one for the supervision of boilers and the other for the enlargement of dangerous clearances .
certainly some measures ought to be adopted looking to a prevention of accidents from these causes .
it seems to me that with respect to boilers a bill might well be drawn requiring and enforcing by penalty a proper system of inspection by the railway companies themselves which would accomplish our purpose .
the entire removal of outside clearances would be attended by such enormous expense that some other remedy must be adopted .
by act of may 6 , 1910 , the interstate commerce commission is authorized and directed to investigate accidents , to report their causes and its recommendations .
i suggest that the commission be requested to make a special report as to injuries from outside clearances and the best method of reducing them .
the interstate commerce commission has recommended appropriations for the purpose of enabling it to enter upon a valuation of all railroads .
this has always been within the jurisdiction of the commission , but the requisite funds have been wanting .
statistics of the value of each railroad would be valuable for many purposes , especially if we ultimately enact any limitations upon the power of the interstate railroads to issue stocks and bonds , as i hope we may .
i think , therefore , that in order to permit a correct understanding of the facts , it would be wise to make a reasonable appropriation to enable the interstate commerce commission to proceed with due dispatch to the valuation of all railroads .
i have no doubt that railroad companies themselves can and will greatly facilitate this valuation and make it much less costly in time and money than has been supposed .
forged and fraudulent hills of lading purporting to be issued against cotton , some months since , resulted in losses of several millions of dollars to american and foreign banking and cotton interests .
foreign bankers then notified american bankers that , after october 31 , 1910 , they would not accept bills of exchange drawn against bills of lading for cotton issued by american railroad companies , unless american bankers would guarantee the integrity of the bills of lading .
the american bankers rightly maintained that they were not justified in giving such guarantees , and that , if they did so , the united states would be the only country in the world whose bills were so discredited , and whose foreign trade was carried on under such guaranties .
the foreign bankers extended the time at which these guaranties were demanded until december 31 , 1910 , relying upon us for protection in the meantime , as the money which they furnish to move our cotton crop is of great value to this country .
for the protection of our own people and the preservation of our credit in foreign trade , i urge upon congress the immediate enactment of a law under which one who , in good faith , advances money or credit upon a bill of lading issued by a common carrier upon an interstate or foreign shipment can hold the carrier liable for the value of the goods described in the bill at the valuation specified in the bill , at least to the extent of the advances made in reliance upon it .
such liability exists under the laws of many of the states .
i see no objection to permitting two classes of bills of lading to be issued : ( i ) those under which a carrier shall be absolutely liable , as above suggested , and ( 2 ) those with respect to which the carrier shall assume no liability except for the goods actually delivered to the agent issuing the bill .
the carrier might be permitted to make a small separate specific charge in addition to the rate of transportation for such guaranteed bill , as an insurance premium against loss from the added risk , thus removing the principal objection which i understand is made by the railroad companies to the imposition of the liability suggested , viz . ,
that the ordinary transportation rate would not compensate them for the liability assumed by the absolute guaranty of the accuracy of the bills of lading .
i further recommend that a punishment of fine and imprisonment be imposed upon railroad agents and shippers for fraud or misrepresentation in connection with the issue of bills of lading issued upon interstate and foreign shipments .
except as above , i do not recommend any amendment to the interstate - commerce law as it stands .
i do not now recommend any amendment to the anti - trust law .
in other words , it seems to me that the existing legislation with reference to the regulation of corporations and the restraint of their business has reached a point where we can stop for a while and witness the effect of the vigorous execution of the laws on the statute books in restraining the abuses which certainly did exist and which roused the public to demand reform .
if this test develops a need for further legislation , well and good , but until then let us execute what we have .
due to the reform movements of the present decade , there has undoubtedly been a great improvement in business methods and standards .
the great body of business men of this country , those who are responsible for its commercial development , now have an earnest desire to obey the law and to square their conduct of business to its requirements and limitations .
these will doubtless be made clearer by the decisions of the supreme court in cases pending before it .
it is in the interest of all the people of the country that for the time being the activities of government , in addition to enforcing earnestly and impartially the existing laws , should be directed to economy of administration , to the enlargement of opportunities for foreign trade , to the conservation and improvement of our agricultural lands and our other natural resources , to the building up of home industries , and to the strengthening of confidence of capital in domestic investment .

to the senate and house of representatives : 
 i withheld from my annual message a discussion of needed legislation under the authority which congress has to regulate commerce between the states and with foreign countries and said that i would bring this subject - matter to your attention later in the session .
accordingly , i beg to submit to you certain recommendations as to the amendments to the interstate - commerce law and certain considerations arising out of the operations of the antitrust law suggesting the wisdom of federal incorporation of industrial companies .
in the annual report of the interstate commerce commission for the year 1908 attention is called to the fact that between july 1 , 1908 , and the close of that year sixteen suits had been begun to set aside orders of the commission ( besides one commenced before that date ) , and that few orders of much consequence had been permitted to go without protest ; that the questions presented by these various suits were fundamental , as the constitutionality of the act itself was in issue , and the right of congress to delegate to any tribunal authority to establish an interstate rate was denied ; but that perhaps the most serious practical question raised concerned the extent of the right of the courts to review the orders of the commission ; and it was pointed out that if the contention of the carriers in this latter respect alone were sustained , but little progress had been made in the hepburn act toward the effective regulation of interstate transportation charges .
in twelve of the cases referred to , it was stated , preliminary injunctions were prayed for , being granted in six and refused in six .
" it has from the first been well understood , " says the commission , " that the success of the present act as a regulating measure depended largely upon the facility with which temporary injunctions could be obtained .
if a railroad company , by mere allegation in its bill of complaint , supported by ex parte affidavits , can overturn the result of days of patient investigation , no very satisfactory result can be expected .
the railroad loses nothing by these proceedings , since if they fail it can only be required to establish the rate and to pay to shippers the difference between the higher rate collected and the rate which is finally held to be reasonable .
in point of fact it usually profits , because it can seldom be required to return more than a fraction of the excess charges collected . "
in its report for the year 1909 , the commission shows that of the seventeen cases referred to in its 1908 report , only one had been decided in the supreme court of the united states , although five other cases had been argued and submitted to that tribunal in october , 1909 .
of course , every carrier affected by an order of the commission has a constitutional right to appeal to a federal court to protect it from the enforcement of an order which it may show to be prima facie confiscatory or unjustly discriminatory in its effect ; and as this application may be made to a court in any district of the united states , not only does delay result in the enforcement of the order , but great uncertainty is caused by contrariety of decision .
the questions presented by these applications are too often technical in their character and require a knowledge of the business and the mastery of a great volume of conflicting evidence which is tedious to examine and troublesome to comprehend .
it would not be proper to attempt to deprive any corporation of the right to the review by a court of any order or decree which , if undisturbed , would rob it of a reasonable return upon its investment or would subject it to burdens which would unjustly discriminate against it and in favor of other carriers similarly situated .
what is , however , of supreme importance is that the decision of such questions shall be as speedy as the nature of the circumstances will admit , and that a uniformity of decision be secured so as to bring about an effective , systematic , and scientific enforcement of the commerce law , rather than conflicting decisions and uncertainty of final result .
for this purpose i recommend the establishment of a court of the united states composed of five judges designated for such purpose from among the circuit judges of the united states , to be known as the " united states court of commerce , " which court shall be clothed with exclusive original jurisdiction over the following classes of cases : 
 ( 1 ) all cases for the enforcement , otherwise than by adjudication and collection of a forfeiture or penalty , or by infliction of criminal punishment , of any order of the interstate commerce commission other than for the payment of money .
( 2 ) all cases brought to enjoin , set aside , annul or suspend any order or requirement of the interstate commerce commission .
( 3 ) all such cases as under section 3 of the act of february 19 , 1903 , known as the " elkins act , " are authorized to be maintained in a circuit court of the united states .
( 4 ) all such mandamus proceedings as under the provisions of section 20 or section 23 of the interstate commerce law are authorized to be maintained in a circuit court of the united states .
reasons precisely analogous to those which induced the congress to create the court of customs appeals by the provisions in the tariff act of august 5 , 1909 , may be urged in support of the creation of the commerce court .
in order to provide a sufficient number of judges to enable this court to be constituted , it will be necessary to authorize the appointment of five additional circuit judges , who , for the purposes of appointment , might be distributed to those circuits where there is at the present time the largest volume of business , such as the second , third , fourth , seventh , and eighth circuits .
the act should empower the chief justice at any time when the business of the court of commerce does not require the services of all the judges to reassign the judges designated to that court to the circuits to which they respectively belong ; and it should also provide for payment to such judges while sitting by assignment in the court of commerce of such additional amount as is necessary to bring their annual compensation up to $ 10,000 .
the regular sessions of such court should be held at the capital , but it should be empowered to hold sessions in different parts of the united states if found desirable ; and its orders and judgments should be made final , subject only to review by the supreme court of the united states , with the provision that the operation of the decree appealed from shall not be stayed unless the supreme court shall so order .
the commerce court should be empowered in its discretion to restrain or suspend the operation of an order of the interstate commerce commission under review pending the final hearing and determination of the proceeding , but no such restraining order should be made except upon notice and after hearing , unless in cases where irreparable damage would otherwise ensue to the petitioner .
a judge of that court might be empowered to allow a stay of the commission 's order for a period of not more than sixty days , but pending application to the court for its order or injunction , then only where his order shall contain a specific finding based upon evidence submitted to the judge making the order and identified by reference thereto , that such irreparable damage would result to the petitioner , specifying the nature of the damage .
under the existing law , the interstate commerce commission itself initiates and defends litigation in the courts for the enforcement , or in the defense , of its orders and decrees , and for this purpose it employs attorneys who , while subject to the control of the attorney - general , act upon the initiative and under the instructions of the commission .
this blending of administrative , legislative , and judicial functions tends , in my opinion , to impair the efficiency of the commission by clothing it with partisan characteristics and robbing it of the impartial judicial attitude it should occupy in passing upon questions submitted to it .
in my opinion all litigation affecting the government should be under the direct control of the department of justice ; and i , therefore , recommend that all proceedings affecting orders and decrees of the interstate commerce commission be brought by or against the united states eo nomine , and be placed in charge of an assistant attorney - general acting under the direction of the attorney - general .
the subject of agreements between carriers with respect to rates has been often discussed in congress .
pooling arrangements and agreements were condemned by the general sentiment of the people , and , under the sherman antitrust law , any agreement between carriers operating in restraint of interstate or international trade or commerce would be unlawful .
the republican platform of 1908 expressed the belief that the interstate - commerce law should be further amended so as to give the railroads the right to make and publish traffic agreements subject to the approval of the commission , but maintaining always the principle of competition between naturally competing lines and avoiding the common control of such lines by any means whatsoever .
in view of the complete control over rate - making and other practices of interstate carriers established by the acts of congress and as recommended in this communication , i see no reason why agreements between carriers subject to the act , specifying the classifications of freight and the rates , fares , and charges for transportation of passengers and freight which they may agree to establish , should not be permitted , provided , copies of such agreements be promptly filed with the commission , but subject to all the provisions of the interstate - commerce act , subject to the right of any parties to such agreement to cancel it as to all or any of the agreed rates , fares , charges , or classifications by thirty days ' notice in writing to the other parties and to the commission .
much complaint is made by shippers over the state of the law under which they are held bound to know the legal rate applicable to any proposed shipment , without , as a matter of fact , having any certain means of actually ascertaining such rate .
it has been suggested that to meet this grievance carriers should be required , upon application by a shipper , to quote the legal rate in writing , and that the shipper should be protected in acting upon the rate thus quoted ; but the objection to this suggestion is that it would afford a much too easy method of giving to favored shippers unreasonable preferences and rebates .
i think that the law should provide that a carrier , upon written request by an intending shipper , should quote in writing the rate or charge applicable to the proposed shipment under any schedules or tariffs to which such carrier is a party , and that if the party making such request shall suffer damage in consequence of either refusal or omission to quote the proper rate , or in consequence of a misstatement of the rate , the carrier shall be liable to a penalty in some reasonable amount , say two hundred and fifty dollars , to accrue to the united states and to be recovered in a civil action brought by the appropriate district attorney .
such a penalty would compel the agent of the carrier to exercise due diligence in quoting the applicable legal rate , and would thus afford the shipper a real measure of protection , while not opening the way to collusion and the giving of rebates or other unfair discrimination .
under the existing law the commission can only act with respect to an alleged excessive rate or unduly discriminatory practice by a carrier on a complaint made by some individual affected thereby .
i see no reason why the commission should not be authorized to act on its own initiative as well as upon the complaint of an individual in investigating the fairness of any existing rate or practice ; and i recommend the amendment of the law to so provide ; and also that the commission shall be fully empowered , beyond any question , to pass upon the classifications of commodities for purposes of fixing rates , in like manner as it may now do with respect to the maximum rate applicable to any transportation .
under the existing law the commission may not investigate an increase in rates until after it shall have become effective ; and although one or more carriers may file with the commission a proposed increase in rates or change in classifications , or other alteration of the existing rates or classifications , to become effective at the expiration of thirty days from such filing , no proceeding can be taken to investigate the reasonableness of such proposed change until after it becomes operative .
on the other hand , if the commission shall make an order finding that an existing rate is excessive and directing it to be reduced , the carrier affected may by proceedings in the courts stay the operation of such order of reduction for months and even years .
it has , therefore , been suggested that the commission should be empowered , whenever a proposed increase in rates is filed , at once to enter upon an investigation of the reasonableness of the increase and to make an order postponing the effective date of such increase until after such investigation shall be completed .
to this much objection has been made on the part of carriers .
they contend that this would be , in effect , to take from the owners of the railroads the management of their properties and to clothe the interstate commerce commission with the original rate - making power -- a policy which was much discussed at the time of the passage of the hepburn act in 1905 - 6 , and which was then and has always been distinctly rejected ; and in reply to the suggestion that they are able by resorting to the courts to stay the taking effect of the order of the commission until its reasonableness shall have been investigated by the courts , whereas the people are deprived of any such remedy with respect to action by the carriers , they point to the provision of the interstate - commerce act providing for restitution to the shippers by carriers of excessive rates charged in cases where the order of the commission reducing such rates are affirmed .
it may be doubted how effective this remedy really is .
experience has shown that many , perhaps , most , shippers do not resort to proceedings to recover the excessive rates which they may have been required to pay , for the simple reason that they have added the rates paid to the cost of the goods and thus enhanced the price thereof to their customers , and that the public has in effect paid the bill .
on the other hand , the enormous volume of transportation charges , the great number of separate tariffs filed annually with the interstate commerce commission , amounting to almost 200,000 , and the impossibility of any commission supervising the making of tariffs in advance of their becoming effective on every transportation line within the united states to the extent that would be necessary if their active concurrence were required in the making of every tariff , has satisfied me that this power , if granted , should be conferred in a very limited and restricted form .
i , therefore , recommend that the interstate commerce commission be empowered whenever any proposed increase of rates is filed , at once , either on complaint or of its own motion , to enter upon an investigation into the reasonableness of such change , and that it be further empowered , in its discretion , to postpone the effective date of such proposed increase for a period not exceeding sixty days beyond the date when such rate would take effect .
if within this time it shall determine that such increase is unreasonable , it may then , by its order , either forbid the increase at all or fix the maximum beyond which it shall not be made .
if , on the other hand , at the expiration of this time , the commission shall not have completed its investigation , then the rate shall take effect precisely as it would under the existing law , and the commission may continue its investigation with such results as might be realized under the law as it now stands .
the claim is very earnestly advanced by some large associations of shippers that shippers of freight should be empowered to direct the route over which their shipments should pass to destination , and in this connection it has been urged that the provisions of section 15 of the interstate - commerce act , which now empowers the commission , after hearing on complaint , to establish through routes and maximum joint rates to be charged , etc . ,
when no reasonable or satisfactory through route shall have been already established , be amended so as to empower the commission to take such action , even when one existing reasonable and satisfactory route already exists , if it be possible to establish additional routes .
this seems to me to be a reasonable provision .
i know of no reason why a shipper should not have the right to elect between two or more established through routes to which the initial carrier may be a party , and to require his shipment to be transported to destination over such of such routes as he may designate for that purpose , subject , however , in the exercise of this right to such reasonable regulations as the interstate commerce commission may prescribe .
the republican platform of 1908 declared in favor of amending the interstate - commerce law , but so as always to maintain the principle of competition between naturally competing lines , and avoiding the common control of such lines by any means whatsover .
one of the most potent means of exercising such control has been through the holding of stock of one railroad company by another company owning a competing line .
this condition has grown up under express legislative power conferred by the laws of many states , and to attempt now to suddenly reverse that policy so far as it affects the ownership of stocks heretofore so acquired , would be to inflict a grievous injury , not only upon the corporations affected but upon a large body of the investment holding public .
i , however , recommend that the law shall be amended so as to provide that from and after the date of its passage no railroad company subject to the interstate - commerce act shall , directly or indirectly , acquire any interests of any kind in capital stock , or purchase or lease any railroad of any other corporation which competes with it respecting business to which the interstate - commerce act applies .
but especially for the protection of the minority stockholders in securing to them the best market for their stock i recommend that such prohibition be coupled with a proviso that it shall not operate to prevent any corporation which , at the date of the passage of such act , shall own not less than one - half of the entire issued and outstanding capital stock of any other railroad company , from acquiring all or the remainder of such stock ; nor to prohibit any railroad company which at the date of the enactment of the law is operating a railroad of any other corporation under lease , executed for a term of not less than twenty - five years , from acquiring the reversionary ownership of the demised railroad ; but that such provisions shall not operate to authorize or validate the acquisition , through stock ownership or otherwise , of a competing line or interest therein in violation of the antitrust or any other law .
the republican platform of 1908 further declares in favor of such national legislation and supervision as will prevent the future over - issue of stocks and bonds by interstate carriers , and in order to carry out its provisions , i recommend the enactment of a law providing that no railroad corporation subject to the interstate - commerce act shall hereafter for any purpose connected with or relating to any part of its business governed by said act , issue any capital stock without previous or simultaneous payment to it of not less than the par value of such stock , or any bonds or other obligations ( except notes maturing not more than one year from the date of their issue ) , without the previous or simultaneous payment to such corporation of not less than the par value of such bonds , or other obligations , or , if issued at less than their par value , then not without such payment of the reasonable market value of such bonds or obligations as ascertained by the interstate commerce commission ; and that no property , services , or other thing than money , shall be taken in payment to such carrier corporation , of the par or other required price of such stock , bond or other obligation , except at the fair value of such property , services or other thing as ascertained by the commission ; and that such act shall also contain provisions to prevent the abuse by the improvident or improper issue of notes maturing at a period not exceeding twelve months from date , in such manner as to commit the commission to the approval of a larger amount of stock or bonds in order to retire such notes than should legitimately have been required .
such act should also provide for the approval by the interstate commerce commission of the amount of stock and bonds to be issued by any railroad company subject to this act upon any reorganization , pursuant to judicial sale or other legal proceedings , in order to prevent the issue of stock and bonds to an amount in excess of the fair value of the property which is the subject of such reorganization .
i believe these suggested modifications in and amendments to the interstate - commerce act would make it a complete and effective measure for securing reasonableness of rates and fairness of practices in the operation of interstate railroad lines , without undue preference to any individual or class over any others ; and would prevent the recurrence of many of the practices which have given rise in the past to so much public inconvenience and loss .
by my direction the attorney - general has drafted a bill to carry out these recommendations , which will be furnished upon request to the appropriate committee whenever it may be desired .
in addition to the foregoing amendments of the interstate - commerce law , the interstate commerce commission should be given the power , after a hearing , to determine upon the uniform construction of those appliances -- such as sill steps , ladders , roof hand holds , running boards , and hand brakes on freight cars engaged in interstate commerce -- used by the train men in the operation of trains , the defects and lack of uniformity in which are apt to produce accidents and injuries to railway train men .
the wonderful reforms effected in the number of switchmen and train men injured by coupling accidents , due to the enforced introduction of safety couplers , is a demonstration of what can be done if railroads are compelled to adopt proper safety appliances .
the question has arisen in the operation of the interstate commerce employer 's liability act as to whether suit can be brought against the employer company in any place other than that of its home office .
the right to bring the suit under this act should be as easy of enforcement as the right of a private person not in the company 's employ to sue on an ordinary claim , and process in such suit should be sufficiently served if upon the station agent of the company upon whom service is authorized to be made to bind the company in ordinary actions arising under state laws .
bills for both the foregoing purposes have been considered by the house of representatives , and have been passed , and are now before the interstate commerce committee of the senate .
i earnestly urge that they be enacted into law .
there has been a marked tendency in business in this country for forty years last past toward combination of capital and plant in manufacture , sale , and transportation .
the moving causes have been several : first , it has rendered possible great economy ; second , by a union of former competitors it has reduced the probability of excessive competition ; and , third , if the combination has been extensive enough , and certain methods in the treatment of competitors and customers have been adopted , the combiners have secured a monopoly and complete control of prices or rates .
a combination successful in achieving complete control over a particular line of manufacture has frequently been called a " trust . "
i presume that the derivation of the word is to be explained by the fact that a usual method of carrying out the plan of the combination has been to put the capital and plants of various individuals , firms , or corporations engaged in the same business under the control of trustees .
the increase in the capital of a business for the purpose of reducing the cost of production and effecting economy in the management has become as essential in modern progress as the change from the hand tool to the machine .
when , therefore , we come to construe the object of congress in adopting the so - called " sherman anti - trust act " in 1890 , whereby in the first section every contract , combination in the form of a trust or otherwise , or conspiracy in restraint of interstate or foreign trade or commerce , is condemned as unlawful and made subject to indictment and restraint by injunction ; and whereby in the second section every monopoly or attempt to monopolize , and every combination or conspiracy with other persons to monopolize any part of interstate trade or commerce , is denounced as illegal and made subject to similar punishment or restraint , we must infer that the evil aimed at was not the mere bigness of the enterprise , but it was the aggregation of capital and plants with the express or implied intent to restrain interstate or foreign commerce , or to monopolize it in whole or in part .
monopoly destroys competition utterly , and restraint of the full and free operation of competition has a tendency to restrain commerce and trade .
a combination of persons , formerly engaged in trade as partnerships or corporations or otherwise , of course eliminates the competition that existed between them ; but the incidental ending of that competition is not to be regarded as necessarily a direct restraint of trade , unless of such an all - embracing character that the intention and effect to restrain trade are apparent from the circumstances , or are expressly declared to be the object of the combination .
a mere incidental restraint of trade and competition is not within the inhibition of the act , but it is where the combination or conspiracy or contract is inevitably and directly a substantial restraint of competition , and so a restraint of trade , that the statute is violated .
the second section of the act is a supplement to the first .
a direct restraint of trade , such as is condemned in the first section , if successful and used to suppress competition , is one of the commonest methods of securing a trade monopoly , condemned in the second section .
it is possible for the owners of a business of manufacturing and selling useful articles of merchandise so to conduct their business as not to violate the inhibitions of the antitrust law and yet to secure to themselves the benefit of the economies of management and of production due to the concentration under one control of large capital and many plants .
if they use no other inducement than the constant low price of their product and its good quality to attract custom , and their business is a profitable one , they violate no law .
if their actual competitors are small in comparison with the total capital invested , the prospect of new investments of capital by others in such a profitable business is sufficiently near and potential to restrain them in the prices at which they sell their product .
but if they attempt by a use of their preponderating capital and by a sale of their goods temporarily at unduly low prices to drive out of business their competitors , or if they attempt , by exclusive contracts with their patrons and threats of nondealing except upon such contracts , or by other methods of a similar character , to use the largeness of their resources and the extent of their output compared with the total output as a means of compelling custom and frightening off competition , then they disclose a purpose to restrain trade and to establish a monopoly and violate the act .
the object of the antitrust law was to suppress the abuses of business of the kind described .
it was not to interfere with a great volume of capital which , concentrated under one organization , reduced the cost of production and made its profits thereby , and took no advantage of its size by methods akin to duress to stifle competition with it .
i wish to make this distinction as emphatic as possible , because i conceive that nothing could happen more destructive to the prosperity of this country than the loss of that great economy in production which has been and will be effected in all manufacturing lines by the employment of large capital under one management .
i do not mean to say that there is not a limit beyond which the economy of management by the enlargement of plant ceases ; and where this happens and combination continues beyond this point , the very fact shows intent to monopolize and not to economize .
the original purpose of many combinations of capital in this country was not confined to the legitimate and proper object of reducing the cost of production .
on the contrary , the history of most trades will show at times a feverish desire to unite by purchase , combination , or otherwise all plants in the country engaged in the manufacture of a particular line of goods .
the idea was rife that thereby a monopoly could be effected and a control of prices brought about which would inure to the profit of those engaged in the combination .
the path of commerce is strewn with failures of such combinations .
their projectors found that the union of all the plants did not prevent competition , especially where proper economy had not been pursued in the purchase and in the conduct of the business after the aggregation was complete .
there were enough , however , of such successful combinations to arouse the fears of good , patriotic men as to the result of a continuance of this movement toward the concentration in the hands of a few of the absolute control of the prices of all manufactured products .
the antitrust statute was passed in 1890 and prosecutions were soon begun under it .
in the case of the united states v .
knight , known as the " sugar trust case , " because of the narrow scope of the pleadings , the combination sought to be enjoined was held not to be included within the prohibition of the act , because the averments did not go beyond the mere acquisition of manufacturing plants for the refining of sugar , and did not include that of a direct and intended restraint upon trade and commerce in the sale and delivery of sugar across state boundaries and in foreign trade .
the result of the sugar trust case was not happy , in that it gave other companies and combinations seeking a similar method of making profit by establishing an absolute control and monopoly in a particular line of manufacture a sense of immunity against prosecutions in the federal jurisdiction ; and where that jurisdiction is barred in respect to a business which is necessarily commensurate with the boundaries of the country , no state prosecution is able to supply the needed machinery for adequate restraint or punishment .
following the sugar trust decision , however , there have come along in the slow but certain course of judicial disposition cases involving a construction of the antitrust statute and its application until now they seem to embrace every phase of that law which can be practically presented to the american public and to the government for action .
they show that the antitrust act has a wide scope and applies to many combinations in actual operation , rendering them unlawful and subject to indictment and restraint .
the supreme court in several of its decisions has declined to read into the statute the word " unreasonable " before " restraint of trade , " on the ground that the statute applies to all restraints and does not intend to leave to the court the discretion to determine what is a reasonable restraint of trade .
the expression " restraint of trade " comes from the common law , and at common law there were certain covenants incidental to the carrying out of a main or principal contract which were said to be covenants in partial restraint of trade , and were held to be enforcible because " reasonably " adapted to the performance of the main or principal contract .
and under the general language used by the supreme court in several cases , it would seem that even such incidental covenants in restraint of interstate trade were within the inhibition of the statute and must be condemned .
in order to avoid such a result , i have thought and said that it might be well to amend the statute so as to exclude such covenants from its condemnation .
a close examination of the later decisions of the court , however , shows quite clearly in cases presenting the exact question , that such incidental restraints of trade are held not to be within the law and are excluded by the general statement that , to be within the statute , the effect of the restraint upon the trade must be direct and not merely incidental or indirect .
the necessity , therefore , for an amendment of the statute so as to exclude these incidental and beneficial covenants in restraint of trade held at common law to be reasonable does not exist .
in some of the opinions of the federal circuit judges there have been intimations , having the effect , if sound , to weaken the force of the statute by including within it absurdly unimportant combinations and arrangements , and suggesting therefore the wisdom of changing its language by limiting its application to serious combinations with intent to restrain competition or control prices .
a reading of the opinions of the supreme court , however , makes the change unnecessary , for they exclude from the operation of the act contracts affecting interstate trade in but a small and incidental way , and apply the statute only to the real evil aimed at by congress .
the statute has been on the statute book now for two decades , and the supreme court in more than a dozen opinions has construed it in application to various phases of business combinations and in reference to various subjects - matter .
it has applied it to the union under one control of two competing interstate railroads , to joint traffic arrangements between several interstate railroads , to private manufacturers engaged in a plain attempt to control prices and suppress competition in a part of the country , including a dozen states , and to many other combinations affecting interstate trade .
the value of a statute which is rendered more and more certain in its meaning by a series of decisions of the supreme court furnishes a strong reason for leaving the act as it is , to accomplish its useful purpose , even though if it were being newly enacted useful suggestions as to change of phrase might be made .
it is the duty and the purpose of the executive to direct an investigation by the department of justice , through the grand jury or otherwise , into the history , organization , and purposes of all the industrial companies with respect to which there is any reasonable ground for suspicion that they have been organized for a purpose , and are conducting business on a plan which is in violation of the antitrust law .
the work is a heavy one , but it is not beyond the power of the department of justice , if sufficient funds are furnished , to carry on the investigations and to pay the counsel engaged in the work .
but such an investigation and possible prosecution of corporations whose prosperity or destruction affects the comfort not only of stockholders , but of millions of wage - earners , employees , and associated tradesmen must necessarily tend to disturb the confidence of the business community , to dry up the now flowing sources of capital from its places of hoarding , and produce a halt in our present prosperity that will cause suffering and strained circumstances among the innocent many for the faults of the guilty few .
the question which i wish in this message to bring clearly to the consideration and discussion of congress is whether in order to avoid such a possible business danger something can not be done by which these business combinations may be offered a means , without great financial disturbance , of changing the character , organization , and extent of their business into one within the lines of the law under federal control and supervision , securing compliance with the antitrust statute .
generally , in the industrial combinations called " trusts , " the principal business is the sale of goods in many states and in foreign markets ; in other words , the interstate and foreign business far exceeds the business done in any one state .
this fact will justify the federal government in granting a federal charter to such a combination to make and sell in interstate and foreign commerce the products of useful manufacture under such limitations as will secure a compliance with the antitrust law .
it is possible so to frame a statute that while it offers protection to a federal company against harmful , vexatious , and unnecessary invasion by the states , it shall subject it to reasonable taxation and control by the states , with respect to its purely local business .
many people conducting great businesses have cherished a hope and a belief that in some way or other a line may be drawn between " good trusts " and " bad trusts , " and that it is possible by amendment to the antitrust law to make a distinction under which good combinations may be permitted to organize , suppress competition , control prices , and do it all legally if only they do not abuse the power by taking too great profit out of the business .
they point with force to certain notorious trusts as having grown into power through criminal methods by the use of illegal rebates and plain cheating , and by various acts utterly violative of business honesty or morality , and urge the establishment of some legal line of separation by which " criminal trusts " of this kind can be punished , and they , on the other hand , be permitted under the law to carry on their business .
now the public , and especially the business public , ought to rid themselves of the idea that such a distinction is practicable or can be introduced into the statute .
certainly under the present antitrust law no such distinction exists .
it has been proposed , however , that the word " reasonable " should be made a part of the statute , and then that it should be left to the court to say what is a reasonable restraint of trade , what is a reasonable suppression of competition , what is a reasonable monopoly .
i venture to think that this is to put into the hands of the court a power impossible to exercise on any consistent principle which will insure the uniformity of decision essential to just judgment .
it is to thrust upon the courts a burden that they have no precedents to enable them to carry , and to give them a power approaching the arbitrary , the abuse of which might involve our whole judicial system in disaster .
in considering violations of the antitrust law we ought , of course , not to forget that that law makes unlawful , methods of carrying on business which before its passage were regarded as evidence of business sagacity and success , and that they were denounced in this act not because of their intrinsic immorality , but because of the dangerous results toward which they tended , the concentration of industrial power in the hands of the few , leading to oppression and injustice .
in dealing , therefore , with many of the men who have used the methods condemned by the statute for the purpose of maintaining a profitable business , we may well facilitate a change by them in the method of doing business , and enable them to bring it back into the zone of lawfulness without losing to the country the economy of management by which in our domestic trade the cost of production has been materially lessened and in competition with foreign manufacturers our foreign trade has been greatly increased .
through all our consideration of this grave question , however , we must insist that the suppression of competition , the controlling of prices , and the monopoly or attempt to monopolize in interstate commerce and business , are not only unlawful , but contrary to the public good , and that they must be restrained and punished until ended .
i , therefore , recommend the enactment by congress of a general law providing for the formation of corporations to engage in trade and commerce among the states and with foreign nations , protecting them from undue interference by the states and regulating their activities , so as to prevent the recurrence , under national auspices , of those abuses which have arisen under state control .
such a law should provide for the issue of stock of such corporations to an amount equal only to the cash paid in on the stock ; and if the stock be issued for property , then at a fair valuation , ascertained under approval and supervision of federal authority , after a full and complete disclosure of all the facts pertaining to the value of such property and the interest therein of the persons to whom it is proposed to issue stock in payment of such property .
it should subject the real and personal property only of such corporations to the same taxation as is imposed by the states within which it may be situated upon other similar property located therein , and it should require such corporations to file full and complete reports of their operations with the department of commerce and labor at regular intervals .
corporations organized under this act should be prohibited from acquiring and holding stock in other corporations ( except for special reasons upon approval by the proper federal authority ) , thus avoiding the creation , under national auspices , of the holding company with subordinate corporations in different states , which has been such an effective agency in the creation of the great trusts and monopolies .
if the prohibition of the antitrust act against combinations in restraint of trade is to be effectively enforced , it is essential that the national government shall provide for the creation of national corporations to carry on a legitimate business throughout the united states .
the conflicting laws of the different states of the union with respect to foreign corporations make it difficult , if not impossible , for one corporation to comply with their requirements so as to carry on business in a number of different states .
to the suggestion that this proposal of federal incorporation for industrial combinations is intended to furnish them a refuge in which to continue industrial abuses under federal protection , it should be said that the measure contemplated does not repeal the sherman antitrust law and is not to be framed so as to permit the doing of the wrongs which it is the purpose of that law to prevent , but only to foster a continuance and advance of the highest industrial efficiency without permitting industrial abuses .
such a national incorporation law will be opposed , first , by those who believe that trusts should be completely broken up and their property destroyed .
it will be opposed , second , by those who doubt the constitutionality of such federal incorporation , and even if it is valid , object to it as too great federal centralization .
it will be opposed , third , by those who will insist that a mere voluntary incorporation like this will not attract to its acceptance the worst of the offenders against the antitrust statute and who will , therefore , propose instead of it a system of compulsory licenses for all federal corporations engaged in interstate business .
let us consider these objections in their order .
the government is now trying to dissolve some of these combinations , and it is not the intention of the government to desist in the least degree in its effort to end those combinations which are to - day monopolizing the commerce of this country ; that where it appears that the acquisition and concentration of property go to the extent of creating a monopoly or of substantially and directly restraining interstate commerce , it is not the intention of the government to permit this monopoly to exist under federal incorporation or to transfer to the protecting wing of the federal government a state corporation now violating the sherman act .
but it is not , and should not be , the policy of the government to prevent reasonable concentration of capital which is necessary to the economic development of manufacture , trade , and commerce .
this country has shown a power of economical production that has astonished the world , and has enabled us to compete with foreign manufactures in many markets .
it should be the care of the government to permit such concentration of capital while keeping open the avenues of individual enterprise , and the opportunity for a man or corporation with reasonable capital to engage in business .
if we would maintain our present business supremacy , we should give to industrial concerns an opportunity to reorganize and to concentrate their legitimate capital in a federal corporation , and to carry on their large business within the lines of the law .
second .
there are those who doubt the constitutionality of such federal incorporation .
the regulation of interstate and foreign commerce is certainly conferred in the fullest measure upon congress , and if for the purpose of securing in the most thorough manner that kind of regulation , congress shall insist that it may provide and authorize certain agencies to carry on that commerce , it would seem to be within its power .
this has been distinctly affirmed with respect to railroad companies doing an interstate business and interstate bridges .
the power of incorporation has been exercised by congress and upheld by the supreme court in this regard .
why , then , with respect to any other form of interstate commerce like the sale of goods across state boundaries and into foreign commerce , may the same power not be asserted ?
indeed , it is the very fact that they carry on interstate commerce that makes these great industrial concerns subject to federal prosecution and control .
how far as incidental to the carrying on of that commerce it may be within the power of the federal government to authorize the manufacture of goods is , perhaps , more open to discussion , though a recent decision of the supreme court would seem to answer that question in the affirmative .
even those who are willing to concede that the supreme court may sustain such federal incorporation are inclined to oppose it on the ground of its tendency to the enlargement of the federal power at the expense of the power of the states .
it is a sufficient answer to this argument to say that no other method can be suggested which offers federal protection on the one hand and close federal supervision on the other of these great organizations that are in fact federal because they are as wide as the country and are entirely unlimited in their business by state lines .
nor is the centralization of federal power under this act likely to be excessive .
only the largest corporations would avail themselves of such a law , because the burden of complete federal supervision and control that must certainly be imposed to accomplish the purpose of the incorporation would not be accepted by an ordinary business concern .
the third objection , that the worst offenders will not accept federal incorporation , is easily answered .
the decrees of injunction recently adopted in prosecutions under the antitrust law are so thorough and sweeping that the corporations affected by them have but three courses before them : 
 first , they must resolve themselves into their component parts in the different states , with a consequent loss to themselves of capital and effective organization and to the country of concentrated energy and enterprise ; or , 
 second , in defiance of law and under some secret trust they must attempt to continue their business in violation of the federal statute , and thus incur the penalties of contempt and bring on an inevitable criminal prosecution of the individuals named in the decree and their associates ; or , 
 third , they must reorganize and accept in good faith the federal charter i suggest .
a federal compulsory license law , urged as a substitute for a federal incorporation law , is unnecessary except to reach that kind of corporation which , by virtue of the considerations already advanced , will take advantage voluntarily of an incorporation law , while the other state corporations doing an interstate business do not need the supervision or the regulation of a federal license and would only be unnecessarily burdened thereby .
the attorney - general , at my suggestion , has drafted a federal incorporation bill , embodying the views i have attempted to set forth , and it will be at the disposition of the appropriate committees of congress .

to the senate and house of representatives : 
 it is the constitutional duty of the president from time to time to recommend to the consideration of congress such measures as he shall judge necessary and expedient .
in my inaugural address , immediately preceding this present extraordinary session of congress , i invited attention to the necessity for a revision of the tariff at this session , and stated the principles upon which i thought the revision should be effected .
i referred to the then rapidly increasing deficit , and pointed out the obligation on the part of the framers of the tariff bill to arrange the duty so as to secure an adequate income , and suggested that if it was not possible to do so by import duties , new kinds of taxation must be adopted , and among them i recommended a graduated inheritance tax as correct in principle and as certain and easy of collection .
the house of representatives has adopted the suggestion and has provided in the bill it passed for the collection of such a tax .
in the senate the action of its finance committee and the course of the debate indicate that it may not agree to this provision , and it is now proposed to make up the deficit by the imposition of a general income tax , in form and substance of almost exactly the same character as that which in the case of pollock v. farmers ' loan and trust company ( 157 u. s. , 429 ) was held by the supreme court to be a direct tax , and therefore not within the power of the federal government to impose unless apportioned among the several states according to population .
this new proposal , which i did not discuss in my inaugural addressor in my message at the opening of the present session , makes it appropriate for me to submit to the congress certain additional recommendations .
the decision of the supreme court in the income - tax cases deprived the national government of a power which , by reason of previous decisions of the court , it was generally supposed that government had .
it is undoubtedly a power the national government ought to have .
it might be indispensable to the nation 's life in great crises .
although i have not considered a constitutional amendment as necessary to the exercise of certain phases of this power , a mature consideration has satisfied me that an amendment is the only proper course for its establishment to its full extent .
i therefore recommend to the congress that both houses , by a two - thirds vote , shall propose an amendment to the constitution conferring the power to levy an income tax upon the national government without apportionment among the states in proportion to population .
this course is much to be preferred to the one proposed of reenacting a law once judicially declared to be unconstitutional .
for the congress to assume that the court will reverse itself , and to enact legislation on such an assumption , will not strengthen popular confidence in the stability of judicial construction of the constitution .
it is much wiser policy to accept the decision and remedy the defect by amendment in due and regular course .
again , it is clear that by the enactment of the proposed law , the congress will not be bringing money into the treasury to meet the present deficiency , but by putting on the statute book a law already there and never repealed , will simply be suggesting to the executive officers of the government their possible duty to invoke litigation .
if the court should maintain its former view , no tax would be collected at all .
if it should ultimately reverse itself , still no taxes would have been collected until after protracted delay .
it is said the difficulty and delay in securing the approval of three - fourths of the states will destroy all chance of adopting the amendment .
of course , no one can speak with certainty upon this point , but i have become convinced that a great majority of the people of this country are in favor of vesting the national government with power to levy an income tax , and that they will secure the adoption of the amendment in the states , if proposed to them .
second , the decision in the pollock case left power in the national government to levy an excise tax which accomplishes the same purpose as a corporation income tax , and is free from certain objections urged to the proposed income - tax measure .
i therefore recommend an amendment to the tariff bill imposing upon all corporations and joint stock companies for profit , except national banks ( otherwise taxed ) , savings banks , and building and loan associations , an excise tax measured by 2 per cent on the net income of such corporations .
this is an excise tax upon the privilege of doing business as an artificial entity and of freedom from a general partnership liability enjoyed by those who own the stock .
i am informed that a 2 per cent tax of this character would bring into the treasury of the united states not less than $ 25,000,000 .
the decision of the supreme court in the case of spreckels sugar refining company against mcclain ( 192 u. s. , 397 ) seems clearly to establish the principle that such a tax as this is an excise tax upon privilege and not a direct tax on property , and is within the federal power without apportionment according to population .
the tax on net income is preferable to one proportionate to a percentage of the gross receipts , because it is a tax upon success and not failure .
it imposes a burden at the source of the income at a time when the corporation is well able to pay and when collection is easy .
another merit of this tax is the federal supervision which must be exercised in order to make the law effective over the annual accounts and business transactions of all corporations .
while the faculty of assuming a corporate form has been of the utmost utility in the business world , it is also true that substantially all of the abuses and all of the evils which have aroused the public to the necessity of reform were made possible by the use of this very faculty .
if now , by a perfectly legitimate and effective system of taxation we are incidentally able to possess the government and the stockholders and the public of the knowledge of the real business transactions and the gains and profits of every corporation in the country , we have made along step toward that supervisory control of corporations which may prevent a further abuse of power .
i recommend , then , first , the adoption of a joint resolution by two - thirds of both houses proposing to the states an amendment to the constitution granting to the federal government the right to levy and collect an income tax without apportionment among the states according to population , and , second , the enactment , as part of the pending revenue measure , either as a substitute for , or in addition to , the inheritance tax , of an excise tax upon all corporations measured by 2 per cent of their net income .

