i was for some time apprehensive that it would be necessary , on account of the contagious sickness which afflicted the city of philadelphia , to convene the national legislature at some other place .
this measure it was desirable to avoid , because it would occasion much public inconvenience and a considerable public expense and add to the calamities of the inhabitants of this city , whose sufferings must have excited the sympathy of all their fellow citizens .
therefore , after taking measures to ascertain the state and decline of the sickness , i postponed my determination , having hopes , now happily realized , that , without hazard to the lives or health of the members , congress might assemble at this place , where it was next by law to meet .
i submit , however , to your consideration whether a power to postpone the meeting of congress , without passing the time fixed by the constitution upon such occasions , would not be a useful amendment to the law of 1794 .
although i can not yet congratulate you on the reestablishment of peace in europe and the restoration of security to the persons and properties of our citizens from injustice and violence at sea , we have , nevertheless , abundant cause of gratitude to the source of benevolence and influence for interior tranquillity and personal security , for propitious seasons , prosperous agriculture , productive fisheries , and general improvements , and , above all , for a rational spirit of civil and religious liberty and a calm but steady determination to support our sovereignty , as well as our moral and our religious principles , against all open and secret attacks .
our envoys extraordinary to the french republic embarked - one in july , the other in august - to join their colleague in holland .
i have received intelligence of the arrival of both of them in holland , from whence they all proceeded on their journeys to paris within a few days of the 19th of september .
whatever may be the result of this mission , i trust that nothing will have been omitted on my part to conduct the negotiation to a successful conclusion , on such equitable terms as may be compatible with the safety , honor and interest of the united states .
nothing , in the mean time , will contribute so much to the preservation of peace and the attainment of justice as manifestation of that energy and unanimity of which on many former occasions the people of the united states have given such memorable proofs , and the exertion of those resources for national defense which a beneficent providence has kindly placed within their power .
it may be confidently asserted that nothing has occurred since the adjournment of congress which renders inexpedient those precautionary measures recommended by me to the consideration of the two houses at the opening of your late extraordinary session .
if that system was then prudent , it is more so now , as increasing depredations strengthen the reasons for its adoption .
indeed , whatever may be the issue of the negotiation with france , and whether the war in europe is or is not to continue , i hold it most certain that permanent tranquillity and order will not soon be obtained .
the state of society has so long been disturbed , the sense of moral and religious obligations so much weakened , public faith and national honor have been so impaired , respect to treaties has been so diminished , and the law of nations has lost so much of its force , while pride , ambition , avarice and violence have been so long unrestrained , there remains no reasonable ground on which to raise an expectation that a commerce without protection or defense will not be plundered .
the commerce of the united states is essential , if not to their existence , at least to their comfort , their growth , prosperity , and happiness .
the genius , character , and habits of the people are highly commercial .
their cities have been formed and exist upon commerce .
our agriculture , fisheries , arts , and manufactures are connected with and depend upon it .
in short , commerce has made this country what it is , and it can not be destroyed or neglected without involving the people in poverty and distress .
great numbers are directly and solely supported by navigation .
the faith of society is pledged for the preservation of the rights of commercial and sea faring no less than of the other citizens .
under this view of our affairs , i should hold myself guilty of a neglect of duty if i forbore to recommend that we should make every exertion to protect our commerce and to place our country in a suitable posture of defense as the only sure means of preserving both .
i have entertained an expectation that it would have been in my power at the opening of this session to have communicated to you the agreeable information of the due execution of our treaty with his catholic majesty respecting the withdrawing of his troops from our territory and the demarcation of the line of limits , but by the latest authentic intelligence spanish garrisons were still continued within our country , and the running of the boundary line had not been commenced .
these circumstances are the more to be regretted as they can not fail to affect the indians in a manner injurious to the united states .
still , however , indulging the hope that the answers which have been given will remove the objections offered by the spanish officers to the immediate execution of the treaty , i have judged it proper that we should continue in readiness to receive the posts and to run the line of limits .
further information on this subject will be communicated in the course of the session .
in connection with this unpleasant state of things on our western frontier it is proper for me to mention the attempts of foreign agents to alienate the affections of the indian nations and to excite them to actual hostilities against the united states .
great activity has been exerted by those persons who have insinuated themselves among the indian tribes residing within the territory of the united states to influence them to transfer their affections and force to a foreign nation , to form them into a confederacy , and prepare them for war against the united states .
although measures have been taken to counteract these infractions of our rights , to prevent indian hostilities , and to preserve entire their attachment to the united states , it is my duty to observe that to give a better effect to these measures and to obviate the consequences of a repetition of such practices a law providing adequate punishment for such offenses may be necessary .
the commissioners appointed under the 5th article of the treaty of amity , commerce , and navigation between the united states and great britain to ascertain the river which was truly intended under the name of the river st. croix mentioned in the treaty of peace , met at passamaquoddy bay in 1796 october , and viewed the mouths of the rivers in question and the adjacent shores and islands , and , being of opinion that actual surveys of both rivers to their sources were necessary , gave to the agents of the two nations instructions for that purpose , and adjourned to meet at boston in august .
they met , but the surveys requiring more time than had been supposed , and not being then completed , the commissioners again adjourned , to meet at providence , in the state of rhode island , in june next , when we may expect a final examination and decision .
the commissioners appointed in pursuance of the 6th article of the treaty met at philadelphia in may last to examine the claims of british subjects for debts contracted before the peace and still remaining due to them from citizens or inhabitants of the united states .
various causes have hitherto prevented any determinations , but the business is now resumed , and doubtless will be prosecuted without interruption .
several decisions on the claims of citizens of the united states for losses and damages sustained by reason of irregular and illegal captures or condemnations of their vessels or other property have been made by the commissioners in london conformably to the 7th article of the treaty .
the sums awarded by the commissioners have been paid by the british government .
a considerable number of other claims , where costs and damages , and not captured property , were the only objects in question , have been decided by arbitration , and the sums awarded to the citizens of the united states have also been paid .
the commissioners appointed agreeably to the 21st article of our treaty with spain met at philadelphia in the summer past to examine and decide on the claims of our citizens for losses they have sustained in consequence of their vessels and cargoes having been taken by the subjects of his catholic majesty during the late war between spain and france .
their sittings have been interrupted , but are now resumed .
the united states being obligated to make compensation for the losses and damages sustained by british subjects , upon the award of the commissioners acting under the 6th article of the treaty with great britain , and for the losses and damages sustained by british subjects by reason of the capture of their vessels and merchandise taken within the limits and jurisdiction of the united states and brought into their ports , or taken by vessels originally armed in ports of the united states , upon the awards of the commissioners acting under the 7th article of the same treaty , it is necessary that provision be made for fulfilling these obligations .
the numerous captures of american vessels by the cruisers of the french republic and of some by those of spain have occasioned considerable expenses in making and supporting the claims of our citizens before their tribunals .
the sums required for this purpose have in divers instances been disbursed by the consuls of the united states .
by means of the same captures great numbers of our sea men have been thrown ashore in foreign countries , destitute of all means of subsistence , and the sick in particular have been exposed to grievous sufferings .
the consuls have in these cases also advanced moneys for their relief .
for these advances they reasonably expect reimbursements from the united states .
the consular act relative to sea men requires revision and amendment .
the provisions for their support in foreign countries and for their return are found to be inadequate and ineffectual .
another provision seems necessary to be added to the consular act .
some foreign vessels have been discovered sailing under the flag of the united states and with forged papers .
it seldom happens that the consuls can detect this deception , because they have no authority to demand an inspection of the registers and sea letters .
gentlemen of the house of representatives : it is my duty to recommend to your serious consideration those objects which by the constitution are placed particularly within your sphere - the national debts and taxes .
since the decay of the feudal system , by which the public defense was provided for chiefly at the expense of individuals , the system of loans has been introduced , and as no nation can raise within the year by taxes sufficient sums for its defense and military operations in time of war the sums loaned and debts contracted have necessarily become the subjects of what have been called funding systems .
the consequences arising from the continual accumulation of public debts in other countries ought to admonish us to be careful to prevent their growth in our own .
the national defense must be provided for as well as the support of government ; but both should be accomplished as much as possible by immediate taxes , and as little as possible by loans .
the estimates for the service of the ensuing year will by my direction be laid before you .
gentlemen of the senate and gentlemen of the house of representatives : we are met together at a most interesting period .
the situation of the principal powers of europe are singular and portentous .
connected with some by treaties and with all by commerce , no important event there can be indifferent to us .
such circumstances call with peculiar importunity not less for a disposition to unite in all those measures on which the honor , safety , and prosperity of our country depend than for all the exertions of wisdom and firmness .
in all such measures you may rely on my zealous and hearty concurrence .

it is with peculiar satisfaction that i meet the 6th congress of the united states of america .
coming from all parts of the union at this critical and interesting period , the members must be fully possessed of the sentiments and wishes of our constituents .
the flattering prospects of abundance from the labors of the people by land and by sea ; the prosperity of our extended commerce , notwithstanding interruptions occasioned by the belligerent state of a great part of the world ; the return of health , industry , and trade to those cities which have lately been afflicted with disease , and the various and inestimable advantages , civil and religious , which , secured under our happy frame of government , are continued to us unimpaired , demand of the whole american people sincere thanks to a benevolent deity for the merciful dispensations of his providence .
but while these numerous blessings are recollected , it is a painful duty to advert to the ungrateful return which has been made for them by some of the people in certain counties of pennsylvania , where , seduced by the arts and misrepresentations of designing men , they have openly resisted the law directing the valuation of houses and lands .
such defiance was given to the civil authority as rendered hopeless all further attempts by judicial process to enforce the execution of the law , and it became necessary to direct a military force to be employed , consisting of some companies of regular troops , volunteers , and militia , by whose zeal and activity , in cooperation with the judicial power , order and submission were restored and many of the offenders arrested .
of these , some have been convicted of misdemeanors , and others , charged with various crimes , remain to be tried .
to give due effect to the civil administration of government and to insure a just execution of the laws , a revision and amendment of the judiciary system is indispensably necessary .
in this extensive country it can not but happen that numerous questions respecting the interpretation of the laws and the rights and duties of officers and citizens must arise .
on the one hand , the laws should be executed ; on the other , individuals should be guarded from oppression .
neither of these objects is sufficiently assured under the present organization of the judicial department .
i therefore earnestly recommend the subject to your serious consideration .
persevering in the pacific and humane policy which had been invariably professed and sincerely pursued by the executive authority of the united states , when indications were made on the part of the french republic of a disposition to accommodate the existing differences between the two countries , i felt it to be my duty to prepare for meeting their advances by a nomination of ministers upon certain conditions which the honor of our country dictated , and which its moderation had given it a right to prescribe .
the assurances which were required of the french government previous to the departure of our envoys have been given through their minister of foreign relations , and i have directed them to proceed on their mission to paris .
they have full power to conclude a treaty , subject to the constitutional advice and consent of the senate .
the characters of these gentlemen are sure pledges to their country that nothing incompatible with its honor or interest , nothing inconsistent with our obligations of good faith or friendship to any other nation , will be stipulated .
it appearing probable from the information i received that our commercial intercourse with some ports in the island of st. domingo might safely be renewed , i took such steps as seemed to me expedient to ascertain that point .
the result being satisfactory , i then , in conformity with the act of congress on the subject , directed the restraints and prohibitions of that intercourse to be discontinued on terms which were made known by proclamation .
since the renewal of this intercourse our citizens trading to those ports , with their property , have been duly respected , and privateering from those ports has ceased .
in examining the claims of british subjects by the commissioners at philadelphia , acting under the sixth article of the treaty of amity , commerce , and navigation with great britain , a difference of opinion on points deemed essential in the interpretation of that article has arisen between the commissioners appointed by the united states and the other members of that board , from which the former have thought it their duty to withdraw .
it is sincerely to be regretted that the execution of an article produced by a mutual spirit of amity and justice should have been thus unavoidably interrupted .
it is , however , confidently expected that the same spirit of amity and the same sense of justice in which it originated will lead to satisfactory explanations .
in consequence of the obstacles to the progress of the commission in philadelphia , his britannic majesty has directed the commissioners appointed by him under the seventh article of the treaty relating to the british captures of american vessels to withdraw from the board sitting in london , but with the express declaration of his determination to fulfill with punctuality and good faith the engagements which his majesty has contracted by his treaty with the united states , and that they will be instructed to resume their functions whenever the obstacles which impede the progress of the commission at philadelphia shall be removed .
it being in like manner my sincere determination , so far as the same depends on me , that with equal punctuality and good faith the engagements contracted by the united states in their treaties with his britannic majesty shall be fulfilled , i shall immediately instruct our minister at london to endeavor to obtain the explanation necessary to a just performance of those engagements on the part of the united states .
with such dispositions on both sides , i can not entertain a doubt that all difficulties will soon be removed and that the two boards will then proceed and bring the business committed to them respectively to a satisfactory conclusion .
the act of congress relative to the seat of the government of the united states requiring that on the first monday of december next it should be transferred from philadelphia to the district chosen for its permanent seat , it is proper for me to inform you that the commissioners appointed to provide suitable buildings for the accommodation of congress and of the president and of the public offices of the government have made a report of the state of the buildings designed for those purposes in the city of washington , from which they conclude that the removal of the seat of government to that place at the time required will be practicable and the accommodation satisfactory .
their report will be laid before you .
gentlemen of the house of representatives : i shall direct the estimates of the appropriations necessary for the service of the ensuing year , together with an account of the revenue and expenditure , to be laid before you .
during a period in which a great portion of the civilized world has been involved in a war unusually calamitous and destructive , it was not to be expected that the united states could be exempted from extraordinary burthens .
although the period is not arrived when the measures adopted to secure our country against foreign attacks can be renounced , yet it is alike necessary for the honor of the government and the satisfaction of the community that an exact economy should be maintained .
i invite you , gentlemen , to investigate the different branches of the public expenditure .
the examination will lead to beneficial retrenchments or produce a conviction of the wisdom of the measures to which the expenditure relates .
gentlemen of the senate and gentlemen of the house of representatives : at a period like the present , when momentous changes are occurring and every hour is preparing new and great events in the political world , when a spirit of war is prevalent in almost every nation with whose affairs the interests of the united states have any connection , unsafe and precarious would be our situation were we to neglect the means of maintaining our just rights .
the result of the mission to france is uncertain ; but however it may terminate , a steady perseverance in a system of national defense commensurate with our resources and the situation of our country is an obvious dictate of wisdom ; for , remotely as we are placed from the belligerent nations , and desirous as we are , by doing justice to all , to avoid offense to any , nothing short of the power of repelling aggressions will secure to our country a rational prospect of escaping the calamities of war or national degradation .
as to myself , it is my anxious desire so to execute the trust reposed in me as to render the people of the united states prosperous and happy .
i rely with entire confidence on your cooperation in objects equally your care , and that our mutual labors will serve to increase and confirm union among our fellow citizens and an unshaken attachment to our government .

whereas the late wicked and treasonable insurrection against the just authority of the united states of sundry persons in the counties of northampton , montgomery , and bucks , in the state of pennsylvania , in the year 1799 , having been speedily suppressed without any of the calamities usually attending rebellion ; whereupon peace , order , and submission to the laws of the united states were restored in the aforesaid counties , and the ignorant , misguided , and misinformed in the counties have returned to a proper sense of their duty , whereby it is become unnecessary for the public good that any future prosecutions should be commenced or carried on against any person or persons by reason of their being concerned in the said insurrection : 
 wherefore be it known that i , john adams , president of the united states of america , have granted , and by these presents do grant , a full , free , and absolute pardon to all and every person or persons concerned in the said insurrection , excepting as hereinafter excepted , of all treasons , misprisions of treason , felonies , misdemeanors , and other crimes by them respectively done or committed against the united states in either of the said counties before the 12th day of march , in the year 1799 , excepting and excluding therefrom every person who now standeth indicted or convicted of any treason , misprision of treason , or other offense against the united states , whereby remedying and releasing unto all persons , except as before excepted , all pains and penalties incurred , or supposed to be incurred , for or on account of the premises .
given under my hand and the seal of the united states of america , at the city of philadelphia , this 21st day of may , a. d. 1800 , and of the independence of the said states the twenty - fourth .
john adams .

the personal inconveniences to the members of the senate and of the house of representatives in leaving their families and private affairs at this season of the year are so obvious that i the more regret the extraordinary occasion which has rendered the convention of congress indispensable .
it would have afforded me the highest satisfaction to have been able to congratulate you on a restoration of peace to the nations of europe whose animosities have endangered our tranquillity ; but we have still abundant cause of gratitude to the supreme dispenser of national blessings for general health and promising seasons , for domestic and social happiness , for the rapid progress and ample acquisitions of industry through extensive territories , for civil , political , and religious liberty .
while other states are desolated with foreign war or convulsed with intestine divisions , the united states present the pleasing prospect of a nation governed by mild and equal laws , generally satisfied with the possession of the rights , neither envying the advantages nor fearing the power of other nations , solicitous only for the maintenance of order and justice and the preservation of liberty , increasing daily in their attachment to a system of government in proportion to their experience of its utility , yielding a ready and general obedience to laws flowing from the reason and resting on the only solid foundation - the affections of the people .
it is with extreme regret that i shall be obliged to turn your thoughts to other circumstances , which admonish us that some of these felicities may not be lasting .
but if the tide of our prosperity is full and a reflux commencing , a vigilant circumspection becomes us , that we may meet our reverses with fortitude and extricate ourselves from their consequences with all the skill we possess and all the efforts in our power .
in giving to congress information of the state of the union and recommending to their consideration such measures as appear to me to be necessary or expedient , according to my constitutional duty , the causes and the objects of the present extraordinary session will be explained .
after the president of the united states received information that the french government had expressed serious discontents at some proceedings of the government of these states said to affect the interests of france , he thought it expedient to send to that country a new minister , fully instructed to enter on such amicable discussions and to give such candid explanations as might happily remove the discontents and suspicions of the french government and vindicate the conduct of the united states .
for this purpose he selected from among his fellow citizens a character whose integrity , talents , experience , and services had placed him in the rank of the most esteemed and respected in the nation .
the direct object of his mission was expressed in his letter of credence to the french republic , being " to maintain that good understanding which from the commencement of the alliance had subsisted between the two nations , and to efface unfavorable impressions , banish suspicions , and restore that cordiality which was at once the evidence and pledge of a friendly union " .
and his instructions were to the same effect , " faithfully to represent the disposition of the government and people of the united states ( their disposition being 1 ) ; to remove jealousies and obviate complaints by shewing that they were groundless , to restore that mutual confidence which had been so unfortunately and injuriously impaired , and to explain the relative interests of both countries and the real sentiments of his own " .
a minister thus specially commissioned it was expected would have proved the instrument of restoring mutual confidence between the two republics .
the first step of the french government corresponded with that expectation .
a few days before his arrival at paris the french minister of foreign relations informed the american minister then resident at paris of the formalities to be observed by himself in taking leave , and by his successor preparatory to his reception .
these formalities they observed , and on the 9th of december presented officially to the minister of foreign relations , the one a copy of his letters of recall , the other a copy of his letters of credence .
these were laid before the executive directory .
two days afterwards the minister of foreign relations informed the recalled american minister that the executive directory had determined not to receive another minister plenipotentiary from the united states until after the redress of grievances demanded of the american government , and which the french republic had a right to expect from it .
the american minister immediately endeavored to ascertain whether by refusing to receive him it was intended that he should retire from the territories of the french republic , and verbal answers were given that such was the intention of the directory .
for his own justification he desired a written answer , but obtained none until toward the last of january , when , receiving notice in writing to quit the territories of the republic , he proceeded to amsterdam , where he proposed to wait for instruction from this government .
during his residence at paris cards of hospitality were refused him , and he was threatened with being subjected to the jurisdiction of the minister of police ; but with becoming firmness he insisted on the protection of the law of nations due to him as the known minister of a foreign power .
you will derive further information from his dispatches , which will be laid before you .
as it is often necessary that nations should treat for the mutual advantage of their affairs , and especially to accommodate and terminate differences , and as they can treat only by ministers , the right of embassy is well known and established by the law and usage of nations .
the refusal on the part of france to receive our minister is , then , the denial of a right ; but the receive him until we have acceded to their demands without discussion and without investigation is to treat us neither as allies nor as friends , nor as a sovereign state .
with this conduct of the french government it will be proper to take into view the public audience given to the late minister of the united states on his taking leave of the executive directory .
the speech of the president discloses sentiments more alarming than the refusal of a minister , because more dangerous to our independence and union , and at the same time studiously marked with indignities toward the government of the united states .
it evinces a disposition to separate the people of the united states from the government , to persuade them that they have different affections , principles , and interests from those of their fellow citizens whom they themselves have chosen to manage their common concerns , and thus to produce divisions fatal to our peace .
such attempts ought to be repelled with a decision which shall convince france and the world that we are not a degraded people , humiliated under a colonial spirit of fear and sense of inferiority , fitted to be the miserable instruments of foreign influence , and regardless of national honor , character , and interest .
i should have been happy to have thrown a veil over these transactions if it had been possible to conceal them ; but they have passed on the great theater of the world , in the face of all europe and america , and with such circumstances of publicity and solemnity that they can not be disguised and will not soon be forgotten .
they have inflicted a wound in the american breast .
it is my sincere desire , however , that it may be healed .
it is my sincere desire , and in this i presume i concur with you and with our constituents , to preserve peace and friendship with all nations ; and believing that neither the honor nor the interest of the united states absolutely forbid the repetition of advances for securing these desirable objects with france , i shall institute a fresh attempt at negotiation , and shall not fail to promote and accelerate an accommodation on terms compatible with the rights , duties , interests , and honor of the nation .
if we have committed errors , and these can be demonstrated , we shall be willing on conviction to redress them ; and equal measures of justice we have a right to expect from france and every other nation .
the diplomatic intercourse between the united states and france being at present suspended , the government has no means of obtaining official information from that country .
nevertheless , there is reason to believe that the executive directory passed a decree on the 2nd of march last contravening in part the treaty of amity and commerce of 1778 , injurious to our lawful commerce and endangering the lives of our citizens .
a copy of this decree will be laid before you .
while we are endeavoring to adjust all our differences with france by amicable negotiation , the progress of the war in europe , the depredations on our commerce , the personal injuries to our citizens , and the general complexion of affairs render it my indispensable duty to recommend to your consideration effectual measures of defense .
the commerce of the united states has become an interesting object of attention , whether we consider it in relation to the wealth and finances or the strength and resources of the nation .
with a sea coast of near 2000 miles in extent , opening a wide field for fisheries , navigation , and commerce , a great portion of our citizens naturally apply their industry and enterprise to these objects .
any serious and permanent injury to commerce would not fail to produce the most embarrassing disorders .
to prevent it from being undermined and destroyed it is essential that it receive an adequate protection .
the naval establishment must occur to every man who considers the injuries committed on our commerce , the insults offered to our citizens , and the description of vessels by which these abuses have been practiced .
as the sufferings of our mercantile and sea faring citizens can not be ascribed to the omission of duties demandable , considering the neutral situation of our country , they are to be attributed to the hope of impunity arising from a supposed inability on our part to afford protection .
to resist the consequences of such impressions on the minds of foreign nations and to guard against the degradation and servility which they must finally stamp on the american character is an important duty of government .
a naval power , next to the militia , is the natural defense of the united states .
the experience of the last war would be sufficient to shew that a moderate naval force , such as would be easily within the present abilities of the union , would have been sufficient to have baffled many formidable transportations of troops from one state to another , which were then practiced .
our sea coasts , from their great extent , are more easily annoyed and more easily defended by a naval force than any other .
with all the materials our country abounds ; in skill our naval architects and navigators are equal to any , and commanders and sea men will not be wanting .
but although the establishment of a permanent system of naval defense appears to be requisite , i am sensible it can not be formed so speedily and extensively as the present crisis demands .
hitherto i have thought proper to prevent the sailing of armed vessels except on voyages to the east indies , where general usage and the danger from pirates appeared to render the permission proper .
yet the restriction has originated solely from a wish to prevent collisions with the powers at war , contravening the act of congress of june 1794 , and not from any doubt entertained by me of the policy and propriety of permitting our vessels to employ means of defense while engaged in a lawful foreign commerce .
it remains for congress to prescribe such regulations as will enable our sea faring citizens to defend themselves against violations of the law of nations , and at the same time restrain them from committing acts of hostility against the powers at war .
in addition to this voluntary provision for defense by individual citizens , it appears to me necessary to equip the frigates , and provide other vessels of inferior force , to take under convoy such merchant vessels as shall remain unarmed .
the greater part of the cruisers whose depredations have been most injurious have been built and some of them partially equipped in the united states .
although an effectual remedy may be attended with difficulty , yet i have thought it my duty to present the subject generally to your consideration .
if a mode can be devised by the wisdom of congress to prevent the resources of the united states from being converted into the means of annoying our trade , a great evil will be prevented .
with the same view , i think it proper to mention that some of our citizens resident abroad have fitted out privateers , and others have voluntarily taken the command , or entered on board of them , and committed spoliations on the commerce of the united states .
such unnatural and iniquitous practices can be restrained only by severe punishments .
but besides a protection of our commerce on the seas , i think it highly necessary to protect it at home , where it is collected in our most important ports .
the distance of the united states from europe and the well known promptitude , ardor , and courage of the people in defense of their country happily diminish the probability of invasion .
nevertheless , to guard against sudden and predatory incursions the situation of some of our principal sea ports demands your consideration .
and as our country is vulnerable in other interests besides those of its commerce , you will seriously deliberate whether the means of general defense ought not to be increased by an addition to the regular artillery and cavalry , and by arrangements for forming a provisional army .
with the same view , and as a measure which , even in a time of universal peace , ought not to be neglected , i recommend to your consideration a revision of the laws for organizing , arming , and disciplining the militia , to render that natural and safe defense of the country efficacious .
although it is very true that we ought not to involve ourselves in the political system of europe , but to keep ourselves always distinct and separate from it if we can , yet to effect this separation , early , punctual , and continual information of the current chain of events and of the political projects in contemplation is no less necessary than if we were directly concerned in them .
it is necessary , in order to the discovery of the efforts made to draw us into the vortex , in season to make preparations against them .
however we may consider ourselves , the maritime and commercial powers of the world will consider the united states of america as forming a weight in that balance of power in europe which never can be forgotten or neglected .
it would not only be against our interest , but it would be doing wrong to half of europe , at least , if we should voluntarily throw ourselves into either scale .
it is a natural policy for a nation that studies to be neutral to consult with other nations engaged in the same studies and pursuits .
at the same time that measures might be pursued with this view , our treaties with prussia and sweden , one of which is expired and the other near expiring , might be renewed .
gentlemen of the house of representatives : it is particularly your province to consider the state of the public finances , and to adopt such measures respecting them as exigencies shall be found to require .
the preservation of public credit , the regular extinguishment of the public debt , and a provision of funds to defray any extraordinary expenses will of course call for your serious attention .
although the imposition of new burthens can not be in itself agreeable , yet there is no ground to doubt that the american people will expect from you such measures as their actual engagements , their present security , and future interests demand .
gentlemen of the senate and gentlemen of the house of representatives : the present situation of our country imposes an obligation on all the departments of government to adopt an explicit and decided conduct .
in my situation an exposition of the principles by which my administration will be governed ought not be omitted .
it is impossible to conceal from ourselves or the world what has been before observed , that endeavors have been employed to foster and establish a division between the government and people of the united states .
to investigate the causes which have encouraged this attempt is not necessary ; but to repel , by decided and united councils , insinuations so derogatory to the honor and aggressions so dangerous to the constitution , union , and even independence of the nation is an indispensable duty .
it must not be permitted to be doubted whether the people of the united states will support the government established by their voluntary consent and appointed by their free choice , or whether , by surrendering themselves to the direction of foreign and domestic factions , in opposition to their own government , they will forfeit the honorable station they have hitherto maintained .
for myself , having never been indifferent to what concerned the interests of my country , devoted the best part of my life to obtain and support its independence , and constantly witnessed the patriotism , fidelity , and perseverance of my fellow citizens on the most trying occasions , it is not for me to hesitate or abandon a cause in which my heart has been so long engaged .
convinced that the conduct of the government has been just and impartial to foreign nations , that those internal regulations which have been established by law for the preservation of peace are in their nature proper , and that they have been fairly executed , nothing will ever be done by me to impair the national engagements , to innovate upon principles which have been so deliberately and uprightly established , or to surrender in any manner the rights of the government .
to enable me to maintain this declaration i rely , under god , with entire confidence on the firm and enlightened support of the national legislature and upon the virtue and patriotism of my fellow citizens .

when it was first perceived , in early times , that no middle course for america remained between unlimited submission to a foreign legislature and a total independence of its claims , men of reflection were less apprehensive of danger from the formidable power of fleets and armies they must determine to resist than from those contests and dissensions which would certainly arise concerning the forms of government to be instituted over the whole and over the parts of this extensive country .
relying , however , on the purity of their intentions , the justice of their cause , and the integrity and intelligence of the people , under an overruling providence which had so signally protected this country from the first , the representatives of this nation , then consisting of little more than half its present number , not only broke to pieces the chains which were forging and the rod of iron that was lifted up , but frankly cut asunder the ties which had bound them , and launched into an ocean of uncertainty .
the zeal and ardor of the people during the revolutionary war , supplying the place of government , commanded a degree of order sufficient at least for the temporary preservation of society .
the confederation which was early felt to be necessary was prepared from the models of the batavian and helvetic confederacies , the only examples which remain with any detail and precision in history , and certainly the only ones which the people at large had ever considered .
but reflecting on the striking difference in so many particulars between this country and those where a courier may go from the seat of government to the frontier in a single day , it was then certainly foreseen by some who assisted in congress at the formation of it that it could not be durable .
negligence of its regulations , inattention to its recommendations , if not disobedience to its authority , not only in individuals but in states , soon appeared with their melancholy consequences?universal languor , jealousies and rivalries of states , decline of navigation and commerce , discouragement of necessary manufactures , universal fall in the value of lands and their produce , contempt of public and private faith , loss of consideration and credit with foreign nations , and at length in discontents , animosities , combinations , partial conventions , and insurrection , threatening some great national calamity .
in this dangerous crisis the people of america were not abandoned by their usual good sense , presence of mind , resolution , or integrity .
measures were pursued to concert a plan to form a more perfect union , establish justice , insure domestic tranquillity , provide for the common defense , promote the general welfare , and secure the blessings of liberty .
the public disquisitions , discussions , and deliberations issued in the present happy constitution of government .
employed in the service of my country abroad during the whole course of these transactions , i first saw the constitution of the united states in a foreign country .
irritated by no literary altercation , animated by no public debate , heated by no party animosity , i read it with great satisfaction , as the result of good heads prompted by good hearts , as an experiment better adapted to the genius , character , situation , and relations of this nation and country than any which had ever been proposed or suggested .
in its general principles and great outlines it was conformable to such a system of government as i had ever most esteemed , and in some states , my own native state in particular , had contributed to establish .
claiming a right of suffrage , in common with my fellow - citizens , in the adoption or rejection of a constitution which was to rule me and my posterity , as well as them and theirs , i did not hesitate to express my approbation of it on all occasions , in public and in private .
it was not then , nor has been since , any objection to it in my mind that the executive and senate were not more permanent .
nor have i ever entertained a thought of promoting any alteration in it but such as the people themselves , in the course of their experience , should see and feel to be necessary or expedient , and by their representatives in congress and the state legislatures , according to the constitution itself , adopt and ordain .
returning to the bosom of my country after a painful separation from it for ten years , i had the honor to be elected to a station under the new order of things , and i have repeatedly laid myself under the most serious obligations to support the constitution .
the operation of it has equaled the most sanguine expectations of its friends , and from an habitual attention to it , satisfaction in its administration , and delight in its effects upon the peace , order , prosperity , and happiness of the nation i have acquired an habitual attachment to it and veneration for it .
what other form of government , indeed , can so well deserve our esteem and love ?
there may be little solidity in an ancient idea that congregations of men into cities and nations are the most pleasing objects in the sight of superior intelligences , but this is very certain , that to a benevolent human mind there can be no spectacle presented by any nation more pleasing , more noble , majestic , or august , than an assembly like that which has so often been seen in this and the other chamber of congress , of a government in which the executive authority , as well as that of all the branches of the legislature , are exercised by citizens selected at regular periods by their neighbors to make and execute laws for the general good .
can anything essential , anything more than mere ornament and decoration , be added to this by robes and diamonds ?
can authority be more amiable and respectable when it descends from accidents or institutions established in remote antiquity than when it springs fresh from the hearts and judgments of an honest and enlightened people ?
for it is the people only that are represented .
it is their power and majesty that is reflected , and only for their good , in every legitimate government , under whatever form it may appear .
the existence of such a government as ours for any length of time is a full proof of a general dissemination of knowledge and virtue throughout the whole body of the people .
and what object or consideration more pleasing than this can be presented to the human mind ?
if national pride is ever justifiable or excusable it is when it springs , not from power or riches , grandeur or glory , but from conviction of national innocence , information , and benevolence .
in the midst of these pleasing ideas we should be unfaithful to ourselves if we should ever lose sight of the danger to our liberties if anything partial or extraneous should infect the purity of our free , fair , virtuous , and independent elections .
if an election is to be determined by a majority of a single vote , and that can be procured by a party through artifice or corruption , the government may be the choice of a party for its own ends , not of the nation for the national good .
if that solitary suffrage can be obtained by foreign nations by flattery or menaces , by fraud or violence , by terror , intrigue , or venality , the government may not be the choice of the american people , but of foreign nations .
it may be foreign nations who govern us , and not we , the people , who govern ourselves ; and candid men will acknowledge that in such cases choice would have little advantage to boast of over lot or chance .
such is the amiable and interesting system of government ( and such are some of the abuses to which it may be exposed ) which the people of america have exhibited to the admiration and anxiety of the wise and virtuous of all nations for eight years under the administration of a citizen who , by a long course of great actions , regulated by prudence , justice , temperance , and fortitude , conducting a people inspired with the same virtues and animated with the same ardent patriotism and love of liberty to independence and peace , to increasing wealth and unexampled prosperity , has merited the gratitude of his fellow - citizens , commanded the highest praises of foreign nations , and secured immortal glory with posterity .
in that retirement which is his voluntary choice may he long live to enjoy the delicious recollection of his services , the gratitude of mankind , the happy fruits of them to himself and the world , which are daily increasing , and that splendid prospect of the future fortunes of this country which is opening from year to year .
his name may be still a rampart , and the knowledge that he lives a bulwark , against all open or secret enemies of his country 's peace .
this example has been recommended to the imitation of his successors by both houses of congress and by the voice of the legislatures and the people throughout the nation .
on this subject it might become me better to be silent or to speak with diffidence ; but as something may be expected , the occasion , i hope , will be admitted as an apology if i venture to say that if a preference , upon principle , of a free republican government , formed upon long and serious reflection , after a diligent and impartial inquiry after truth ; if an attachment to the constitution of the united states , and a conscientious determination to support it until it shall be altered by the judgments and wishes of the people , expressed in the mode prescribed in it ; if a respectful attention to the constitutions of the individual states and a constant caution and delicacy toward the state governments ; if an equal and impartial regard to the rights , interest , honor , and happiness of all the states in the union , without preference or regard to a northern or southern , an eastern or western , position , their various political opinions on unessential points or their personal attachments ; if a love of virtuous men of all parties and denominations ; if a love of science and letters and a wish to patronize every rational effort to encourage schools , colleges , universities , academies , and every institution for propagating knowledge , virtue , and religion among all classes of the people , not only for their benign influence on the happiness of life in all its stages and classes , and of society in all its forms , but as the only means of preserving our constitution from its natural enemies , the spirit of sophistry , the spirit of party , the spirit of intrigue , the profligacy of corruption , and the pestilence of foreign influence , which is the angel of destruction to elective governments ; if a love of equal laws , of justice , and humanity in the interior administration ; if an inclination to improve agriculture , commerce , and manufacturers for necessity , convenience , and defense ; if a spirit of equity and humanity toward the aboriginal nations of america , and a disposition to meliorate their condition by inclining them to be more friendly to us , and our citizens to be more friendly to them ; if an inflexible determination to maintain peace and inviolable faith with all nations , and that system of neutrality and impartiality among the belligerent powers of europe which has been adopted by this government and so solemnly sanctioned by both houses of congress and applauded by the legislatures of the states and the public opinion , until it shall be otherwise ordained by congress ; if a personal esteem for the french nation , formed in a residence of seven years chiefly among them , and a sincere desire to preserve the friendship which has been so much for the honor and interest of both nations ; if , while the conscious honor and integrity of the people of america and the internal sentiment of their own power and energies must be preserved , an earnest endeavor to investigate every just cause and remove every colorable pretense of complaint ; if an intention to pursue by amicable negotiation a reparation for the injuries that have been committed on the commerce of our fellow - citizens by whatever nation , and if success can not be obtained , to lay the facts before the legislature , that they may consider what further measures the honor and interest of the government and its constituents demand ; if a resolution to do justice as far as may depend upon me , at all times and to all nations , and maintain peace , friendship , and benevolence with all the world ; if an unshaken confidence in the honor , spirit , and resources of the american people , on which i have so often hazarded my all and never been deceived ; if elevated ideas of the high destinies of this country and of my own duties toward it , founded on a knowledge of the moral principles and intellectual improvements of the people deeply engraven on my mind in early life , and not obscured but exalted by experience and age ; and , with humble reverence , i feel it to be my duty to add , if a veneration for the religion of a people who profess and call themselves christians , and a fixed resolution to consider a decent respect for christianity among the best recommendations for the public service , can enable me in any degree to comply with your wishes , it shall be my strenuous endeavor that this sagacious injunction of the two houses shall not be without effect .
with this great example before me , with the sense and spirit , the faith and honor , the duty and interest , of the same american people pledged to support the constitution of the united states , i entertain no doubt of its continuance in all its energy , and my mind is prepared without hesitation to lay myself under the most solemn obligations to support it to the utmost of my power .
and may that being who is supreme over all , the patron of order , the fountain of justice , and the protector in all ages of the world of virtuous liberty , continue his blessing upon this nation and its government and give it all possible success and duration consistent with the ends of his providence .

gentlemen of the senate and gentlemen of the house of representatives : immediately after the adjournment of congress at their last session in philadelphia i gave directions , in compliance with the laws , for the removal of the public offices , records , and property .
these directions have been executed , and the public officers have since resided and conducted the ordinary business of the government in this place .
i congratulate the people of the united states on the assembling of congress at the permanent seat of their government , and i congratulate you , gentlemen , on the prospect of a residence not to be changed .
although there is cause to apprehend that accommodations are not now so complete as might be wished , yet there is great reason to believe that this inconvenience will cease with the present session .
it would be unbecoming the representatives of this nation to assemble for the first time in this solemn temple without looking up to the supreme ruler of the universe and imploring his blessing .
may this territory be the residence of virtue and happiness !
in this city may that piety and virtue , that wisdom and magnanimity , that constancy and self - government , which adorned the great character whose name it bears be forever held in veneration !
here and throughout our country may simple manners , pure morals , and true religion flourish forever !
it is with you , gentlemen , to consider whether the local powers over the district of columbia vested by the constitution in the congress of the united states shall be immediately exercised .
if in your opinion this important trust ought now to be executed , you can not fail while performing it to take into view the future probable situation of the territory for the happiness of which you are about to provide .
you will consider it as the capital of a great nation advancing with unexampled rapidity in arts , in commerce , in wealth , and in population , and possessing within itself those energies and resources which , if not thrown away or lamentably misdirected , will secure to it a long course of prosperity and self - government .
in compliance with a law of the last session of congress , the officers and soldiers of the temporary army have been discharged .
it affords real pleasure to recollect the honorable testimony they gave of the patriotic motives which brought them into the service of their country , by the readiness and regularity with which they returned to the station of private citizens .
it is in every point of view of such primary importance to carry the laws into prompt and faithful execution , and to render that part of the administration of justice which the constitution and laws devolve on the federal courts as convenient to the people as may consist with their present circumstances , that i can not omit once more to recommend to your serious consideration the judiciary system of the united states .
no subject is more interesting than this to the public happiness , and to none can those improvements which may have been suggested by experience be more beneficially applied .
a treaty of amity and commerce with the king of prussia has been concluded and ratified .
the ratifications have been exchanged , and i have directed the treaty to be promulgated by proclamation .
the difficulties which suspended the execution of the 6th article of our treaty of amity , commerce , and navigation with great britain have not yet been removed .
the negotiation on this subject is still depending .
as it must be fore the interest and honor of both nations to adjust this difference with good faith , i indulge confidently the expectation that the sincere endeavors of the government of the united states to bring it to an amicable termination will not be disappointed .
the envoys extraordinary and ministers plenipotentiary from the united states to france were received by the first consul with the respect due to their character , and 3 persons with equal powers were appointed to treat with them .
although at the date of the last official intelligence the negotiation had not terminated , yet it is to be hoped that our efforts to effect an accommodation will at length meet with a success proportioned to the sincerity with which they have been so often repeated .
while our best endeavors for the preservation of harmony with all nations will continue to be used , the experience of the world and our own experience admonish us of the insecurity of trusting too confidently to their success .
we can not , without committing a dangerous imprudence , abandon those measures of self protection which are adapted to our situation and to which , notwithstanding our pacific policy , the violence and injustice of others may again compel us to resort .
while our vast extent of sea coast , the commercial and agriculture habits of our people , the great capital they will continue to trust on the ocean , suggest the system of defense which will be most beneficial to ourselves , our distance from europe and our resources for maritime strength will enable us to employ it with effect .
seasonable and systematic arrangements , so far as our resources will justify , for a navy adapted to defensive war , and which may in case of necessity be quickly brought into use , seem to be as much recommended by a wise and true economy as by a just regard for our future tranquillity , for the safety of our shores , and for the protection of our property committed to the ocean .
the present navy of the united states , called suddenly into existence by a great national exigency , has raised us in our own esteem , and by the protection afforded to our commerce has effected to the extent of our expectations the objects for which it was created .
in connection with a navy ought to be contemplated the fortification of some of our principal sea ports and harbors .
a variety of considerations , which will readily suggest themselves , urge an attention to this measure of precaution .
to give security to our principal ports considerable sums have already been expended , but the works remain incomplete .
it is for congress to determine whether additional appropriations shall be made in order to render competent to the intended purposes the fortifications which have been commenced .
the manufacture of arms within the united states still invites the attention of the national legislature .
at a considerable expense to the public this manufacture has been brought to such a state of maturity as , with continued encouragement , will supersede the necessity of future importations from foreign countries .
gentlemen of the house of representatives : i shall direct the estimates of the appropriations necessary for the ensuing year , together with an account of the public revenue and expenditure to a late period , to be laid before you .
i observe with much satisfaction that the product of the revenue during the present year has been more considerable than during any former equal period .
this result affords conclusive evidence of the great resources of this country and of the wisdom and efficiency of the measures which have been adopted by congress for the protection of commerce and preservation of public credit .
gentlemen of the senate and gentlemen of the house of representatives : as one of the grand community of nations , our attention is irresistibly drawn to the important scenes which surround us .
if they have exhibited an uncommon portion of calamity , it is the province of humanity to deplore and of wisdom to avoid the causes which may have produced it .
if , turning our eyes homeward , we find reason to rejoice at the prospect which presents itself ; if we perceive the interior of our country prosperous , free , and happy ; if all enjoy in safety , under the protection of laws emanating only from the general will , the fruits of their own labor , we ought to fortify and cling to those institutions which have been the source of such real felicity and resist with unabating perseverance the progress of those dangerous innovations which may diminish their influence .
to your patriotism , gentlemen , has been confided the honorable duty of guarding the public interests ; and while the past is to your country a sure pledge that it will be faithfully discharged , permit me to assure you that your labors to promote the general happiness will receive from me the most zealous cooperation .

gentlemen of the senate and gentlemen of the house of representatives : while with reverence and resignation we contemplate the dispensations of divine providence in the alarming and destructive pestilence with which several of our cities and towns have been visited , there is cause for gratitude and mutual congratulations that the malady has disappeared and that we are again permitted to assemble in safety at the seat of government for the discharge of our important duties .
but when we reflect that this fatal disorder has within a few years made repeated ravages in some of our principal sea ports , and with increased malignancy , and when we consider the magnitude of the evils arising from the interruption of public and private business , whereby the national interests are deeply affected , i think it my duty to invite the legislature of the union to examine the expediency of establishing suitable regulations in aid of the health laws of the respective states ; for these being formed on the idea that contagious sickness may be communicated through the channels of commerce , there seems to be a necessity that congress , who alone can regulate trade , should frame a system which , while it may tend to preserve the general health , may be compatible with the interests of commerce and the safety of the revenue .
while we think on this calamity and sympathize with the immediate sufferers , we have abundant reason to present to the supreme being our annual oblations of gratitude for a liberal participation in the ordinary blessings of his providence .
to the usual subjects of gratitude i can not omit to add one of the 1st importance to our well being and safety ; i mean that spirit which has arisen in our country against the menaces and aggression of a foreign nation .
a manly sense of national honor , dignity , and independence has appeared which , if encouraged and invigorated by every branch of the government , will enable us to view undismayed the enterprises of any foreign power and become the sure foundation of national prosperity and glory .
the course of the transactions in relation to the united states and france which have come to my knowledge during your recess will be made the subject of a future communication .
that communication will confirm the ultimate failure of the measures which have been taken by the government of the united states toward an amicable adjustment of differences with that power .
you will at the same time perceive that the french government appears solicitous to impress the opinion that it is averse to a rupture with this country , and that it has in a qualified manner declared itself willing to receive a minister from the united states for the purpose of restoring a good understanding .
it is unfortunate for professions of this kind that they should be expressed in terms which may countenance the inadmissible pretension of a right to prescribe the qualifications which a minister from the united states should possess , and that while france is asserting the existence of a disposition on her part to conciliate with sincerity the differences which have arisen , the sincerity of a like disposition on the part of the united states , of which so many demonstrative proofs have been given , should even be indirectly questioned .
it is also worthy of observation that the decree of the directory alleged to be intended to restrain the depredations of french cruisers on our commerce has not given , and can not give , any relief .
it enjoins them to conform to all the laws of france relative to cruising and prizes , while these laws are themselves the sources of the depredations of which we have so long , so justly , and so fruitlessly complained .
the law of france enacted in january last , which subjects to capture and condemnation neutral vessels and their cargoes if any portion of the latter are of british fabric or produce , although the entire property belong to neutrals , instead of being rescinded has lately received a confirmation by the failure of a proposition for its repeal .
while this law , which is an unequivocal act of war on the commerce of the nations it attacks , continues in force those nations can see in the french government only a power regardless of their essential rights , of their independence and sovereignty ; and if they possess the means they can reconcile nothing with their interest and honor but a firm resistance .
hitherto , therefore , nothing is discoverable in the conduct of france which ought to change or relax our measures of defense .
on the contrary , to extend and invigorate them is our true policy .
we have no reason to regret that these measures have been thus far adopted and pursued , and in proportion as we enlarge our view of the portentous and incalculable situation of europe we shall discover new and cogent motives for the full development of our energies and resources .
but in demonstrating by our conduct that we do not fear war in the necessary protection of our rights and honor we shall give no room to infer that we abandon the desire of peace .
an efficient preparation for war can alone insure peace .
it is peace that we have uniformly and perseveringly cultivated , and harmony between us and france may be restored at her option .
but to send another minister without more determinate assurances that he would be received would be an act of humiliation to which the united states ought not to submit .
it must therefore be left with france ( if she is indeed desirous of accommodation ) to take the requisite steps .
the united states will steadily observe the maxims by which they have hitherto been governed .
they will respect the sacred rights of embassy ; and with a sincere disposition on the part of france to desist from hostility , to make reparation for the injuries heretofore inflicted on our commerce , and to do justice in future , there will be no obstacle to the restoration of a friendly intercourse .
in making to you this declaration i give a pledge to france and the world that the executive authority of this country still adheres to the humane and pacific policy which has invariably governed its proceedings , in conformity with the wishes of the other branches of the government and of the people of the united states .
but considering the late manifestations of her policy toward foreign nations , i deem it a duty deliberately and solemnly to declare my opinion that whether we negotiate with her or not , vigorous preparations for war will be alike indispensable .
these alone will give to us an equal treaty and insure its observance .
among the measures of preparation which appear expedient , i take the liberty to recall your attention to the naval establishment .
the beneficial effects of the small naval armament provided under the acts of the last session are known and acknowledged .
perhaps no country ever experienced more sudden and remarkable advantages from any measure of policy than we have derived from the arming for our maritime protection and defense .
we ought without loss of time to lay the foundation for an increase of our navy to a size sufficient to guard our coast and protect our trade .
such a naval force as it is doubtless in the power of the united states to create and maintain would also afford to them the best means of general defense by facilitating the safe transportation of troops and stores to every part of our extensive coast .
to accomplish this important object , a prudent foresight requires that systematic measures be adopted for procuring at all times the requisite timber and other supplies .
in what manner this shall be done i leave to your consideration .
i will now advert , gentlemen , to some matters of less moment , but proper to be communicated to the national legislature .
after the spanish garrisons had evacuated the posts they occupied at the natchez and walnut hills the commissioner of the united states commences his observations to ascertain the point near the mississippi which terminated the northernmost part of the 31st degree of north latitude .
from thence he proceeded to run the boundary line between the united states and spain .
he was afterwards joined by the spanish commissioner , when the work of the former was confirmed , and they proceeded together to the demarcation of the line .
recent information renders it probably that the southern indians , either instigated to oppose the demarcation or jealous of the consequences of suffering white people to run a line over lands to which the indian title had not been extinguished , have ere this time stopped the progress of the commissioners ; and considering the mischiefs which may result from continuing the demarcation in opposition to the will of the indian tribes , the great expense attending it , and that the boundaries which the commissioners have actually established probably extend at least as far as the indian title has been extinguished , it will perhaps become expedient and necessary to suspend further proceedings by recalling our commissioner .
the commissioners appointed in pursuance of the 5th article of the treaty of amity , commerce , and navigation between the united states and his britannic majesty to determine what river was truly intended under the name of the river st. croix mentioned in the treaty of peace , and forming a part of the boundary therein described , have finally decided that question .
on the 25th of october they made their declaration that a river called scoodiac , which falls into passamaquoddy bay at its northwestern quarter , was the true st. croix intended in the treaty of peace , as far as its great fork , where one of its streams comes from the westward and the other from the northward , and that the latter stream is the continuation of the st. croix to its source .
this decision , it is understood , will preclude all contention among the individual claimants , as it seems that the scoodiac and its northern branch bound the grants of land which have been made by the respective adjoining governments .
a subordinate question , however , it has been suggested , still remains to be determined .
between the mouth of the st. croix as now settled and what is usually called the bay of fundy lie a number of valuable islands .
the commissioners have not continued the boundary line through any channel of these islands , and unless the bay of passamaquoddy be a part of the bay of fundy this further adjustment of boundary will be necessary , but it is apprehended that this will not be a matter of any difficulty .
such progress has been made in the examination and decision of cases of captures and condemnations of american vessels which were the subject of the 7th article of the treaty of amity , commerce , and navigation between the united states and great britain that it is supposed the commissioners will be able to bring their business to a conclusion in august of the ensuing year .
the commissioners acting under the 25th article of the treaty between the united states and spain have adjusted most of the claims of our citizens for losses sustained in consequence of their vessels and cargoes having been taken by the subjects of his catholic majesty during the late war between france and spain .
various circumstances have concurred to delay the execution of the law for augmenting the military establishment , among these the desire of obtaining the fullest information to direct the best selection of officers .
as this object will now be speedily accomplished , it is expected that the raising and organizing of the troops will proceed without obstacle and with effect .
gentlemen of the house of representatives : i have directed an estimate of the appropriations which will be necessary for the service of the ensuing year to be laid before you , accompanied with a view of the public receipts and expenditures to a recent period .
it will afford you satisfaction to infer the great extent and solidity of the public resources from the prosperous state of the finances , notwithstanding the unexampled embarrassments which have attended commerce .
when you reflect on the conspicuous examples of patriotism and liberality which have been exhibited by our mercantile fellow citizens , and how great a proportion of the public resources depends on their enterprise , you will naturally consider whether their convenience can not be promoted and reconciled with the security of the revenue by a revision of the system by which the collection is at present regulated .
during your recess measures have been steadily pursued for effecting the valuations and returns directed by the act of the last session , preliminary to the assessment and collection of a direct tax .
no other delays or obstacles have been experienced except such as were expected to arise from the great extent of our country and the magnitude and novelty of the operation , and enough has been accomplished to assure a fulfillment of the views of the legislature .
gentlemen of the senate and gentlemen of the house of representatives : i can not close this address without once more adverting to our political situation and inculcating the essential importance of uniting in the maintenance of our dearest interests ; and i trust that by the temper and wisdom of your proceedings and by a harmony of measures we shall secure to our country that weight and respect to which it is so justly entitled .

as the safety and prosperity of nations ultimately and essentially depend on the protection and the blessing of almighty god , and the national acknowledgment of this truth is not only an indispensable duty which the people owe to him , but a duty whose natural influence is favorable to the promotion of that morality and piety without which social happiness can not exist nor the blessings of a free government be enjoyed ; and as this duty , at all times incumbent , is so especially in seasons of difficulty or of danger , when existing or threatening calamities , the just judgments of god against prevalent iniquity , are a loud call to repentance and reformation ; and as the united states of america are at present placed in a hazardous and afflictive situation by the unfriendly disposition , conduct , and demands of a foreign power , evinced by repeated refusals to receive our messengers of reconciliation and peace , by depredation on our commerce , and the infliction of injuries on very many of our fellow - citizens while engaged in their lawful business on the seas -- under these considerations it has appeared to me that the duty of imploring the mercy and benediction of heaven on our country demands at this time a special attention from its inhabitants .
i have therefore thought fit to recommend , and i do hereby recommend , that wednesday , the 9th day of may next , be observed throughout the united states as a day of solemn humiliation , fasting , and prayer ; that the citizens of these states , abstaining on that day from their customary worldly occupations , offer their devout addresses to the father of mercies agreeably to those forms or methods which they have severally adopted as the most suitable and becoming ; that all religious congregations do , with the deepest humility , acknowledge before god the manifold sins and transgressions with which we are justly chargeable as individuals and as a nation , beseeching him at the same time , of his infinite grace , through the redeemer of the world , freely to remit all our offenses , and to incline us by his holy spirit to that sincere repentance and reformation which may afford us reason to hope for his inestimable favor and heavenly benediction ; that it be made the subject of particular and earnest supplication that our country may be protected from all the dangers which threaten it ; that our civil and religious privileges may be preserved inviolate and perpetuated to the latest generations ; that our public councils and magistrates may be especially enlightened and directed at this critical period ; that the american people may be united in those bonds of amity and mutual confidence and inspired with that vigor and fortitude by which they have in times past been so highly distinguished and by which they have obtained such invaluable advantages ; that the health of the inhabitants of our land may be preserved , and their agriculture , commerce , fisheries , arts , and manufactures be blessed and prospered ; that the principles of genuine piety and sound morality may influence the minds and govern the lives of every description of our citizens , and that the blessings of peace , freedom , and pure religion may be speedily extended to all the nations of the earth .
and finally , i recommend that on the said day the duties of humiliation and prayer be accompanied by fervent thanksgiving to the bestower of every good gift , not only for his having hitherto protected and preserved the people of these united states in the independent enjoyment of their religious and civil freedom , but also for having prospered them in a wonderful progress of population , and for conferring on them many and great favors conducive to the happiness and prosperity of a nation .
given under my hand and the seal of the united states of america , at philadelphia , this 23d day of march , a. d. 1798 , and of the independence of the said states the twenty - second .
john adams .
by the president : 
 timothy pickering , 
 secretary of state .

gentlemen of the senate and gentlemen of the house of representatives : 
 the letter herewith transmitted will inform you that it has pleased divine providence to remove from this life our excellent fellow - citizen , george washington , by the purity of his character and a long series of services to his country rendered illustrious through the world .
it remains for an affectionate and grateful people , in whose hearts he can never die , to pay suitable honors to his memory .
john adams .
mount vernon , december 15 , 1799 .
the president of the united states .
sir : it is with inexpressible grief that i have to announce to you the death of the great and good general washington .
he died last evening between 10 and 11 o'clock , after a short illness of about twenty hours .
his disorder was an inflamatory sore throat , which proceeded from a cold of which he made but little complaint on friday .
on saturday morning about 3 o'clock he became ill .
dr. craik attended him in the morning , and dr. dick , of alexandria , and dr. brown , of port tobacco , were soon after called in .
every medical assistance was offered , but without the desired effect .
his last scene corresponded with the whole tenor of his life ; not a groan nor a complaint escaped him in extreme distress .
with perfect resignation and in full possession of his reason , he closed his well - spent life .
i have the honor to be , with the highest respect , sir , your most obedient and very humble servant , 
 tobias lear .
the senate , having resolved to wait on the president of the united states " to condole with him on the distressing event of the death of general george washington , " proceeded to the house of the president , when the president of the senate , in their name , presented the address which had previously been agreed to , as follows : 
 the president of the united states : 
 the senate of the united states respectfully take leave , sir , to to you their deep regret for the loss their country sustains in the death of general george washington .
this event , so distressing to all our fellow - citizens , must be peculiarly heavy to you , who have long been associated with him in deeds of patriotism .
permit us , sir , to mingle our tears with yours .
on this occasion it is manly to weep .
to lose such a man at such a crisis is no common calamity to the world .
our country mourns her father .
the almighty disposer of human events has taken from us our greatest benefactor and ornament .
it becomes us to submit with reverence to him who maketh darkness his pavilion .
with patriotic pride we review the life of our washington and compare him with those of other countries who have been preeminent in fame .
ancient and modern names are diminished before him .
greatness and guilt have too often been allied , but his fame is whiter than it is brilliant .
the destroyers of nations stood abashed at the majesty of his virtue .
it reproved the intemperance of their ambition and darkened the splendor of victory .
the scene is closed , and we are no longer anxious lest misfortune should sully his glory .
he has traveled on to the end of his journey and carried with him an increasing weight of honor .
he has deposited it safely , where misfortune can not tarnish it , where malice can not blast it .
favored of heaven , he departed without exhibiting the weakness of humanity .
magnanimous in death , the darkness of the grave could not obscure his brightness .
such was the man whom we deplore .
thanks to god , his glory is consummated .
washington yet lives on earth in his spotless example ; his spirit is in heaven .
let his countrymen consecrate the memory of the heroic general , the patriotic statesman , and the virtuous sage .
let them teach their children never to forget that the fruit of his labors and his example are their inheritance .
samuel livermore , 
 president of the senate pro tempore .
december 23 , 1799 .
to which the president replied as follows : 
 united states , december 23 , 1799 .
gentlemen of the senate : 
 i receive with the most respectful and affectionate sentiments in this impressive address the obliging expressions of your regard for the loss our country has sustained in the death of her most esteemed , beloved , and admired citizen .
in the multitude of my thoughts and recollections on this melancholy event you will permit me only to say that i have seen him in the days of adversity , in some of the scenes of his deepest distress and most trying perplexities ; i have also attended him in his highest elevation and most prosperous felicity , with uniform admiration of his wisdom , moderation , and constancy .
among all our original associates in that memorable league of the continent in 1774 , which first expressed the sovereign will of a free nation in america , he was the only one remaining in the general government .
although with a constitution more enfeebled than his at an age when he thought it necessary to prepare for retirement , i feel myself alone bereaved of my last brother ; yet i derive a strong consolation from the unanimous disposition which appears in all ages and classes to mingle their sorrows with mine on this common calamity to the world .
the life of our washington can not suffer by comparison with those of other countries who have been most celebrated and exalted by fame .
the attributes and decorations of royalty could have only served to eclipse the majesty of those virtues which made him , from being a modest citizen , a more resplendent luminary .
misfortune , had he lived , could hereafter have sullied his glory only with those superficial minds who , believing that characters and actions are marked by success alone , rarely deserve to enjoy it .
malice could never blast his honor , and envy made him a singular exception to her universal rule .
for himself , he had lived enough to life and to glory .
for his fellow - citizens , if their prayers could have been answered , he would have been immortal .
for me , his departure is at a most unfortunate moment .
trusting , however , in the wise and righteous dominion of providence over the passions of men and the results of their councils and actions , as well as over their lives , nothing remains for me but humble resignation .
his example is now complete , and it will teach wisdom and virtue to magistrates , citizens , and men , not only in the present age , but in future generations as long as our history shall be read .
if a trajan found a pliny , a marcus aurelius can never want biographers , eulogists , or historians .
john adams .
the house of representatives having resolved unanimously to wait on the president of the united states " in condolence of this national calamity , " the speaker , attended by the house , withdrew to the house of the president , when the speaker addressed the president as follows : 
 sir : the house of representatives , penetrated with a sense of the irreparable loss sustained by the nation in the death of that great and good man , the illustrious and beloved washington , wait on you , sir , to express their condolence on this melancholy and distressing event .
to which the president replied as follows : 
 united states december 19 , 1799 .
gentlemen of the house of representatives : 
 i receive with great respect and affection the condolence of the house of representatives on the melancholy and affecting event in the death of the most illustrious and beloved personage which this country ever produced .
i sympathize with you , with the nation , and with good men through the world in this irreparable loss sustained by us all .
john adams .

