on the 26th day of april last lieutenant craven , of the united states steamer mohawk , captured the slaver wildfire on the coast of cuba , with 507 african negroes on board .
the prize was brought into key west on the 31st april and the negroes were delivered into the custody of fernando j. moreno , marshal of the southern district of florida .
the question which now demands immediate decision is , what disposition shall be made of these africans ?
in the annual message to congress of december 6 , 1858 , i expressed my opinion in regard to the construction of the act of the 3d march , 1819 , " in addition to the acts prohibiting the slave trade , " so far as the same is applicable to the present case .
from this i make the following extract : 
 under the second section of this act the president is " authorized to make such regulations and arrangements as he may deem expedient for the safe - keeping , support , and removal beyond the limits of the united states of all such negroes , mulattoes , or persons of color " captured by vessels of the united states as may be delivered to the marshal of the district into which they are brought , " and to appoint a proper person or persons residing upon the coast of africa as agent or agents for receiving the negroes , mulattoes , or persons of color delivered from on board vessels seized in the prosecution of the slave trade by commanders of united states armed vessels . "
a doubt immediately arose as to the true construction of this act .
it is quite clear from its terms that the president was authorized to provide " for the safe - keeping , support , and removal " of these negroes up till the time of their delivery to the agent on the coast of africa , but no express provision was made for their protection and support after they had reached the place of their destination .
still , an agent was to be appointed to receive them in africa , and it could not have been supposed that congress intended he should desert them at the moment they were received and turn them loose on that inhospitable coast to perish for want of food or to become again the victims of the slave trade .
had this been the intention of congress , the employment of an agent to receive them , who is required to reside on the coast , was unnecessary , and they might have been landed by our vessels anywhere in africa and left exposed to the sufferings and the fate which would certainly await them .
mr. monroe , in his special message of december 17 , 1819 , at the first session after the act was passed , announced to congress what in his opinion was its true construction .
he believed it to be his duty under it to follow these unfortunates into africa and make provision for them there until they should be able to provide for themselves .
in communicating this interpretation of the act to congress he stated that some doubt had been entertained as to its true intent and meaning , and he submitted the question to them so that they might , " should it be deemed advisable , amend the same before further proceedings are had under it . "
nothing was done by congress to explain the act , and mr. monroe proceeded to carry it into execution according to his own interpretation .
this , then , became the practical construction .
adopting this construction of president monroe , i entered into an agreement with the colonization society , dated 7th september , 1858 , to receive the africans which had been captured on the slaver echo from the agent of the united states in liberia , to furnish them during the period of one year thereafter with comfortable shelter , clothing , and provisions , and to cause them to be instructed in the arts of civilized life suitable to their condition , at the rate of $ 150 for each individual .
it was believed that within that period they would be prepared to become citizens of liberia and to take care of themselves .
as congress was not then in session and as there was no outstanding appropriation applicable to this purpose , the society were obliged to depend for payment on the future action of that body .
i recommended this appropriation , and $ 75,000 were granted by the act of 3d march , 1859 ( the consular and diplomatic bill ) , " to enable the president of the united states to carry into effect the act of congress of 3d march , 1819 , and any subsequent acts now in force for the suppression of the slave trade . "
of this appropriation there remains unexpended the sum of $ 24,350.90 , after deducting from it an advance made by the secretary of the interior out of the judiciary fund of $ 11,348.10 .
i regret to say that under the mode adopted in regard to the africans captured on board the echo the expense will be large , but this seems to a great extent to be inevitable without a violation of the laws of humanity .
the expenditure upon this scale for those captured on board the wildfire will not be less than $ 100,000 , and may considerably exceed that sum .
still , it ought to be observed that during the period when the government itself , through its own agents , undertook the task of providing for captured negroes in africa the cost per head was much greater than that which i agreed to pay the colonization society .
but it will not be sufficient for congress to limit the amount appropriated to the case of the wildfire .
it is probable , judging from the increased activity of the slave trade and the vigilance of our cruisers , that several similar captures may be made before the end of the year .
an appropriation ought therefore to be granted large enough to cover such contingencies .
the period has arrived when it is indispensable to provide some specific legislation for the guidance of the executive on this subject .
with this view i would suggest that congress might authorize the president to enter into a general agreement with the colonization society binding them to receive on the coast of africa , from an agent there , all the captured africans which may be delivered to him , and to maintain them for a limited period , upon such terms and conditions as may combine humanity toward these unfortunates with a just economy .
this would obviate the necessity of making a new bargain with every new capture and would prevent delay and avoid expense in the disposition of the captured .
the law might then provide that in all cases where this may be practicable the captor should carry the negroes directly to africa and deliver them to the american agent there , afterwards bringing the captured vessel to the united states for adjudication .
the capturing officer , in case he should bring his prize directly to the united states , ought to be required to land the negroes in some one or more ports , to be designated by congress , where the prevailing health throughout the year is good .
at these ports cheap but permanent accommodations might be provided for the negroes until they could be sent away , without incurring the expense of erecting such accommodations at every port where the capturing officer may think proper to enter .
on the present occasion these negroes have been brought to key west , and , according to the estimate presented by the marshal of the southern district of florida to the secretary of the interior , the cost of providing temporary quarters for them will be $ 2,500 and the aggregate expenses for the single month of may will amount to $ 12,000 .
but this is far from being the worst evil .
within a few weeks the yellow fever will most probably prevail at key west , and hence the marshal urges their removal from their present quarters at an early day , which must be done , in any event , as soon as practicable .
for these reasons i earnestly commend this subject to the immediate attention of congress .
i transmit herewith a copy of the letter and estimate of fernando j. moreno , marshal of the southern district of florida , to the secretary of the interior , dated 10th may , 1860 , together with a copy of the letter of the secretary of the interior to myself , dated 16th may. 
 it is truly lamentable that great britain and the united states should be obliged to expend such a vast amount of blood and treasure for the suppression of the african slave trade , and this when the only portions of the civilized world where it is tolerated and encouraged are the spanish islands of cuba and porto rico .

fellow - citizens : 

 i appear before you this day to take the solemn oath " that i will faithfully execute the office of president of the united states and will to the best of my ability preserve , protect , and defend the constitution of the united states . "
in entering upon this great office i must humbly invoke the god of our fathers for wisdom and firmness to execute its high and responsible duties in such a manner as to restore harmony and ancient friendship among the people of the several states and to preserve our free institutions throughout many generations .
convinced that i owe my election to the inherent love for the constitution and the union which still animates the hearts of the american people , let me earnestly ask their powerful support in sustaining all just measures calculated to perpetuate these , the richest political blessings which heaven has ever bestowed upon any nation .
having determined not to become a candidate for reelection , i shall have no motive to influence my conduct in administering the government except the desire ably and faithfully to serve my country and to live in grateful memory of my countrymen .
we have recently passed through a presidential contest in which the passions of our fellow - citizens were excited to the highest degree by questions of deep and vital importance ; but when the people proclaimed their will the tempest at once subsided and all was calm .
the voice of the majority , speaking in the manner prescribed by the constitution , was heard , and instant submission followed .
our own country could alone have exhibited so grand and striking a spectacle of the capacity of man for self - government .
what a happy conception , then , was it for congress to apply this simple rule , that the will of the majority shall govern , to the settlement of the question of domestic slavery in the territories .
congress is neither " to legislate slavery into any territory or state nor to exclude it therefrom , but to leave the people thereof perfectly free to form and regulate their domestic institutions in their own way , subject only to the constitution of the united states . "
as a natural consequence , congress has also prescribed that when the territory of kansas shall be admitted as a state it " shall be received into the union with or without slavery , as their constitution may prescribe at the time of their admission . "
a difference of opinion has arisen in regard to the point of time when the people of a territory shall decide this question for themselves .
this is , happily , a matter of but little practical importance .
besides , it is a judicial question , which legitimately belongs to the supreme court of the united states , before whom it is now pending , and will , it is understood , be speedily and finally settled .
to their decision , in common with all good citizens , i shall cheerfully submit , whatever this may be , though it has ever been my individual opinion that under the nebraska - kansas act the appropriate period will be when the number of actual residents in the territory shall justify the formation of a constitution with a view to its admission as a state into the union .
but be this as it may , it is the imperative and indispensable duty of the government of the united states to secure to every resident inhabitant the free and independent expression of his opinion by his vote .
this sacred right of each individual must be preserved .
that being accomplished , nothing can be fairer than to leave the people of a territory free from all foreign interference to decide their own destiny for themselves , subject only to the constitution of the united states .
the whole territorial question being thus settled upon the principle of popular sovereignty -- a principle as ancient as free government itself -- everything of a practical nature has been decided .
no other question remains for adjustment , because all agree that under the constitution slavery in the states is beyond the reach of any human power except that of the respective states themselves wherein it exists .
may we not , then , hope that the long agitation on this subject is approaching its end , and that the geographical parties to which it has given birth , so much dreaded by the father of his country , will speedily become extinct ?
most happy will it be for the country when the public mind shall be diverted from this question to others of more pressing and practical importance .
throughout the whole progress of this agitation , which has scarcely known any intermission for more than twenty years , whilst it has been productive of no positive good to any human being it has been the prolific source of great evils to the master , to the slave , and to the whole country .
it has alienated and estranged the people of the sister states from each other , and has even seriously endangered the very existence of the union .
nor has the danger yet entirely ceased .
under our system there is a remedy for all mere political evils in the sound sense and sober judgment of the people .
time is a great corrective .
political subjects which but a few years ago excited and exasperated the public mind have passed away and are now nearly forgotten .
but this question of domestic slavery is of far graver importance than any mere political question , because should the agitation continue it may eventually endanger the personal safety of a large portion of our countrymen where the institution exists .
in that event no form of government , however admirable in itself and however productive of material benefits , can compensate for the loss of peace and domestic security around the family altar .
let every union - loving man , therefore , exert his best influence to suppress this agitation , which since the recent legislation of congress is without any legitimate object .
it is an evil omen of the times that men have undertaken to calculate the mere material value of the union .
reasoned estimates have been presented of the pecuniary profits and local advantages which would result to different states and sections from its dissolution and of the comparative injuries which such an event would inflict on other states and sections .
even descending to this low and narrow view of the mighty question , all such calculations are at fault .
the bare reference to a single consideration will be conclusive on this point .
we at present enjoy a free trade throughout our extensive and expanding country such as the world has never witnessed .
this trade is conducted on railroads and canals , on noble rivers and arms of the sea , which bind together the north and the south , the east and the west , of our confederacy .
annihilate this trade , arrest its free progress by the geographical lines of jealous and hostile states , and you destroy the prosperity and onward march of the whole and every part and involve all in one common ruin .
but such considerations , important as they are in themselves , sink into insignificance when we reflect on the terrific evils which would result from disunion to every portion of the confederacy -- to the north , not more than to the south , to the east not more than to the west .
these i shall not attempt to portray , because i feel an humble confidence that the kind providence which inspired our fathers with wisdom to frame the most perfect form of government and union ever devised by man will not suffer it to perish until it shall have been peacefully instrumental by its example in the extension of civil and religious liberty throughout the world .
next in importance to the maintenance of the constitution and the union is the duty of preserving the government free from the taint or even the suspicion of corruption .
public virtue is the vital spirit of republics , and history proves that when this has decayed and the love of money has usurped its place , although the forms of free government may remain for a season , the substance has departed forever .
our present financial condition is without a parallel in history .
no nation has ever before been embarrassed from too large a surplus in its treasury .
this almost necessarily gives birth to extravagant legislation .
it produces wild schemes of expenditure and begets a race of speculators and jobbers , whose ingenuity is exerted in contriving and promoting expedients to obtain public money .
the purity of official agents , whether rightfully or wrongfully , is suspected , and the character of the government suffers in the estimation of the people .
this is in itself a very great evil .
the natural mode of relief from this embarrassment is to appropriate the surplus in the treasury to great national objects for which a clear warrant can be found in the constitution .
among these i might mention the extinguishment of the public debt , a reasonable increase of the navy , which is at present inadequate to the protection of our vast tonnage afloat , now greater than that of any other nation , as well as to the defense of our extended seacoast .
it is beyond all question the true principle that no more revenue ought to be collected from the people than the amount necessary to defray the expenses of a wise , economical , and efficient administration of the government .
to reach this point it was necessary to resort to a modification of the tariff , and this has , i trust , been accomplished in such a manner as to do as little injury as may have been practicable to our domestic manufactures , especially those necessary for the defense of the country .
any discrimination against a particular branch for the purpose of benefiting favored corporations , individuals , or interests would have been unjust to the rest of the community and inconsistent with that spirit of fairness and equality which ought to govern in the adjustment of a revenue tariff .
but the squandering of the public money sinks into comparative insignificance as a temptation to corruption when compared with the squandering of the public lands .
no nation in the tide of time has ever been blessed with so rich and noble an inheritance as we enjoy in the public lands .
in administering this important trust , whilst it may be wise to grant portions of them for the improvement of the remainder , yet we should never forget that it is our cardinal policy to reserve these lands , as much as may be , for actual settlers , and this at moderate prices .
we shall thus not only best promote the prosperity of the new states and territories , by furnishing them a hardy and independent race of honest and industrious citizens , but shall secure homes for our children and our children 's children , as well as for those exiles from foreign shores who may seek in this country to improve their condition and to enjoy the blessings of civil and religious liberty .
such emigrants have done much to promote the growth and prosperity of the country .
they have proved faithful both in peace and in war .
after becoming citizens they are entitled , under the constitution and laws , to be placed on a perfect equality with native - born citizens , and in this character they should ever be kindly recognized .
the federal constitution is a grant from the states to congress of certain specific powers , and the question whether this grant should be liberally or strictly construed has more or less divided political parties from the beginning .
without entering into the argument , i desire to state at the commencement of my administration that long experience and observation have convinced me that a strict construction of the powers of the government is the only true , as well as the only safe , theory of the constitution .
whenever in our past history doubtful powers have been exercised by congress , these have never failed to produce injurious and unhappy consequences .
many such instances might be adduced if this were the proper occasion .
neither is it necessary for the public service to strain the language of the constitution , because all the great and useful powers required for a successful administration of the government , both in peace and in war , have been granted , either in express terms or by the plainest implication .
whilst deeply convinced of these truths , i yet consider it clear that under the war - making power congress may appropriate money toward the construction of a military road when this is absolutely necessary for the defense of any state or territory of the union against foreign invasion .
under the constitution congress has power " to declare war , " " to raise and support armies , " " to provide and maintain a navy , " and to call forth the militia to " repel invasions . "
thus endowed , in an ample manner , with the war - making power , the corresponding duty is required that " the united states shall protect each of them [ the states ] against invasion . "
now , how is it possible to afford this protection to california and our pacific possessions except by means of a military road through the territories of the united states , over which men and munitions of war may be speedily transported from the atlantic states to meet and to repel the invader ?
in the event of a war with a naval power much stronger than our own we should then have no other available access to the pacific coast , because such a power would instantly close the route across the isthmus of central america .
it is impossible to conceive that whilst the constitution has expressly required congress to defend all the states it should yet deny to them , by any fair construction , the only possible means by which one of these states can be defended .
besides , the government , ever since its origin , has been in the constant practice of constructing military roads .
it might also be wise to consider whether the love for the union which now animates our fellow - citizens on the pacific coast may not be impaired by our neglect or refusal to provide for them , in their remote and isolated condition , the only means by which the power of the states on this side of the rocky mountains can reach them in sufficient time to " protect " them " against invasion . "
i forbear for the present from expressing an opinion as to the wisest and most economical mode in which the government can lend its aid in accomplishing this great and necessary work .
i believe that many of the difficulties in the way , which now appear formidable , will in a great degree vanish as soon as the nearest and best route shall have been satisfactorily ascertained .
it may be proper that on this occasion i should make some brief remarks in regard to our rights and duties as a member of the great family of nations .
in our intercourse with them there are some plain principles , approved by our own experience , from which we should never depart .
we ought to cultivate peace , commerce , and friendship with all nations , and this not merely as the best means of promoting our own material interests , but in a spirit of christian benevolence toward our fellow - men , wherever their lot may be cast .
our diplomacy should be direct and frank , neither seeking to obtain more nor accepting less than is our due .
we ought to cherish a sacred regard for the independence of all nations , and never attempt to interfere in the domestic concerns of any unless this shall be imperatively required by the great law of self - preservation .
to avoid entangling alliances has been a maxim of our policy ever since the days of washington , and its wisdom 's no one will attempt to dispute .
in short , we ought to do justice in a kindly spirit to all nations and require justice from them in return .
it is our glory that whilst other nations have extended their dominions by the sword we have never acquired any territory except by fair purchase or , as in the case of texas , by the voluntary determination of a brave , kindred , and independent people to blend their destinies with our own .
even our acquisitions from mexico form no exception .
unwilling to take advantage of the fortune of war against a sister republic , we purchased these possessions under the treaty of peace for a sum which was considered at the time a fair equivalent .
our past history forbids that we shall in the future acquire territory unless this be sanctioned by the laws of justice and honor .
acting on this principle , no nation will have a right to interfere or to complain if in the progress of events we shall still further extend our possessions .
hitherto in all our acquisitions the people , under the protection of the american flag , have enjoyed civil and religious liberty , as well as equal and just laws , and have been contented , prosperous , and happy .
their trade with the rest of the world has rapidly increased , and thus every commercial nation has shared largely in their successful progress .
i shall now proceed to take the oath prescribed by the constitution , whilst humbly invoking the blessing of divine providence on this great people .

fellow - citizens of the senate and house of representatives : our deep and heartfelt gratitude is due to that almighty power which has bestowed upon us such varied and numerous blessings throughout the past year .
the general health of the country has been excellent , our harvests have been unusually plentiful , and prosperity smiles throughout the land .
indeed , notwithstanding our demerits , we have much reason to believe from the past events in our history that we have enjoyed the special protection of divine providence ever since our origin as a nation .
we have been exposed to many threatening and alarming difficulties in our progress , but on each successive occasion the impending cloud has been dissipated at the moment it appeared ready to burst upon our head , and the danger to our institutions has passed away .
may we ever be under the divine guidance and protection .
whilst it is the duty of the president " from time to time to give to congress information of the state of the union , " i shall not refer in detail to the recent sad and bloody occurrences at harpers ferry .
still , it is proper to observe that these events , however bad and cruel in themselves , derive their chief importance from the apprehension that they are but symptoms of an incurable disease in the public mind , which may break out in still more dangerous outrages and terminate at last in an open war by the north to abolish slavery in the south .
whilst for myself i entertain no such apprehension , they ought to afford a solemn warning to us all to beware of the approach of danger .
our union is a stake of such inestimable value as to demand our constant and watchful vigilance for its preservation .
in this view , let me implore my countrymen , north and south , to cultivate the ancient feelings of mutual forbearance and good will toward each other and strive to allay the demon spirit of sectional hatred and strife now alive in the land .
this advice proceeds from the heart of an old public functionary whose service commenced in the last generation , among the wise and conservative statesmen of that day , now nearly all passed away , and whose first and dearest earthly wish is to leave his country tranquil , prosperous , united , and powerful .
we ought to reflect that in this age , and especially in this country , there is an incessant flux and reflux of public opinion .
questions which in their day assumed a most threatening aspect have now nearly gone from the memory of men .
they are " volcanoes burnt out , and on the lava and ashes and squalid scoria of old eruptions grow the peaceful olive , the cheering vine , and the sustaining corn . "
such , in my opinion , will prove to be the fate of the present sectional excitement should those who wisely seek to apply the remedy continue always to confine their efforts within the pale of the constitution .
if this course be pursued , the existing agitation on the subject of domestic slavery , like everything human , will have its day and give place to other and less threatening controversies .
public opinion in this country is all - powerful , and when it reaches a dangerous excess upon any question the good sense of the people will furnish the corrective and bring it back within safe limits .
still , to hasten this auspicious result at the present crisis we ought to remember that every rational creature must be presumed to intend the natural consequences of his own teachings .
those who announce abstract doctrines subversive of the constitution and the union must not be surprised should their heated partisans advance one step further and attempt by violence to carry these doctrines into practical effect .
in this view of the subject , it ought never to be forgotten that however great may have been the political advantages resulting from the union to every portion of our common country , these would all prove to be as nothing should the time ever arrive when they can not be enjoyed without serious danger to the personal safety of the people of fifteen members of the confederacy .
if the peace of the domestic fireside throughout these states should ever be invaded , if the mothers of families within this extensive region should not be able to retire to rest at night without suffering dreadful apprehensions of what may be their own fate and that of their children before the morning , it would be vain to recount to such a people the political benefits which result to them from the union .
self - preservation is the first instinct of nature , and therefore any state of society in which the sword is all the time suspended over the heads of the people must at last become intolerable .
but i indulge in no such gloomy forebodings .
on the contrary , i firmly believe that the events at harpers ferry , by causing the people to pause and reflect upon the possible peril to their cherished institutions , will be the means under providence of allaying the existing excitement and preventing further outbreaks of a similar character .
they will resolve that the constitution and the union shall not be endangered by rash counsels , knowing that should " the silver cord be loosed or the golden bowl be broken at the fountain " human power could never reunite the scattered and hostile fragments .
i cordially congratulate you upon the final settlement by the supreme court of the united states of the question of slavery in the territories , which had presented an aspect so truly formidable at the commencement of my administration .
the right has been established of every citizen to take his property of any kind , including slaves , into the common territories belonging equally to all the states of the confederacy , and to have it protected there under the federal constitution .
neither congress nor a territorial legislature nor any human power has any authority to annul or impair this vested right .
the supreme judicial tribunal of the country , which is a coordinate branch of the government , has sanctioned and affirmed these principles of constitutional law , so manifestly just in themselves and so well calculated to promote peace and harmony among the states .
it is a striking proof of the sense of justice which is inherent in our people that the property in slaves has never been disturbed , to my knowledge , in any of the territories .
even throughout the late troubles in kansas there has not been any attempt , as i am credibly informed , to interfere in a single instance with the right of the master .
had any such attempt been made , the judiciary would doubtless have afforded an adequate remedy .
should they fail to do this hereafter , it will then be time enough to strengthen their hands by further legislation .
had it been decided that either congress or the territorial legislature possess the power to annul or impair the right to property in slaves , the evil would be intolerable .
in the latter event there would be a struggle for a majority of the members of the legislature at each successive election , and the sacred rights of property held under the federal constitution would depend for the time being on the result .
the agitation would thus be rendered incessant whilst the territorial condition remained , and its baneful influence would keep alive a dangerous excitement among the people of the several states .
thus has the status of a territory during the intermediate period from its first settlement until it shall become a state been irrevocably fixed by the final decision of the supreme court .
fortunate has this been for the prosperity of the territories , as well as the tranquillity of the states .
now emigrants from the north and the south , the east and the west , will meet in the territories on a common platform , having brought with them that species of property best adapted , in their own opinion , to promote their welfare .
from natural causes the slavery question will in each case soon virtually settle itself , and before the territory is prepared for admission as a state into the union this decision , one way or the other , will have been a foregone conclusion .
meanwhile the settlement of the new territory will proceed without serious interruption , and its progress and prosperity will not be endangered or retarded by violent political struggles .
when in the progress of events the inhabitants of any territory shall have reached the number required to form a state , they will then proceed in a regular manner and in the exercise of the rights of popular sovereignty to form a constitution preparatory to admission into the union .
after this has been done , to employ the language of the kansas and nebraska act , they " shall be received into the union with or without slavery , as their constitution may prescribe at the time of their admission . "
this sound principle has happily been recognized in some form or other by an almost unanimous vote of both houses of the last congress .
all lawful means at my command have been employed , and shall continue to be employed , to execute the laws against the african slave trade .
after a most careful and rigorous examination of our coasts and a thorough investigation of the subject , we have not been able to discover that any slaves have been imported into the united states except the cargo by the wanderer , numbering between three and four hundred .
those engaged in this unlawful enterprise have been rigorously prosecuted , but not with as much success as their crimes have deserved .
a number of them are still under prosecution .
our history proves that the fathers of the republic , in advance of all other nations , condemned the african slave trade .
it was , notwithstanding , deemed expedient by the framers of the constitution to deprive congress of the power to prohibit " the migration or importation of such persons as any of the states now existing shall think proper to admit " " prior to the year 1808 . "
it will be seen that this restriction on the power of congress was confined to such states only as might think proper to admit the importation of slaves .
it did not extend to other states or to the trade carried on abroad .
accordingly , we find that so early as the 22d march , 1794 , congress passed an act imposing severe penalties and punishments upon citizens and residents of the united states who should engage in this trade between foreign nations .
the provisions of this act were extended and enforced by the act of 10th may , 1800.again , the states themselves had a clear right to waive the constitutional privilege intended for their benefit , and to prohibit by their own laws this trade at any time they thought proper previous to 1808 .
several of them exercised this right before that period , and among them some containing the greatest number of slaves .
this gave to congress the immediate power to act in regard to all such states , because they themselves had removed the constitutional barrier .
congress accordingly passed an act on 28th february , 1803 , " to prevent the importation of certain persons into certain states where by the laws thereof their admission is prohibited . "
in this manner the importation of african slaves into the united states was to a great extent prohibited some years in advance of 1808.as the year 1808 approached congress determined not to suffer this trade to exist even for a single day after they had the power to abolish it .
on the 2d of march , 1807 , they passed an act , to take effect " from and after the 1st day of january , 1808 , " prohibiting the importation of african slaves into the united states .
this was followed by subsequent acts of a similar character , to which i need not specially refer .
such were the principles and such the practice of our ancestors more than fifty years ago in regard to the african slave trade .
it did not occur to the revered patriots who had been delegates to the convention , and afterwards became members of congress , that in passing these laws they had violated the constitution which they had framed with so much care and deliberation .
they supposed that to prohibit congress in express terms from exercising a specified power before an appointed day necessarily involved the right to exercise this power after that day had arrived .
if this were not the case , the framers of the constitution had expended much labor in vain .
had they imagined that congress would possess no power to prohibit the trade either before or after 1808 , they would not have taken so much care to protect the states against the exercise of this power before that period .
nay , more , they would not have attached such vast importance to this provision as to have excluded it from the possibility of future repeal or amendment , to which other portions of the constitution were exposed .
it would , then , have been wholly unnecessary to ingraft on the fifth article of the constitution , prescribing the mode of its own future amendment , the proviso " that no amendment which may be made prior to the year 1808 shall in any manner affect " the provision in the constitution securing to the states the right to admit the importation of african slaves previous to that period .
according to the adverse construction , the clause itself , on which so much care and discussion had been employed by the members of the convention , was an absolute nullity from the beginning , and all that has since been done under it a mere usurpation .
it was well and wise to confer this power on congress , because had it been left to the states its efficient exercise would have been impossible .
in that event any one state could have effectually continued the trade , not only for itself , but for all the other slave states , though never so much against their will .
and why ?
because african slaves , when once brought within the limits of any one state in accordance with its laws , can not practically be excluded from any state where slavery exists .
and even if all the states had separately passed laws prohibiting the importation of slaves , these laws would have failed of effect for want of a naval force to capture the slavers and to guard the coast .
such a force no state can employ in time of peace without the consent of congress .
these acts of congress , it is believed , have , with very rare and insignificant exceptions , accomplished their purpose .
for a period of more than half a century there has been no perceptible addition to the number of our domestic slaves .
during this period their advancement in civilization has far surpassed that of any other portion of the african race .
the light and the blessings of christianity have been extended to them , and both their moral and physical condition has been greatly improved .
reopen the trade and it would be difficult to determine whether the effect would be more deleterious on the interests of the master or on those of the native - born slave .
of the evils to the master , the one most to be dreaded would be the introduction of wild , heathen , and ignorant barbarians among the sober , orderly , and quiet slaves whose ancestors have been on the soil for several generations .
this might tend to barbarize , demoralize , and exasperate the whole mass and produce most deplorable consequences .
the effect upon the existing slave would , if possible , be still more deplorable .
at present he is treated with kindness and humanity .
he is well fed , well clothed , and not overworked .
his condition is incomparably better than that of the coolies which modern nations of high civilization have employed as a substitute for african slaves .
both the philanthropy and the self - interest of the master have combined to produce this humane result .
but let this trade be reopened and what will be the effect ?
the same to a considerable extent as on a neighboring island , the only spot now on earth where the african slave trade is openly tolerated , and this in defiance of solemn treaties with a power abundantly able at any moment to enforce their execution .
there the master , intent upon present gain , extorts from the slave as much labor as his physical powers are capable of enduring , knowing that when death comes to his relief his place can be supplied at a price reduced to the lowest point by the competition of rival african slave traders .
should this ever be the case in our country , which i do not deem possible , the present useful character of the domestic institution , wherein those too old and too young to work are provided for with care and humanity and those capable of labor are not overtasked , would undergo an unfortunate change .
the feeling of reciprocal dependence and attachment which now exists between master and slave would be converted into mutual distrust and hostility .
but we are obliged as a christian and moral nation to consider what would be the effect upon unhappy africa itself if we should reopen the slave trade .
this would give the trade an impulse and extension which it has never had , even in its palmiest days .
the numerous victims required to supply it would convert the whole slave coast into a perfect pandemonium , for which this country would be held responsible in the eyes both of god and man .
its petty tribes would then be constantly engaged in predatory wars against each other for the purpose of seizing slaves to supply the american market .
all hopes of african civilization would thus be ended .
on the other hand , when a market for african slaves shall no longer be furnished in cuba , and thus all the world be closed against this trade , we may then indulge a reasonable hope for the gradual improvement of africa .
the chief motive of war among the tribes will cease whenever there is no longer any demand for slaves .
the resources of that fertile but miserable country might then be developed by the hand of industry and afford subjects for legitimate foreign and domestic commerce .
in this manner christianity and civilization may gradually penetrate the existing gloom .
the wisdom of the course pursued by this government toward china has been vindicated by the event .
whilst we sustained a neutral position in the war waged by great britain and france against the chinese empire , our late minister , in obedience to his instructions , judiciously cooperated with the ministers of these powers in all peaceful measures to secure by treaty the just concessions demanded by the interests of foreign commerce .
the result is that satisfactory treaties have been concluded with china by the respective ministers of the united states , great britain , france , and russia .
our " treaty , or general convention , of peace , amity , and commerce " with that empire was concluded at tien - tsin on the 18th june , 1858 , and was ratified by the president , by and with the advice and consent of the senate , on the 21st december following .
on the 15th december , 1858 , john e. ward , a distinguished citizen of georgia , was duly commissioned as envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary to china .
he left the united states for the place of his destination on the 5th of february , 1859 , bearing with him the ratified copy of this treaty , and arrived at shanghai on the 28th may. from thence he proceeded to peking on the 16th june , but did not arrive in that city until the 27th july .
according to the terms of the treaty , the ratifications were to be exchanged on or before the 18th june , 1859 .
this was rendered impossible by reasons and events beyond his control , not necessary to detail ; but still it is due to the chinese authorities at shanghai to state that they always assured him no advantage should be taken of the delay , and this pledge has been faithfully redeemed .
on the arrival of mr. ward at peking he requested an audience of the emperor to present his letter of credence .
this he did not obtain , in consequence of his very proper refusal to submit to the humiliating ceremonies required by the etiquette of this strange people in approaching their sovereign .
nevertheless , the interviews on this question were conducted in the most friendly spirit and with all due regard to his personal feelings and the honor of his country .
when a presentation to his majesty was found to be impossible , the letter of credence from the president was received with peculiar honors by kweiliang , " the emperor 's prime minister and the second man in the empire to the emperor himself . "
the ratifications of the treaty were afterwards , on the 16th of august , exchanged in proper form at peit - sang .
as the exchange did not take place until after the day prescribed by the treaty , it is deemed proper before its publication again to submit it to the senate .
it is but simple justice to the chinese authorities to observe that throughout the whole transaction they appear to have acted in good faith and in a friendly spirit toward the united states .
it is true this has been done after their own peculiar fashion ; but we ought to regard with a lenient eye the ancient customs of an empire dating back for thousands of years , so far as this may be consistent with our own national honor .
the conduct of our minister on the occasion has received my entire approbation .
in order to carry out the spirit of this treaty and to give it full effect it became necessary to conclude two supplemental conventions , the one for the adjustment and satisfaction of the claims of our citizens and the other to fix the tariff on imports and exports and to regulate the transit duties and trade of our merchants with china .
this duty was satisfactorily performed by our late minister .
these conventions bear date at shanghai on the 8th november , 1858 .
having been considered in the light of binding agreements subsidiary to the principal treaty , and to be carried into execution without delay , they do not provide for any formal ratification or exchange of ratifications by the contracting parties .
this was not deemed necessary by the chinese , who are already proceeding in good faith to satisfy the claims of our citizens and , it is hoped , to carry out the other provisions of the conventions .
still , i thought it was proper to submit them to the senate by which they were ratified on the 3d of march , 1859 .
the ratified copies , however , did not reach shanghai until after the departure of our minister to peking , and these conventions could not , therefore , be exchanged at the same time with the principal treaty .
no doubt is entertained that they will be ratified and exchanged by the chinese government should this be thought advisable ; but under the circumstances presented i shall consider them binding engagements from their date on both parties , and cause them to be published as such for the information and guidance of our merchants trading with the chinese empire .
it affords me much satisfaction to inform you that all our difficulties with the republic of paraguay have been satisfactorily adjusted .
it happily did not become necessary to employ the force for this purpose which congress had placed at my command under the joint resolution of 2d june , 1858 .
on the contrary , the president of that republic , in a friendly spirit , acceded promptly to the just and reasonable demands of the government of the united states .
our commissioner arrived at assumption , the capital of the republic , on the 25th of january , 1859 , and left it on the 17th of february , having in three weeks ably and successfully accomplished all the objects of his mission .
the treaties which he has concluded will be immediately submitted to the senate .
in the view that the employment of other than peaceful means might become necessary to obtain " just satisfaction " from paraguay , a strong naval force was concentrated in the waters of the la plata to await contingencies whilst our commissioner ascended the rivers to assumption .
the navy department is entitled to great credit for the promptness , efficiency , and economy with which this expedition was fitted out and conducted .
it consisted of 19 armed vessels , great and small , carrying 200 guns and 2,500 men , all under the command of the veteran and gallant shubrick .
the entire expenses of the expedition have been defrayed out of the ordinary appropriations for the naval service , except the sum of $ 289,000 , applied to the purchase of seven of the steamers constituting a part of it , under the authority of the naval appropriation act of the 3d march last .
it is believed that these steamers are worth more than their cost , and they are all now usefully and actively employed in the naval service .
the appearance of so large a force , fitted out in such a prompt manner , in the far - distant waters of the la plata , and the admirable conduct of the officers and men employed in it , have had a happy effect in favor of our country throughout all that remote portion of the world .
our relations with the great empires of france and russia , as well as with all other governments on the continent of europe , unless we may except that of spain , happily continue to be of the most friendly character .
in my last annual message i presented a statement of the unsatisfactory condition of our relations with spain , and i regret to say that this has not materially improved .
without special reference to other claims , even the " cuban claims , " the payment of which has been ably urged by our ministers , and in which more than a hundred of our citizens are directly interested , remain unsatisfied , notwithstanding both their justice and their amount ( $ 128,635.54 ) had been recognized and ascertained by the spanish government itself .
i again recommend that an appropriation be made " to be paid to the spanish government for the purpose of distribution among the claimants in the amistad case . "
in common with two of my predecessors , i entertain no doubt that this is required by our treaty with spain of the 27th october , 1795 .
the failure to discharge this obligation has been employed by the cabinet of madrid as a reason against the settlement of our claims .
i need not repeat the arguments which i urged in my last annual message in favor of the acquisition of cuba by fair purchase .
my opinions on that measure remain unchanged .
i therefore again invite the serious attention of congress to this important subject .
without a recognition of this policy on their part it will be almost impossible to institute negotiations with any reasonable prospect of success .
until a recent period there was good reason to believe that i should be able to announce to you on the present occasion that our difficulties with great britain arising out of the clayton and bulwer treaty had been finally adjusted in a manner alike honorable and satisfactory to both parties .
from causes , however , which the british government had not anticipated , they have not yet completed treaty arrangements with the republics of honduras and nicaragua , in pursuance of the understanding between the two governments .
it is , nevertheless , confidently expected that this good work will ere long be accomplished .
whilst indulging the hope that no other subject remained which could disturb the good understanding between the two countries , the question arising out of the adverse claims of the parties to the island of san juan , under the oregon treaty of the 15th june , 1846 , suddenly assumed a threatening prominence .
in order to prevent unfortunate collisions on that remote frontier , the late secretary of state , on the 17th july , 1855 , addressed a note to mr. crampton , then british minister at washington , communicating to him a copy of the instructions which he ( mr. marcy ) had given on the 14th july to governor stevens , of washington territory , having a special reference to an " apprehended conflict between our citizens and the british subjects on the island of san juan . "
to prevent this the governor was instructed " that the officers of the territory should abstain from all acts on the disputed grounds which are calculated to provoke any conflicts , so far as it can be done without implying the concession to the authorities of great britain of an exclusive right over the premises .
the title ought to be settled before either party should attempt to exclude the other by force or exercise complete and exclusive sovereign rights within the fairly disputed limits . "
in acknowledging the receipt on the next day of mr. marcy 's note the british minister expressed his entire concurrence " in the propriety of the course recommended to the governor of washington territory by your [ mr. marcy 's ] instructions to that officer , " and stating that he had " lost no time in transmitting a copy of that document to the governor - general of british north america " and had " earnestly recommended to his excellency to take such measures as to him may appear best calculated to secure on the part of the british local authorities and the inhabitants of the neighborhood of the line in question the exercise of the same spirit of forbearance which is inculcated by you [ mr. marcy ] on the authorities and citizens of the united states."thus matters remained upon the faith of this arrangement until the 9th july last , when general harney paid a visit to the island .
he found upon it twenty - five american residents with their families , and also an establishment of the hudsons bay company for the purpose of raising sheep .
a short time before his arrival one of these residents had shot an animal belonging to the company whilst trespassing upon his premises , for which , however , he offered to pay twice its value , but that was refused .
soon after " the chief factor of the company at victoria , mr. dalles , son - in - law of governor douglas , came to the island in the british sloop of war satellite and threatened to take this american [ mr. cutler ] by force to victoria to answer for the trespass he had committed .
the american seized his rifle and told mr. dalles if any such attempt was made he would kill him upon the spot .
the affair then ended."under these circumstances the american settlers presented a petition to the general " through the united states inspector of customs , mr. hubbs , to place a force upon the island to protect them from the indians as well as the oppressive interference of the authorities of the hudsons bay company at victoria with their rights as american citizens . "
the general immediately responded to this petition , and ordered captain george e. pickett , ninth infantry , " to establish his company on bellevue , or san juan island , on some suitable position near the harbor at the southeastern extremity . "
this order was promptly obeyed and a military post was established at the place designated .
the force was afterwards increased , so that by the last return the whole number of troops then on the island amounted in the aggregate to 691 men .
whilst i do not deem it proper on the present occasion to go further into the subject and discuss the weight which ought to be attached to the statements of the british colonial authorities contesting the accuracy of the information on which the gallant general acted , it was due to him that i should thus present his own reasons for issuing the order to captain pickett .
from these it is quite clear his object was to prevent the british authorities on vancouvers island from exercising jurisdiction over american residents on the island of san juan , as well as to protect them against the incursions of the indians .
much excitement prevailed for some time throughout that region , and serious danger of collision between the parties was apprehended .
the british had a large naval force in the vicinity , and it is but an act of simple justice to the admiral on that station to state that he wisely and discreetly forbore to commit any hostile act , but determined to refer the whole affair to his government and await their instructions .
this aspect of the matter , in my opinion , demanded serious attention .
it would have been a great calamity for both nations had they been precipitated into acts of hostility , not on the question of title to the island , but merely concerning what should be its condition during the intervening period whilst the two governments might be employed in settling the question to which of them it belongs .
for this reason lieutenant - general scott was dispatched , on the 17th of september last , to washington territory to take immediate command of the united states forces on the pacific coast , should he deem this necessary .
the main object of his mission was to carry out the spirit of the precautionary arrangement between the late secretary of state and the british minister , and thus to preserve the peace and prevent collision between the british and american authorities pending the negotiations between the two governments .
entertaining no doubt of the validity of our title , i need scarcely add that in any event american citizens were to be placed on a footing at least as favorable as that of british subjects , it being understood that captain pickett 's company should remain on the island .
it is proper to observe that , considering the distance from the scene of action and in ignorance of what might have transpired on the spot before the general 's arrival , it was necessary to leave much to his discretion ; and i am happy to state the event has proven that this discretion could not have been intrusted to more competent hands .
general scott has recently returned from his mission , having successfully accomplished its objects , and there is no longer any good reason to apprehend a collision between the forces of the two countries during the pendency of the existing negotiations .
i regret to inform you that there has been no improvement in the affairs of mexico since my last annual message , and i am again obliged to ask the earnest attention of congress to the unhappy condition of that republic .
the constituent congress of mexico , which adjourned on the 17th february , 1857 , adopted a constitution and provided for a popular election .
this took place in the following july ( 1857 ) , and general comonfort was chosen president almost without opposition .
at the same election a new congress was chosen , whose first session commenced on the 16th of september ( 1857 ) .
by the constitution of 1857 the presidential term was to begin on the 1st of december ( 1857 ) and continue for four years .
on that day general comonfort appeared before the assembled congress in the city of mexico , took the oath to support the new constitution , and was duly inaugurated as president .
within a month afterwards he had been driven from the capital and a military rebellion had assigned the supreme power of the republic to general zuloaga .
the constitution provided that in the absence of the president his office should devolve upon the chief justice of the supreme court ; and general comonfort having left the country , this functionary , general juarez , proceeded to form at guanajuato a constitutional government .
before this was officially known , however , at the capital the government of zuloaga had been recognized by the entire diplomatic corps , including the minister of the united states , as the de facto government of mexico .
the constitutional president , nevertheless , maintained his position with firmness , and was soon established , with his cabinet , at vera cruz .
meanwhile the government of zuloaga was earnestly resisted in many parts of the republic , and even in the capital , a portion of the army having pronounced against it , its functions were declared terminated , and an assembly of citizens was invited for the choice of a new president .
this assembly elected general miramort , but that officer repudiated the plan under which he was chosen , and zuloaga was thus restored to his previous position .
he assumed it , however , only to withdraw from it ; and miramon , having become by his appointment " president substitute , " continues with that title at the head of the insurgent party .
in my last annual message i communicated to congress the circumstances under which the late minister of the united states suspended his official relations with the central government and withdrew from the country .
it was impossible to maintain friendly intercourse with a government like that at the capital , under whose usurped authority wrongs were constantly committed , but never redressed .
had this been an established government , with its power extending by the consent of the people over the whole of mexico , a resort to hostilities against it would have been quite justifiable , and , indeed , necessary .
but the country was a prey to civil war , and it was hoped that the success of the constitutional president might lead to a condition of things less injurious to the united states .
this success became so probable that in january last i employed a reliable agent to visit mexico and report to me the actual condition and prospects of the contending parties .
in consequence of his report and from information which reached me from other sources favorable to the prospects of the constitutional cause , i felt justified in appointing a new minister to mexico , who might embrace the earliest suitable opportunity of restoring our diplomatic relations with that republic .
for this purpose a distinguished citizen of maryland was selected , who proceeded on his mission on the 8th of march last , with discretionary authority to recognize the government of president juarez if on his arrival in mexico he should find it entitled to such recognition according to the established practice of the united states .
on the 7th of april following mr. mclane presented his credentials to president juarez , having no hesitation " in pronouncing the government of juarez to be the only existing government of the republic . "
he was cordially received by the authorities at vera cruz , and they have ever since manifested the most friendly disposition toward the united states .
unhappily , however , the constitutional government has not been able to establish its power over the whole republic .
it is supported by a large majority of the people and the states , but there are important parts of the country where it can enforce no obedience .
general miramon maintains himself at the capital , and in some of the distant provinces there are military governors who pay little respect to the decrees of either government .
in the meantime the excesses which always attend upon civil war , especially in mexico , are constantly recurring .
outrages of the worst description are committed both upon persons and property .
there is scarcely any form of injury which has not been suffered by our citizens in mexico during the last few years .
we have been nominally at peace with that republic , but " so far as the interests of our commerce , or of our citizens who have visited the country as merchants , shipmasters , or in other capacities , are concerned , we might as well have been at war . "
life has been insecure , property unprotected , and trade impossible except at a risk of loss which prudent men can not be expected to incur .
important contracts , involving large expenditures , entered into by the central government , have been set at defiance by the local governments .
peaceful american residents , occupying their rightful possessions , have been suddenly expelled the country , in defiance of treaties and by the mere force of arbitrary power .
even the course of justice has not been safe from control , and a recent decree of miramort permits the intervention of government in all suits where either party is a foreigner .
vessels of the united states have been seized without law , and a consular officer who protested against such seizure has been fined and imprisoned for disrespect to the authorities .
military contributions have been levied in violation of every principle of right , and the american who resisted the lawless demand has had his property forcibly taken away and has been himself banished .
from a conflict of authority in different parts of the country tariff duties which have been paid in one place have been exacted over again in another place .
large numbers of our citizens have been arrested and imprisoned without any form of examination or any opportunity for a hearing , and even when released have only obtained their liberty after much suffering and injury , and without any hope of redress .
the wholesale massacre of crabbe and his associates without trial in sonora , as well as the seizure and murder of four sick americans who had taken shelter in the house of an american upon the soil of the united states , was communicated to congress at its last session .
murders of a still more atrocious character have been committed in the very heart of mexico , under the authority of miramon 's government , during the present year .
some of these were only worthy of a barbarous age , and if they had not been dearly proven would have seemed impossible in a country which claims to be civilized .
of this description was the brutal massacre in april last , by order of general marquez , of three american physicians who were seized in the hospital at tacubaya while attending upon the sick and the dying of both parties , and without trial , as without crime , were hurried away to speedy execution .
little less shocking was the recent fate of ormond chase , who was shot in tepic on the 7th of august by order of the same mexican general , not only without a trial , but without any conjecture by his friends of the cause of his arrest .
he is represented as a young man of good character and intelligence , who had made numerous friends in tepic by the courage and humanity which he had displayed on several trying occasions ; and his death was as unexpected as it was shocking to the whole community .
other outrages might be enumerated , but these are sufficient to illustrate the wretched state of the country and the unprotected condition of the persons and property of our citizens in mexico .
in all these cases our ministers have been constant and faithful in their demands for redress , but both they and this government , which they have successively represented , have been wholly powerless to make their demands effective .
their testimony in this respect and in reference to the only remedy which in their judgments would meet the exigency has been both uniform and emphatic . "
nothing but a manifestation of the power of the government of the united states , " wrote our late minister in 1856 , " and of its purpose to punish these wrongs will avail .
i assure you that the universal belief here is that there is nothing to be apprehended from the government of the united states , and that local mexican officials can commit these outrages upon american citizens with absolute impunity . " "
i hope the president , " wrote our present minister in august last , " will feel authorized to ask from congress the power to enter mexico with the military forces of the united states at the call of the constitutional authorities , in order to protect the citizens and the treaty rights of the united states .
unless such a power is conferred upon him , neither the one nor the other will be respected in the existing state of anarchy and disorder , and the outrages already perpetrated will never be chastised ; and , as i assured you in my no .
23 , all these evils must increase until every vestige of order and government disappears from the country . "
i have been reluctantly led to the same opinion , and in justice to my countrymen who have suffered wrongs from mexico and who may still suffer them i feel bound to announce this conclusion to congress .
the case presented , however , is not merely a case of individual claims , although our just claims against mexico have reached a very large amount ; nor is it merely the case of protection to the lives and property of the few americans who may still remain in mexico , although the life and property of every american citizen ought to be sacredly protected in every quarter of the world ; but it is a question which relates to the future as well as to the present and the past , and which involves , indirectly at least , the whole subject of our duty to mexico as a neighboring state .
the exercise of the power of the united states in that country to redress the wrongs and protect the rights of our own citizens is none the less to be desired because efficient and necessary aid may thus be rendered at the same time to restore peace and order to mexico itself .
in the accomplishment of this result the people of the united states must necessarily feel a deep and earnest interest .
mexico ought to be a rich and prosperous and powerful republic .
she possesses an extensive territory , a fertile soil , and an incalculable store of mineral wealth .
she occupies an important position between the gulf and the ocean for transit routes and for commerce .
is it possible that such a country as this can be given up to anarchy and ruin without an effort from any quarter for its rescue and its safety ?
will the commercial nations of the world , which have so many interests connected with it , remain wholly indifferent to such a result ?
can the united states especially , which ought to share most largely in its commercial intercourse , allow their immediate neighbor thus to destroy itself and injure them ?
yet without support from some quarter it is impossible to perceive how mexico can resume her position among nations and enter upon a career which promises any good results .
the aid which she requires , and which the interests of all commercial countries require that she should have , it belongs to this government to render , not only by virtue of our neighborhood to mexico , along whose territory we have a continuous frontier of nearly a thousand miles , but by virtue also of our established policy , which is inconsistent with the intervention of any european power in the domestic concerns of that republic .
the wrongs which we have suffered from mexico are before the world and must deeply impress every american citizen .
a government which is either unable or unwilling to redress such wrongs is derelict to its highest duties .
the difficulty consists in selecting and enforcing the remedy .
we may in vain apply to the constitutional government at vera cruz , although it is well disposed to do us justice , for adequate redress .
whilst its authority is acknowledged in all the important ports and throughout the seacoasts of the republic , its power does not extend to the city of mexico and the states in its vicinity , where nearly all the recent outrages have been committed on american citizens .
we must penetrate into the interior before we can reach the offenders , and this can only be done by passing through the territory in the occupation of the constitutional government .
the most acceptable and least difficult mode of accomplishing the object will be to act in concert with that government .
their consent and their aid might , i believe , be obtained ; but if not , our obligation to protect our own citizens in their just rights secured by treaty would not be the less imperative .
for these reasons i recommend to congress to pass a law authorizing the president under such conditions as they may deem expedient , to employ a sufficient military force to enter mexico for the purpose of obtaining indemnity for the past and security for the future .
i purposely refrain from any suggestion as to whether this force shall consist of regular troops or volunteers , or both .
this question may be most appropriately left to the decision of congress .
i would merely observe that should volunteers be selected such a force could be easily raised in this country among those who sympathize with the sufferings of our unfortunate fellow - citizens in mexico and with the unhappy condition of that republic .
such an accession to the forces of the constitutional government would enable it soon to reach the city of mexico and extend its power over the whole republic .
in that event there is no reason to doubt that the just claims of our citizens would be satisfied and adequate redress obtained for the injuries inflicted upon them .
the constitutional government have ever evinced a strong desire to do justice , and this might be secured in advance by a preliminary treaty .
it may be said that these measures will , at least indirectly , be inconsistent with our wise and settled policy not to interfere in the domestic concerns of foreign nations .
but does not the present case fairly constitute an exception ?
an adjoining republic is in a state of anarchy and confusion from which she has proved wholly unable to extricate herself .
she is entirely destitute of the power to maintain peace upon her borders or to prevent the incursions of banditti into our territory .
in her fate and in her fortune , in her power to establish and maintain a settled government , we have a far deeper interest , socially , commercially , and politically , than any other nation .
she is now a wreck upon the ocean , drifting about as she is impelled by different factions .
as a good neighbor , shall we not extend to her a helping hand to save her ?
if we do not , it would not be surprising should some other nation undertake the task , and thus force us to interfere at last , under circumstances of increased difficulty , for the maintenance of our established policy .
i repeat the recommendation contained in my last annual message that authority may be given to the president to establish one or more temporary military posts across the mexican line in sonora and chihuahua , where these may be necessary to protect the lives and property of american and mexican citizens against the incursions and depredations of the indians , as well as of lawless rovers , on that remote region .
the establishment of one such post at a point called arispe , in sonora , in a country now almost depopulated by the hostile inroads of the indians from our side of the line , would , it is believed , have prevented much injury and many cruelties during the past season .
a state of lawlessness and violence prevails on that distant frontier .
life and property are there wholly insecure .
the population of arizona , now numbering more than 10,000 souls , are practically destitute of government , of laws , or of any regular administration of justice .
murder , rapine , and other crimes are committed with impunity .
i therefore again call the attention of congress to the necessity for establishing a territorial government over arizona .
the treaty with nicaragua of the 16th of february , 1857 , to which i referred in my last annual message , failed to receive the ratification of the government of that republic , for reasons which i need not enumerate .
a similar treaty has been since concluded between the parties , bearing date on the 16th march , 1859 , which has already been ratified by the nicaraguan congress .
this will be immediately submitted to the senate for their ratification .
its provisions can not , i think , fail to be acceptable to the people of both countries .
our claims against the governments of costa rica and nicaragua remain unredressed , though they are pressed in an earnest manner and not without hope of success .
i deem it to be my duty once more earnestly to recommend to congress the passage of a law authorizing the president to employ the naval force at his command for the purpose of protecting the lives and property of american citizens passing in transit across the panama , nicaragua , and tehuantepec routes against sudden and lawless outbreaks and depredations .
i shall not repeat the arguments employed in former messages in support of this measure .
suffice it to say that the lives of many of our people and the security of vast amounts of treasure passing and repassing over one or more of these routes between the atlantic and pacific may be deeply involved in the action of congress on this subject .
i would also again recommend to congress that authority be given to the president to employ the naval force to protect american merchant vessels , their crews and cargoes , against violent and lawless seizure and confiscation in the ports of mexico and the spanish american states when these countries may be in a disturbed and revolutionary condition .
the mere knowledge that such an authority had been conferred , as i have already stated , would of itself in a great degree prevent the evil .
neither would this require any additional appropriation for the naval service .
the chief objection urged against the grant of this authority is that congress by conferring it would violate the constitution ; that it would be a transfer of the war - making , or , strictly speaking , the war - declaring , power to the executive .
if this were well rounded , it would , of course , be conclusive .
a very brief examination , however , will place this objection at rest .
congress possess the sole and exclusive power under the constitution " to declare war . "
they alone can"raise and support armies " and " provide and maintain a navy . "
but after congress shall have declared war and provided the force necessary to carry it on the president , as commander in chief of the army and navy , can alone employ this force in making war against the enemy .
this is the plain language , and history proves that it was the well - known intention of the framers , of the constitution .
it will not be denied that the general " power to declare war " is without limitation and embraces within itself not only what writers on the law of nations term a public or perfect war , but also an imperfect war , and , in short , every species of hostility , however confined or limited .
without the authority of congress the president can not fire a hostile gun in any case except to repel the attacks of an enemy .
it will not be doubted that under this power congress could , if they thought proper , authorize the president to employ the force at his command to seize a vessel belonging to an american citizen which had been illegally and unjustly captured in a foreign port and restore it to its owner .
but can congress only act after the fact , after the mischief has been done ?
have they no power to confer upon the president the authority in advance to furnish instant redress should such a case afterwards occur ?
must they wait until the mischief has been done , and can they apply the remedy only when it is too late ?
to confer this authority to meet future cases under circumstances strictly specified is as clearly within the war - declaring power as such an authority conferred upon the president by act of congress after the deed had been done .
in the progress of a great nation many exigencies must arise imperatively requiring that congress should authorize the president to act promptly on certain conditions which may or may not afterwards arise .
our history has already presented a number of such cases .
i shall refer only to the latest .
under the resolution of june 2 , 1858 , " for the adjustment of difficulties with the republic of paraguay , " the president is " authorized to adopt such measures and use such force as in his judgment may be necessary and advisable in the event of a refusal of just satisfaction by the government of paraguay . " "
just satisfaction " for what ?
for " the attack on the united states steamer water witch " and " other matters referred to in the annual message of the president . "
here the power is expressly granted upon the condition that the government of paraguay shall refuse to render this " just satisfaction . "
in this and other similar cases congress have conferred upon the president power in advance to employ the army and navy upon the happening of contingent future events ; and this most certainly is embraced within the power to declare war .
now , if this conditional and contingent power could be constitutionally conferred upon the president in the case of paraguay , why may it not be conferred for the purpose of protecting the lives and property of american citizens in the event that they may be violently and unlawfully attacked in passing over the transit routes to and from california or assailed by the seizure of their vessels in a foreign port ?
to deny this power is to render the navy in a great degree useless for the protection of the lives and property of american citizens in countries where neither protection nor redress can be otherwise obtained .
the thirty - fifth congress terminated on the 3d of march , 1859 , without having passed the " act making appropriations for the service of the post - office department during the fiscal year ending the 30th of june , 1860 , " this act also contained an appropriation " to supply deficiencies in the revenue of the post - office department for the year ending 30th june , 1859 . "
i believe this is the first instance since the origin of the federal government , now more than seventy years ago , when any congress went out of existence without having passed all the general appropriation bills necessary to carry on the government until the regular period for the meeting of a new congress .
this event imposed on the executive a grave responsibility .
it presented a choice of evils .
had this omission of duty occurred at the first session of the last congress , the remedy would have been plain .
i might then have instantly recalled them to complete their work , and this without expense to the government .
but on the 4th of march last there were fifteen of the thirty - three states which had not elected any representatives to the present congress .
had congress been called together immediately , these states would have been virtually disfranchised .
if an intermediate period had been selected , several of the states would have been compelled to hold extra sessions of their legislatures , at great inconvenience and expense , to provide for elections at an earlier day than that previously fixed by law .
in the regular course ten of these states would not elect until after the beginning of august , and five of these ten not until october and november .
on the other hand , when i came to examine carefully the condition of the post - office department , i did not meet as many or as great difficulties as i had apprehended .
had the bill which failed been confined to appropriations for the fiscal year ending on the 30th june next , there would have been no reason of pressing importance for the call of an extra session .
nothing would become due on contracts ( those with railroad companies only excepted ) for carrying the mail for the first quarter of the present fiscal year , commencing on the 1st of july , until the 1st of december -- less than one week before the meeting of the present congress .
the reason is that the mail contractors for this and the current year did not complete their first quarter 's service until the 30th september last , and by the terms of their contracts sixty days more are allowed for the settlement of their accounts before the department could be called upon for payment .
the great difficulty and the great hardship consisted in the failure to provide for the payment of the deficiency in the fiscal year ending the 30th june , 1859 .
the department had entered into contracts , in obedience to existing laws , for the service of that fiscal year , and the contractors were fairly entitled to their compensation as it became due .
the deficiency as stated in the bill amounted to $ 3,838,728 , but after a careful settlement of all these accounts it has been ascertained that it amounts to $ 4,296,009 .
with the scanty means at his command the postmaster - general has managed to pay that portion of this deficiency which occurred in the first two quarters of the past fiscal year , ending on the 31st december last .
in the meantime the contractors themselves , under these trying circumstances , have behaved in a manner worthy of all commendation .
they had one resource in the midst of their embarrassments .
after the amount due to each of them had been ascertained and finally settled according to law , this became a specific debt of record against the united states , which enabled them to borrow money on this unquestionable security .
still , they were obliged to pay interest in consequence of the default of congress , and on every principle of justice ought to receive interest from the government .
this interest should commence from the date when a warrant would have issued for the payment of the principal had an appropriation been made for this purpose .
calculated up to the 1st december , it will not exceed $ 96,660 - -a sum not to be taken into account when contrasted with the great difficulties and embarrassments of a public and private character , both to the people and the states , which would have resulted from convening and holding a special session of congress .
for these reasons i recommend the passage of a bill at as early a day as may be practicable to provide for the payment of the amount , with interest , due to these last - mentioned contractors , as well as to make the necessary appropriations for the service of the post - office department for the current fiscal year .
the failure to pass the post - office bill necessarily gives birth to serious reflections .
congress , by refusing to pass the general appropriation bills necessary to carry on the government , may not only arrest its action , but might even destroy its existence .
the army , the navy , the judiciary , in short , every department of the government , can no longer perform their functions if congress refuse the money necessary for their support .
if this failure should teach the country the necessity of electing a full congress in sufficient time to enable the president to convene them in any emergency , even immediately after the old congress has expired , it will have been productive of great good .
in a time of sudden and alarming danger , foreign or domestic , which all nations must expect to encounter in their progress , the very salvation of our institutions may be staked upon the assembling of congress without delay .
if under such circumstances the president should find himself in the condition in which he was placed at the close of the last congress , with nearly half the states of the union destitute of representatives , the consequences might he disastrous .
i therefore recommend to congress to carry into effect the provisions of the constitution on this subject , and to pass a law appointing some day previous to the 4th march in each year of odd number for the election of representatives throughout all the states .
they have already appointed a day for the election of electors for president and vice - president , and this measure has been approved by the country .
i would again express a most decided opinion in favor of the construction of a pacific railroad , for the reasons stated in my two last annual messages .
when i reflect upon what would be the defenseless condition of our states and territories west of the rocky mountains in case of a war with a naval power sufficiently strong to interrupt all intercourse with them by the routes across the isthmus , i am still more convinced than ever of the vast importance of this railroad .
i have never doubted the constitutional competency of congress to provide for its construction , but this exclusively under the war - making power .
besides , the constitution expressly requires as an imperative duty that " the united states shall protect each of them [ the states ] against invasion . "
i am at a loss to conceive how this protection can be afforded to california and oregon against such a naval power by any other means .
i repeat the opinion contained in my last annual message that it would be inexpedient for the government to undertake this great work by agents of its own appointment and under its direct and exclusive control .
this would increase the patronage of the executive to a dangerous extent and would foster a system of jobbing and corruption which no vigilance on the part of federal officials could prevent .
the construction of this road ought , therefore , to be intrusted to incorporated companies or other agencies who would exercise that active and vigilant supervision over it which can be inspired alone by a sense of corporate and individual interest .
i venture to assert that the additional cost of transporting troops , munitions of war , and necessary supplies for the army across the vast intervening plains to our possessions on the pacific coast would be greater in such a war than the whole amount required to construct the road .
and yet this resort would after all be inadequate for their defense and protection .
we have yet scarcely recovered from the habits of extravagant expenditure produced by our overflowing treasury during several years prior to the commencement of my administration .
the financial reverses which we have since experienced ought to teach us all to scrutinize our expenditures with the greatest vigilance and to reduce them to the lowest possible point .
the executive departments of the government have devoted themselves to the accomplishment of this object with considerable success , as will appear from their different reports and estimates .
to these i invite the scrutiny of congress , for the purpose of reducing them still lower , if this be practicable consistent with the great public interests of the country .
in aid of the policy of retrenchment , i pledge myself to examine closely the bills appropriating lands or money , so that if any of these should inadvertently pass both houses , as must sometimes be the case , i may afford them an opportunity for reconsideration .
at the same time , we ought never to forget that true public economy consists not in withholding the means necessary to accomplish important national objects confided to us by the constitution , but in taking care that the money appropriated for these purposes shall be faithfully and frugally expended .
it will appear from the report of the secretary of the treasury that it is extremely doubtful , to say the least , whether we shall be able to pass through the present and the next fiscal year without providing additional revenue .
this can only be accomplished by strictly confining the appropriations within the estimates of the different departments , without making an allowance for any additional expenditures which congress may think proper , in their discretion , to authorize , and without providing for the redemption of any portion of the $ 20,000,000 of treasury notes which have been already issued .
in the event of a deficiency , which i consider probable , this ought never to be supplied by a resort to additional loans .
it would be a ruinous practice in the days of peace and prosperity to go on increasing the national debt to meet the ordinary expenses of the government .
this policy would cripple our resources and impair our credit in case the existence of war should render it necessary to borrow money .
should such a deficiency occur as i apprehend , i would recommend that the necessary revenue be raised by an increase of our present duties on imports .
i need not repeat the opinions expressed in my last annual message as to the best mode and manner of accomplishing this object , and shall now merely observe that these have since undergone no change .
the report of the secretary of the treasury will explain in detail the operations of that department of the government .
the receipts into the treasury from all sources during the fiscal year ending june 30 , 1859 , including the loan authorized by the act of june 14 , 1858 , and the issues of treasury notes authorized by existing laws , were $ 81,692,471.01 , which sum , with the balance of $ 6,398,316.10 remaining in the treasury at the commencement of that fiscal year , made an aggregate for the service of the year of $ 88,090,787.11.the public expenditures during the fiscal year ending june 30 , 1859 , amounted to $ 83,751,511.57 .
of this sum $ 17,405,285.44 were applied to the payment of interest on the public debt and the redemption of the issues of treasury notes .
the expenditures for all other branches of the public service during that fiscal year were therefore $ 66,346,226.13 .
the balance remaining in the treasury on the 1st july , 1859 , being the commencement of the present fiscal year , was $ 4,339,275.54 .
the receipts into the treasury during the first quarter of the present fiscal year , commencing july 1 , 1859 , were $ 20,618,865.85 .
of this amount $ 3,821,300 was received on account of the loan and the issue of treasury notes , the amount of $ 16,797,565.85 having been received during the quarter from the ordinary sources of public revenue .
the estimated receipts for the remaining three quarters of the present fiscal year , to june 30 , 1860 , are $ 50,426,400 .
of this amount it is estimated that $ 5,756,400 will be received for treasury notes which may be reissued under the fifth section of the act of 3d march last , and $ 1,170,000 on account of the loan authorized by the act of june 14 , 1858 , making $ 6,926,400 from these extraordinary sources , and $ 43,500,000 from the ordinary sources of the public revenue , making an aggregate , with the balance in the treasury on the 1st july , 1859 , of $ 75,384,541.89 for the estimated means of the present fiscal year , ending june 30 , 1860.the expenditures during the first quarter of the present fiscal year were $ 20,007,174.76 .
four million six hundred and sixty - four thousand three hundred and sixty - six dollars and seventy - six cents of this sum were applied to the payment of interest on the public debt and the redemption of the issues of treasury notes , and the remainder , being $ 15,342,808 , were applied to ordinary expenditures during the quarter .
the estimated expenditures during the remaining three quarters , to june 30 , 1860 , are $ 40,995,558.23 , of which sum $ 2,886,621.34 are estimated for the interest on the public debt .
the ascertained and estimated expenditures for the fiscal year ending june 30 , 1860 , on account of the public debt are accordingly $ 7,550,988.10 , and for the ordinary expenditures of the government $ 53,451,744.89 , making an aggregate of $ 61,002,732.99 , leaving an estimated balance in the treasury on june 30 , 1860 , of $ 14,381,808.40.the estimated receipts during the next fiscal year , ending june 30 , 1861 , are $ 66,225,000 , which , with the balance estimated , as before stated , as remaining in the treasury on the 30th june , 1860 , will make an aggregate for the service of the next fiscal year of $ 80,606,808.40.the estimated expenditures during the next fiscal year , ending 30th june , 1861 , are $ 66,714,928.79 .
of this amount $ 3,386,621.34 will be required to pay the interest on the public debt , leaving the sum of $ 63,328,307.45 for the estimated ordinary expenditures during the fiscal year ending 30th june , 1861 .
upon these estimates a balance will be left in the treasury on the 30th june , 1861 , of $ 13,891,879.61 .
but this balance , as well as that estimated to remain in the treasury on the 1st july , 1860 , will be reduced by such appropriations as shall be made by law to carry into effect certain indian treaties during the present fiscal year , asked for by the secretary of the interior , to the amount of $ 539,350 ; and upon the estimates of the postmaster - general for the service of his department the last fiscal year , ending 30th june , 1859 , amounting to $ 4,296,009 , together with the further estimate of that officer for the service of the present fiscal year , ending 30th june , 1860 , being $ 5,526,324 , making an aggregate of $ 10,361,683.should these appropriations be made as requested by the proper departments , the balance in the treasury on the 30th june , 1861 , will not , it is estimated , exceed $ 3,530,196.61.i transmit herewith the reports of the secretaries of war , of the navy , of the interior , and of the postmaster - general .
they each contain valuable information and important recommendations well worthy of the serious consideration of congress .
it will appear from the report of the secretary of war that the army expenditures have been materially reduced by a system of rigid economy , which in his opinion offers every guaranty that the reduction will be permanent .
the estimates of the department for the next have been reduced nearly $ 2,000,000 below the estimates for the present fiscal year and $ 500,000 below the amount granted for this year at the last session of congress .
the expenditures of the post - office department during the past fiscal year , ending on the 30th june , 1859 , exclusive of payments for mail service specially provided for by congress out of the general treasury , amounted to $ 14,964,493.33 and its receipts to $ 7,968,484.07 , showing a deficiency to be supplied from the treasury of $ 6,996,009.26 , against $ 5,235,677.15 for the year ending 30th june , 1858 .
the increased cost of transportation , growing out of the expansion of the service required by congress , explains this rapid augmentation of the expenditures .
it is gratifying , however , to observe an increase of receipts for the year ending on the 30th of june , 1859 , equal to $ 481,691.21 compared with those in the year ending on the 30th june , 1858.it is estimated that the deficiency for the current fiscal year will be $ 5,988,424.04 , but that for the year ending 30th june , 1861 , it will not exceed $ 1,342,473.90 should congress adopt the measures of reform proposed and urged by the postmaster - general .
since the month of march retrenchments have been made in the expenditures amounting to $ 1,826,471 annually , which , however , did not take effect until after the commencement of the present fiscal year .
the period seems to have arrived for determining the question whether this department shall become a permanent and ever - increasing charge upon the treasury , or shall be permitted to resume the self - sustaining policy which had so long controlled its administration .
the course of legislation recommended by the postmaster - general for the relief of the department from its present embarrassments and for restoring it to its original independence is deserving of your early and earnest consideration .
in conclusion i would again commend to the just liberality of congress the local interests of the district of columbia .
surely the city bearing the name of washington , and destined , i trust , for ages to be the capital of our united , free , and prosperous confederacy , has strong claims on our favorable regard .

after a delay which has afforded me ample time for reflection , and after much and careful deliberation , i find myself constrained by an imperious sense of duty , as a coordinate branch of the federal government , to protest against the first two clauses of the first resolution adopted by the house of representatives on the 5th instant , and published in the congressional globe on the succeeding day .
these clauses are in the following words : 
 resolved , that a committee of five members be appointed by the speaker for the purpose , first , of investigating whether the president of the united states or any other officer of the government has , by money , patronage , or other improper means , sought to influence the action of congress or any committee thereof for or against the passage of any law appertaining to the rights of any state or territory ; and , second , also to inquire into and investigate whether any officer or officers of the government have , by combination or otherwise , prevented or defeated , or attempted to prevent or defeat , the execution of any law or laws now upon the statute book , and whether the president has failed or refused to compel the execution of any law thereof .
i confine myself exclusively to these two branches of the resolution , because the portions of it which follow relate to alleged abuses in post - offices , navy - yards , public buildings , and other public works of the united states .
in such cases inquiries are highly proper in themselves and belong equally to the senate and the house , as incident to their legislative duties and being necessary to enable them to discover and to provide the appropriate legislative remedies for any abuses which may be ascertained .
although the terms of the latter portion of the resolution are extremely vague and general , yet my sole purpose in adverting to them at present is to mark the broad line of distinction between the accusatory and the remedial clauses of this resolution .
the house of representatives possess no power under the constitution over the first or accusatory portion of the resolution except as an impeaching body , whilst over the last , in common with the senate , their authority as a legislative body is fully and cheerfully admitted .
it is solely in reference to the first or impeaching power that i propose to make a few observations .
except in this single case , the constitution has invested the house of representatives with no power , no jurisdiction , no supremacy whatever over the president .
in all other respects he is quite as independent of them as they are of him .
as a coordinate branch of the government he is their equal .
indeed , he is the only direct representative on earth of the people of all and each of the sovereign states .
to them , and to them alone , is he responsible whilst acting within the sphere of his constitutional duty , and not in any manner to the house of representatives .
the people have thought proper to invest him with the most honorable , responsible , and dignified office in the world , and the individual , however unworthy , now holding this exalted position , will take care , so far as in him lies , that their rights and prerogatives shall never be violated in his person , but shall pass to his successors unimpaired by the adoption of a dangerous precedent .
he will defend them to the last extremity against any unconstitutional attempt , come from what quarter it may , to abridge the constitutional rights of the executive and render him subservient to any human power except themselves .
the people have not confined the president to the exercise of executive duties .
they have also conferred upon him a large measure of legislative discretion .
no bill can become a law without his approval , as representing the people of the united states , unless it shall pass after his veto by a majority of two - thirds of both houses .
in his legislative capacity he might , in common with the senate and the house , institute an inquiry to ascertain any facts which ought to influence his judgment in approving or vetoing any bill .
this participation in the performance of legislative duties between the coordinate branches of the government ought to inspire the conduct of all of them in their relations toward each other with mutual forbearance and respect .
at least each has a right to demand justice from the other .
the cause of complaint is that the constitutional rights and immunities of the executive have been violated in the person of the president .
the trial of an impeachment of the president before the senate on charges preferred and prosecuted against him by the house of representatives would be an imposing spectacle for the world .
in the result not only his removal from the presidential office would be involved , but , what is of infinitely greater importance to himself , his character , both in the eyes of the present and of future generations , might possibly be tarnished .
the disgrace cast upon him would in some degree be reflected upon the character of the american people , who elected him .
hence the precautions adopted by the constitution to secure a fair trial .
on such a trial it declares that " the chief justice shall preside . "
this was doubtless because the framers of the constitution believed it to be possible that the vice - president might be biased by the fact that " in case of the removal of the president from office * * * the same shall devolve on the vice - president . "
the preliminary proceedings in the house in the case of charges which may involve impeachment have been well and wisely settled by long practice upon principles of equal justice both to the accused and to the people .
the precedent established in the case of judge peck , of missouri , in 1831 , after a careful review of all former precedents , will , i venture to predict , stand the test of time .
in that case luke edward lawless , the accuser , presented a petition to the house , in which he set forth minutely and specifically his causes of complaint .
he prayed " that the conduct and proceedings in this behalf of said judge peck may be inquired into by your honorable body , and such decision made thereon as to your wisdom and justice shall seem proper . "
this petition was referred to the judiciary committee ; such has ever been deemed the appropriate committee to make similar investigations .
it is a standing committee , supposed to be appointed without reference to any special case , and at all times is presumed to be composed of the most eminent lawyers in the house from different portions of the union , whose acquaintance with judicial proceedings and whose habits of investigation qualify them peculiarly for the task .
no tribunal , from their position and character , could in the nature of things be more impartial .
in the case of judge peck the witnesses were selected by the committee itself , with a view to ascertain the truth of the charge .
they were cross - examined by him , and everything was conducted in such a manner as to afford him no reasonable cause of complaint .
in view of this precedent , and , what is of far greater importance , in view of the constitution and the principles of eternal justice , in what manner has the president of the united states been treated by the house of representatives ?
mr. john covode , a representative from pennsylvania , is the accuser of the president .
instead of following the wise precedents of former times , and especially that in the case of judge peck , and referring the accusation to the committee on the judiciary , the house have made my accuser one of my judges .
to make the accuser the judge is a violation of the principles of universal justice , and is condemned by the practice of all civilized nations .
every freeman must revolt at such a spectacle .
i am to appear before mr. covode , either personally or by a substitute , to cross - examine the witnesses which he may produce before himself to sustain his own accusations against me ; and perhaps even this poor boon may be denied to the president .
and what is the nature of the investigation which his resolution proposes to institute ?
it is as vague and general as the english language affords words in which to make it .
the committee is to inquire , not into any specific charge or charges , but whether the president has , by " money , patronage , or other improper means , sought to influence , " not the action of any individual member or members of congress , but " the action " of the entire body " of congress " itself " or any committee thereof . "
the president might have had some glimmering of the nature of .
the offense to be investigated had his accuser pointed to the act or acts of congress which he sought to pass or to defeat by the employment of " money , patronage , or other improper means . "
but the accusation is bounded by no such limits .
it extends to the whole circle of legislation -- to interference " for or against the passage of any law appertaining to the rights of any state or territory . "
and what law does not appertain to the rights of some state or territory ?
and what law or laws has the president failed to execute ?
these might easily have been pointed out had any such existed .
had mr. lawless asked an inquiry to be made by the house whether judge peck , in general terms , had not violated his judicial duties , without the specification of any particular act , i do not believe there would have been a single vote in that body in favor of the inquiry .
since the time of the star - chamber and of general warrants there has been no such proceeding in england .
the house of representatives , the high impeaching power of the country , without consenting to hear a word of explanation , have indorsed this accusation against the president and made it their own act .
they even refused to permit a member to inquire of the president&#39;s accuser what were the specific charges against him .
thus , in this preliminary accusation of " high crimes and misdemeanors " against a coordinate branch of the government , under the impeaching power , the house refused to hear a single suggestion , even in regard to the correct mode of proceeding , but without a moment&#39;s delay passed the accusatory resolutions under the pressure of the previous question .
in the institution of a prosecution for any offense against the most humble citizen -- and i claim for myself no greater rights than he enjoys -- the constitutions of the united states and of the several states require that he shall be informed in the very beginning of the nature and cause of the accusation against him , in order to enable him to prepare for his defense .
there are other principles which i might enumerate , not less sacred , presenting an impenetrable shield to protect every citizen falsely charged with a criminal offense .
these have been violated in the prosecution instituted by the house of representatives against the executive branch of the government .
shall the president alone be deprived of the protection of these great principles which prevail in every land where a ray of liberty penetrates the gloom of despotism ?
shall the executive alone be deprived of rights which all his fellow - citizens enjoy ?
the whole proceeding against him justifies the fears of those wise and great men who , before the constitution was adopted by the states , apprehended that the tendency of the government was to the aggrandizement of the legislative at the expense of the executive and judicial departments .
i again declare emphatically that i make this protest for no reason personal to myself , and i do it with perfect respect for the house of representatives , in which i had the honor of serving as a member for five successive terms .
i have lived long in this goodly land , and have enjoyed all the offices and honors which my country could bestow .
amid all the political storms through which i have passed , the present is the first attempt which has ever been made , to my knowledge , to assail my personal or official integrity ; and this as the time is approaching when i shall voluntarily retire from the service of my country .
i feel proudly conscious that there is no public act of my life which will not bear the strictest scrutiny .
i defy all investigation .
nothing but the basest perjury can sully my good name .
i do not fear even this , because i cherish an humble confidence that the gracious being who has hitherto defended and protected me against the shafts of falsehood and malice will not desert me now when i have become " old and gray headed . "
i can declare before god and my country that no human being ( with an exception scarcely worthy of notice ) has at any period of my life dared to approach me with a corrupt or dishonorable proposition , and until recent developments it had never entered into my imagination that any person , even in the storm of exasperated political excitement , would charge me in the most remote degree with having made such a proposition to any human being .
i may now , however , exclaim in the language of complaint employed by my first and greatest predecessor , that i have been abused " in such exaggerated and indecent terms as could scarcely be applied to a nero , to a notorious defaulter , or even to a common pickpocket . "
i do therefore , for the reasons stated and in the name of the people of the several states , solemnly protest against these proceedings of the house of representatives , because they are in violation of the rights of the coordinate executive branch of the government and subversive of its constitutional independence ; because they are calculated to foster a band of interested parasites and informers , ever ready , for their own advantage , to swear before ex parte committees to pretended private conversations between the president and themselves , incapable from their nature of being disproved , thus furnishing material for harassing him , degrading him in the eyes of the country , and eventually , should he be a weak or a timid man , rendering him subservient to improper influences in order to avoid such persecutions and annoyances ; because they tend to destroy that harmonious action for the common good which ought to be maintained , and which i sincerely desire to cherish , between coordinate branches of the government ; and , finally , because , if unresisted , they would establish a precedent dangerous and embarrassing to all my successors , to whatever political party they might be attached .

fellow - citizens of the senate and house of representatives : when we compare the condition of the country at the present day with what it was one year ago at the meeting of congress , we have much reason for gratitude to that almighty providence which has never failed to interpose for our relief at the most critical periods of our history .
one year ago the sectional strife between the north and the south on the dangerous subject of slavery had again become so intense as to threaten the peace and perpetuity of the confederacy .
the application for the admission of kansas as a state into the union fostered this unhappy agitation and brought the whole subject once more before congress .
it was the desire of every patriot that such measures of legislation might be adopted as would remove the excitement from the states and confine it to the territory where it legitimately belonged .
much has been done , i am happy to say , toward the accomplishment of this object during the last session of congress .
the supreme court of the united states had previously decided that all american citizens have an equal right to take into the territories whatever is held as property under the laws of any of the states , and to hold such property there under the guardianship of the federal constitution so long as the territorial condition shall remain .
this is now a well - established position , and the proceedings of the last session were alone wanting to give it practical effect .
the principle has been recognized in some form or other by an almost unanimous vote of both houses of congress that a territory has a right to come into the union either as a free or a slave state , according to the will of a majority of its people .
the just equality of all the states has thus been vindicated and a fruitful source of dangerous dissension among them has been removed .
whilst such has been the beneficial tendency of your legislative proceedings outside of kansas , their influence has nowhere been so happy as within that territory itself .
left to manage and control its own affairs in its own way , without the pressure of external influence , the revolutionary topeka organization and all resistance to the territorial government established by congress have been finally abandoned .
as a natural consequence that fine territory now appears to be tranquil and prosperous and is attracting increasing thousands of immigrants to make it their happy home .
the past unfortunate experience of kansas has enforced the lesson , so often already taught , that resistance to lawful authority under our form of government can not fail in the end to prove disastrous to its authors .
had the people of the territory yielded obedience to the laws enacted by their legislature , it would at the present moment have contained a large additional population of industrious and enterprising citizens , who have been deterred from entering its borders by the existence of civil strife and organized rebellion .
it was the resistance to rightful authority and the persevering attempts to establish a revolutionary government under the topeka constitution which caused the people of kansas to commit the grave error of refusing to vote for delegates to the convention to frame a constitution under a law not denied to be fair and just in its provisions .
this refusal to vote has been the prolific source of all the evils which have followed , in their hostility to the territorial government they disregarded the principle , absolutely essential to the working of our form of government , that a majority of those who vote , not the majority who may remain at home , from whatever cause , must decide the result of an election .
for this reason , seeking to take advantage of their own error , they denied the authority of the convention thus elected to frame a constitution .
the convention , notwithstanding , proceeded to adopt a constitution unexceptionable in its general features , and providing for the submission of the slavery question to a vote of the people , which , in my opinion , they were bound to do under the kansas and nebraska act .
this was the all - important question which had alone convulsed the territory ; and yet the opponents of the lawful government , persisting in their first error , refrained from exercising their right to vote , and preferred that slavery should continue rather than surrender their revolutionary topeka organization .
a wiser and better spirit seemed to prevail before the first monday of january last , when an election was held under the constitution .
a majority of the people then voted for a governor and other state officers , for a member of congress and members of the state legislature .
this election was warmly contested by the two political parties in kansas , and a greater vote was polled than at any previous election .
a large majority of the members of the legislature elect belonged to that party which had previously refused to vote .
the antislavery party were thus placed in the ascendant , and the political power of the state was in their own hands .
had congress admitted kansas into the union under the lecompton constitution , the legislature might at its very first session have submitted the question to a vote of the people whether they would or would not have a convention to amend their constitution , either on the slavery or any other question , and have adopted all necessary means for giving speedy effect to the will of the majority .
thus the kansas question would have been immediately and finally settled .
under these circumstances i submitted to congress the constitution thus framed , with all the officers already elected necessary to put the state government into operation , accompanied by a strong recommendation in favor of the admission of kansas as a state .
in the course of my long public life i have never performed any official act which in the retrospect has afforded me more heartfelt satisfaction .
its admission could have inflicted no possible injury on any human being , whilst it would within a brief period have restored peace to kansas and harmony to the union .
in that event the slavery question would ere this have been finally settled according to the legally expressed will of a majority of the voters , and popular sovereignty would thus have been vindicated in a constitutional manner .
with my deep convictions of duty i could have pursued no other course .
it is true that as an individual i had expressed an opinion , both before and during the session of the convention , in favor of submitting the remaining clauses of the constitution , as well as that concerning slavery , to the people .
but , acting in an official character , neither myself nor any human authority had the power to rejudge the proceedings of the convention and declare the constitution which it had framed to be a nullity .
to have done this would have been a violation of the kansas and nebraska act , which left the people of the territory " perfectly free to form and regulate their domestic institutions in their own way , subject only to the constitution of the united states . "
it would equally have violated the great principle of popular sovereignty , at the foundation of our institutions , to deprive the people of the power , if they thought proper to exercise it , of confiding to delegates elected by themselves the trust of framing a constitution without requiring them to subject their constituents to the trouble , expense , and delay of a second election .
it would have been in opposition to many precedents in our history , commencing in the very best age of the republic , of the admission of territories as states into the union without a previous vote of the people approving their constitution .
it is to be lamented that a question so insignificant when viewed in its practical effects on the people of kansas , whether decided one way or the other , should have kindled such a flame of excitement throughout the country .
this reflection may prove to be a lesson of wisdom and of warning for our future guidance .
practically considered , the question is simply whether the people of that territory should first come into the union and then change any provision in their constitution not agreeable to themselves , or accomplish the very same object by remaining out of the union and framing another constitution in accordance with their will .
in either case the result would be precisely the same .
the only difference , in point of fact , is that the object would have been much sooner attained and the pacification of kansas more speedily effected had it been admitted as a state during the last session of congress .
my recommendation , however , for the immediate admission of kansas failed to meet the approbation of congress .
they deemed it wiser to adopt a different measure for the settlement of the question .
for my own part , i should have been willing to yield my assent to almost any constitutional measure to accomplish this object .
i therefore cordially acquiesced in what has been called the english compromise and approved the " act for the admission of the state of kansas into the union " upon the terms therein prescribed .
under the ordinance which accompanied the lecompton constitution the people of kansas had claimed double the quantity of public lands for the support of common schools which had ever been previously granted to any state upon entering the union , and also the alternate sections of land for 12 miles on each side of two railroads proposed to be constructed from the northern to the southern boundary and from the eastern to the western boundary of the state .
congress , deeming these claims unreasonable , provided by the act of may 4 , 1858 , to which i have just referred , for the admission of the state on an equal footing with the original states , but " upon the fundamental condition precedent " that a majority of the people thereof , at an election to be held for that purpose , should , in place of the very large grants of public lands which they had demanded under the ordinance , accept such grants as had been made to minnesota and other new states .
under this act , should a majority reject the proposition offered them , " it shall be deemed and held that the people of kansas do not desire admission into the union with said constitution under the conditions set forth in said proposition . "
in that event the act authorizes the people of the territory to elect delegates to form a constitution and state government for themselves " whenever , and not before , it is ascertained by a census , duly and legally taken , that the population of said territory equals or exceeds the ratio of representation required for a member of the house of representatives of the congress of the united states . "
the delegates thus assembled " shall first determine by a vote whether it is the wish of the people of the proposed state to be admitted into the union at that time , and , if so , shall proceed to form a constitution and take all necessary steps for the establishment of a state government in conformity with the federal constitution . "
after this constitution shall have been formed , congress , carrying out the principles of popular sovereignty and nonintervention , have left " the mode and manner of its approval or ratification by the people of the proposed state " to be " prescribed by law , " and they " shall then be admitted into the union as a state under such constitution , thus fairly and legally made , with or without slavery , as said constitution may prescribe."an election was held throughout kansas , in pursuance of the provisions of this act , on the 2d day of august last , and it resulted in the rejection by a large majority of the proposition submitted to the people by congress .
this being the case , they are now authorized to form another constitution , preparatory to admission into the union , but not until their number , as ascertained by a census , shall equal or exceed the ratio required to elect a member to the house of representatives .
it is not probable , in the present state of the case , that a third constitution can be lawfully framed and presented to congress by kansas before its population shall have reached the designated number .
nor is it to be presumed that after their sad experience in resisting the territorial laws they will attempt to adopt a constitution in express violation of the provisions of an act of congress .
during the session of 1856 much of the time of congress was occupied on the question of admitting kansas under the topeka constitution .
again , nearly the whole of the last session was devoted to the question of its admission under the lecompton constitution .
surely it is not unreasonable to require the people of kansas to wait before making a third attempt until the number of their inhabitants shall amount to 93,420 .
during this brief period the harmony of the states as well as the great business interests of the country demand that the people of the union shall not for a third time be convulsed by another agitation on the kansas question .
by waiting for a short time and acting in obedience to law kansas will glide into the union without the slightest impediment .
this excellent provision , which congress have applied to kansas , ought to be extended and rendered applicable to all territories which may hereafter seek admission into the union .
whilst congress possess the undoubted power of admitting a new state into the union , however small may be the number of its inhabitants , yet this power ought not , in my opinion , to be exercised before the population shall amount to the ratio required by the act for the admission of kansas .
had this been previously the rule , the country would have escaped all the evils and misfortunes to which it has been exposed by the kansas question .
of course it would be unjust to give this rule a retrospective application , and exclude a state which , acting upon the past practice of the government , has already formed its constitution , elected its legislature and other officers , and is now prepared to enter the union .
the rule ought to be adopted , whether we consider its bearing on the people of the territories or upon the people of the existing states .
many of the serious dissentions which have prevailed in congress and throughout the country would have been avoided had this rule been established at an earlier period of the government .
immediately upon the formation of a new territory people from different states and from foreign countries rush into it for the laudable purpose of improving their condition .
their first duty to themselves is to open and cultivate farms , to construct roads , to establish schools , to erect places of religious worship , and to devote their energies generally to reclaim the wilderness and to lay the foundations of a flourishing and prosperous commonwealth .
if in this incipient condition , with a population of a few thousand , they should prematurely enter the union , they are oppressed by the burden of state taxation , and the means necessary for the improvement of the territory and the advancement of their own interests are thus diverted to very different purposes .
the federal government has ever been a liberal parent to the territories and a generous contributor to the useful enterprises of the early settlers .
it has paid the expenses of their governments and legislative assemblies out of the common treasury , and thus relieved them from a heavy charge .
under these circumstances nothing can be better calculated to retard their material progress than to divert them from their useful employments by prematurely exciting angry political contests among themselves for the benefit of aspiring leaders .
it is surely no hardship for embryo governors , senators , and members of congress to wait until the number of inhabitants shall equal those of a single congressional district .
they surely ought not to be permitted to rush into the union with a population less than one - half of several of the large counties in the interior of some of the states .
this was the condition of kansas when it made application to be admitted under the topeka constitution .
besides , it requires some time to render the mass of a population collected in a new territory at all homogeneous and to unite them on anything like a fixed policy .
establish the rule , and all will look forward to it and govern themselves accordingly .
but justice to the people of the several states requires that this rule should be established by congress .
each state is entitled to two senators and at least one representative in congress .
should the people of the states fail to elect a vice - president , the power devolves upon the senate to select this officer from the two highest candidates on the list .
in case of the death of the president , the vice - president thus elected by the senate becomes president of the united states .
on all questions of legislation the senators from the smallest states of the union have an equal vote with those from the largest .
the same may be said in regard to the ratification of treaties and of executive appointments .
all this has worked admirably in practice , whilst it conforms in principle with the character of a government instituted by sovereign states .
i presume no american citizen would desire the slightest change in the arrangement .
still , is it not unjust and unequal to the existing states to invest some 40,000 or 50,000 people collected in a territory with the attributes of sovereignty and place them on an equal footing with virginia and new york in the senate of the united states?for these reasons i earnestly recommend the passage of a general act which shall provide that , upon the application of a territorial legislature declaring their belief that the territory contains a number of inhabitants which , if in a state , would entitle them to elect a member of congress , it shall be the duty of the president to cause a census of the inhabitants to be taken , and if found sufficient then by the terms of this act to authorize them to proceed " in their own way " to frame a state constitution preparatory to admission into the union .
i also recommend that an appropriation may be made to enable the president to take a census of the people of kansas .
the present condition of the territory of utah , when contrasted with what it was one year ago , is a subject for congratulation .
it was then in a state of open rebellion , and , cost what it might , the character of the government required that this rebellion should be suppressed and the mormons compelled to yield obedience to the constitution and the laws .
in order to accomplish this object , as i informed you in my last annual message , i appointed a new governor instead of brigham young , and other federal officers to take the place of those who , consulting their personal safety , had found it necessary to withdraw from the territory .
to protect these civil officers , and to aid them , as a posse comitatus , in the execution of the laws in case of need , i ordered a detachment of the army to accompany them to utah .
the necessity for adopting these measures is now demonstrated .
on the 15th of september , 1857 , governor young issued his proclamation , in the style of an independent sovereign , announcing his purpose to resist by force of arms the entry of the united states troops into our own territory of utah .
by this he required all the forces in the territory to " hold themselves in readiness to march at a moment 's notice to repel any and all such invasion , " and established martial law from its date throughout the territory .
these proved to be no idle threats .
forts bridger and supply were vacated and burnt down by the mormons to deprive our troops of a shelter after their long and fatiguing march .
orders were issued by daniel h. wells , styling himself " lieutenant general , nauvoo legion , " to stampede the animals of the united states troops on their march , to set fire to their trains , to burn the grass and the whole country before them and on their flanks , to keep them from sleeping by night surprises , and to blockade the road by felling trees and destroying the fords of rivers , etc .
these orders were promptly and effectually obeyed .
on the 4th of october , 1857 , the mormons captured and burned , on green river , three of our supply trains , consisting of seventy - five wagons loaded with provisions and tents for the army , and carried away several hundred animals .
this diminished the supply of provisions so materially that general johnston was obliged to reduce the ration , and even with this precaution there was only sufficient left to subsist the troops until the 1st of june .
our little army behaved admirably in their encampment at fort bridger under these trying privations .
in the midst of the mountains , in a dreary , unsettled , and inhospitable region , more than a thousand miles from home , they passed the severe and inclement winter without a murmur .
they looked forward with confidence for relief from their country in due season , and in this they were not disappointed .
the secretary of war employed all his energies to forward them the necessary supplies and to muster and send such a military force to utah as would render resistance on the part of the mormons hopeless , and thus terminate the war without the effusion of blood .
in his efforts he was efficiently sustained by congress .
they granted appropriations sufficient to cover the deficiency thus necessarily created , and also provided for raising two regiments of volunteers " for the purpose of quelling disturbances in the territory of utah , for the protection of supply and emigrant trains , and the suppression of indian hostilities on the frontiers . "
happily , there was no occasion to call these regiments into service .
if there had been , i should have felt serious embarrassment in selecting them , so great was the number of our brave and patriotic citizens anxious to serve their country in this distant and apparently dangerous expedition .
thus it has ever been , and thus may it ever be .
the wisdom and economy of sending sufficient reenforcements to utah are established , not only by the event , but in the opinion of those who from their position and opportunities are the most capable of forming a correct judgment .
general johnston , the commander of the forces , in addressing the secretary of war from fort bridger under date of october 18 , 1857 , expresses the opinion that " unless a large force is sent here , from the nature of the country a protracted war on their [ the mormons 's ] part is inevitable . "
this he considered necessary to terminate the war " speedily and more economically than if attempted by insufficient means."in the meantime it was my anxious desire that the mormons should yield obedience to the constitution and the laws without rendering it necessary to resort to military force .
to aid in accomplishing this object , i deemed it advisable in april last to dispatch two distinguished citizens of the united states , messrs. powell and mcculloch , to utah .
they bore with them a proclamation addressed by myself to the inhabitants of utah , dated on the 6th day of that month , warning them of their true condition and how hopeless it was on their part to persist in rebellion against the united states , and offering all those who should submit to the laws a full pardon for their past seditions and treasons .
at the same time i assured those who should persist in rebellion against the united states that they must expect no further lenity , but look to be rigorously dealt with according to their deserts .
the instructions to these agents , as well as a copy of the proclamation and their reports , are herewith submitted .
it will be seen by their report of the 3d of july last that they have fully confirmed the opinion expressed by general johnston in the previous october as to the necessity of sending reenforcements to utah .
in this they state that they " are firmly impressed with the belief that the presence of the army here and the large additional force that had been ordered to this territory were the chief inducements that caused the mormons to abandon the idea of resisting the authority of the united states .
a less decisive policy would probably have resulted in a long , bloody , and expensive war."these gentlemen conducted themselves to my entire satisfaction and rendered useful services in executing the humane intentions of the government .
it also affords me great satisfaction to state that governor cumming has performed his duty in an able and conciliatory manner and with the happiest effect .
i can not in this connection refrain from mentioning the valuable services of colonel thomas l. kane , who , from motives of pure benevolence and without any official character or pecuniary compensation , visited utah during the last inclement winter for the purpose of contributing to the pacification of the territory .
i am happy to inform you that the governor and other civil officers of utah are now performing their appropriate functions without resistance .
the authority of the constitution and the laws has been fully restored and peace prevails throughout the territory .
a portion of the troops sent to utah are now encamped in cedar valley , 44 miles southwest of salt lake city , and the remainder have been ordered to oregon to suppress indian hostilities .
the march of the army to salt lake city through the indianterritory has had a powerful effect in restraining the hostile feelings against the united states which existed among the indians in that region and in securing emigrants to the far west against their depredations .
this will also be the means of establishing military posts and promoting settlements along the route .
i recommend that the benefits of our land laws and preemption system be extended to the people of utah by the establishment of a land office in that territory .
i have occasion also to congratulate you on the result of our negotiations with china .
you were informed by my last annual message that our minister had been instructed to occupy a neutral position in the hostilities conducted by great britain and france against canton .
he was , however , at the same time directed to cooperate cordially with the british and french ministers in all peaceful measures to secure by treaty those just concessions to foreign commerce which the nations of the world had a right to demand .
it was impossible for me to proceed further than this on my own authority without usurping the war - making power , which under the constitution belongs exclusively to congress .
besides , after a careful examination of the nature and extent of our grievances , i did not believe they were of such a pressing and aggravated character as would have justified congress in declaring war against the chinese empire without first making another earnest attempt to adjust them by peaceful negotiation .
i was the more inclined to this opinion because of the severe chastisement which had then but recently been inflicted upon the chinese by our squadron in the capture and destruction of the barrier forts to avenge an alleged insult to our flag .
the event has proved the wisdom of our neutrality .
our minister has executed his instructions with eminent skill and ability .
in conjunction with the russian plenipotentiary , he has peacefully , but effectually , cooperated with the english and french plenipotentiaries , and each of the four powers has concluded a separate treaty with china of a highly satisfactory character .
the treaty concluded by our own plenipotentiary will immediately be submitted to the senate .
i am happy to announce that through the energetic yet conciliatory efforts of our consul - general in japan a new treaty has been concluded with that empire , which may be expected materially to augment our trade and intercourse in that quarter and remove from our countrymen the disabilities which have heretofore been imposed upon the exercise of their religion .
the treaty shall be submitted to the senate for approval without delay .
it is my earnest desire that every misunderstanding with the government of great britain should be amicably and speedily adjusted .
it has been the misfortune of both countries , almost ever since the period of the revolution , to have been annoyed by a succession of irritating and dangerous questions , threatening their friendly relations .
this has partially prevented the full development of those feelings of mutual friendship between the people of the two countries so natural in themselves and so conducive to their common interest .
any serious interruption of the commerce between the united states and great britain would be equally injurious to both .
in fact , no two nations have ever existed on the face of the earth which could do each other so much good or so much harm .
entertaining these sentiments , i am gratified to inform you that the long - pending controversy between the two governments in relation to the question of visitation and search has been amicably adjusted .
the claim on the part of great britain forcibly to visit american vessels on the high seas in time of peace could not be sustained under the law of nations , and it had been overruled by her own most eminent jurists .
this question was recently brought to an issue by the repeated acts of british cruisers in boarding and searching our merchant vessels in the gulf of mexico and the adjacent seas .
these acts were the more injurious and annoying , as these waters are traversed by a large portion of the commerce and navigation of the united states and their free and unrestricted use is essential to the security of the coastwise trade between the different states of the union .
such vexatious interruptions could not fail to excite the feelings of the country and to require the interposition of the government .
remonstrances were addressed to the british government against these violations of our rights of sovereignty , and a naval force was at the same time ordered to the cuban waters with directions " to protect all vessels of the united states on the high seas from search or detention by the vessels of war of any other nation . "
these measures received the unqualified and even enthusiastic approbation of the american people .
most fortunately , however , no collision took place , and the british government promptly avowed its recognition of the principles of international law upon this subject as laid down by the government of the united states in the note of the secretary of state to the british minister at washington of april 10 , 1858 , which secure the vessels of the united states upon the high seas from visitation or search in time of peace under any circumstances whatever .
the claim has been abandoned in a manner reflecting honor on the british government and evincing a just regard for the law of nations , and can not fail to strengthen the amicable relations between the two countries .
the british government at the same time proposed to the united states that some mode should be adopted , by mutual arrangement between the two countries , of a character which may be found effective without being offensive , for verifying the nationality of vessels suspected on good grounds of carrying false colors .
they have also invited the united states to take the initiative and propose measures for this purpose .
whilst declining to assume so grave a responsibility , the secretary of state has informed the british government that we are ready to receive any proposals which they may feel disposed to offer having this object in view , and to consider them in an amicable spirit .
a strong opinion is , however , expressed that the occasional abuse of the flag of any nation is an evil far less to be deprecated than would be the establishment of any regulations which might be incompatible with the freedom of the seas .
this government has yet received no communication specifying the manner in which the british government would propose to carry out their suggestion , and i am inclined to believe that no plan which can be devised will be free from grave embarrassments .
still , i shall form no decided opinion on the subject until i shall have carefully and in the best spirit examined any proposals which they may think proper to make .
i am truly sorry i can not also inform you that the complications between great britain and the united states arising out of the clayton and bulwer treaty of april , 1850 , have been finally adjusted .
at the commencement of your last session i had reason to hope that , emancipating themselves from further unavailing discussions , the two governments would proceed to settle the central american questions in a practical manner , alike honorable and satisfactory to both ; and this hope i have not yet abandoned .
in my last annual message i stated that overtures had been made by the british government for this purpose in a friendly spirit , which i cordially reciprocated .
their proposal was to withdraw these questions from direct negotiation between the two governments , but to accomplish the same object by a negotiation between the british government and each of the central american republics whose territorial interests are immediately involved .
the settlement was to be made in accordance with the general tenor of the interpretation placed upon the clayton and bulwer treaty by the united states , with certain modifications .
as negotiations are still pending upon this basis , it would not be proper for me now to communicate their present condition .
a final settlement of these questions is greatly to be desired , as this would wipe out the last remaining subject of dispute between the two countries .
our relations with the great empires of france and russia , as well as with all other governments on the continent of europe , except that of spain , continue to be of the most friendly character .
with spain our relations remain in an unsatisfactory condition .
in my message of december last i informed you that our envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary to madrid had asked for his recall , and it was my purpose to send out a new minister to that court with special instructions on all questions pending between the two governments , and with a determination to have them speedily and amicably adjusted if that were possible .
this purpose has been hitherto defeated by causes which i need not enumerate .
the mission to spain has been intrusted to a distinguished citizen of kentucky , who will proceed to madrid without delay and make another and a final attempt to obtain justice from that government .
spanish officials under the direct control of the captain - general of cuba have insulted our national flag and in repeated instances have from time to time inflicted injuries on the persons and property of our citizens .
these have given birth to numerous claims against the spanish government , the merits of which have been ably discussed for a series of years by our successive diplomatic representatives .
notwithstanding this , we have not arrived at a practical result in any single instance , unless we may except the case of the black warrior , under the late administration , and that presented an outrage of such a character as would have justified an immediate resort to war .
all our attempts to obtain redress have been baffled and defeated .
the frequent and oft - recurring changes in the spanish ministry have been employed as reasons for delay .
we have been compelled to wait again and again until the new minister shall have had time to investigate the justice of our demands .
even what have been denominated " the cuban claims , " in which more than 100 of our citizens are directly interested , have furnished no exception .
these claims were for the refunding of duties unjustly exacted from american vessels at different custom - houses in cuba so long ago as the year 1844 .
the principles upon which they rest are so manifestly equitable and just that , after a period of nearly ten years , in 1854 they were recognized by the spanish government .
proceedings were afterwards instituted to ascertain their amount , and this was finally fixed , according to their own statement ( with which we were satisfied ) , at the sum of $ 128,635.54 .
just at the moment , after a delay of fourteen years , when we had reason to expect that this sum would be repaid with interest , we have received a proposal offering to refund one - third of that amount ( $ 42,878.41 ) , but without interest , if we would accept this in full satisfaction .
the offer is also accompanied by a declaration that this indemnification is not founded on any reason of strict justice , but is made as a special favor .
one alleged cause for procrastination in the examination and adjustment of our claims arises from an obstacle which it is the duty of the spanish government to remove .
whilst the captain - general of cuba is invested with general despotic authority in the government of that island , the power is withheld from him to examine and redress wrongs committed by officials under his control on citizens of the united states .
instead of making our complaints directly to him at havana , we are obliged to present them through our minister at madrid .
these are then referred back to the captain - general for information , and much time is thus consumed in preliminary investigations and correspondence between madrid and cuba before the spanish government will consent to proceed to negotiation .
many of the difficulties between the two governments would be obviated and a long train of negotiation avoided if the captain - general were invested with authority to settle questions of easy solution on the spot , where all the facts are fresh and could be promptly and satisfactorily ascertained .
we have hitherto in vain urged upon the spanish government to confer this power upon the captain - general , and our minister to spain will again be instructed to urge this subject on their notice .
in this respect we occupy a different position from the powers of europe .
cuba is almost within sight of our shores ; our commerce with it is far greater than that of any other nation , including spain itself , and our citizens are in habits of daily and extended personal intercourse with every part of the island .
it is therefore a great grievance that when any difficulty occurs , no matter how unimportant , which might be readily settled at the moment , we should be obliged to resort to madrid , especially when the very first step to be taken there is to refer it back to cuba .
the truth is that cuba , in its existing colonial condition , is a constant source of injury and annoyance to the american people .
it is the only spot in the civilized world where the african slave trade is tolerated , and we are bound by treaty with great britain to maintain a naval force on the coast of africa , at much expense both of life and treasure , solely for the purpose of arresting slavers bound to that island .
the late serious difficulties between the united states and great britain respecting the right of search , now so happily terminated , could never have arisen if cuba had not afforded a market for slaves .
as long as this market shall remain open there can be no hope for the civilization of benighted africa .
whilst the demand for slaves continues in cuba wars will be waged among the petty and barbarous chiefs in africa for the purpose of seizing subjects to supply this trade .
in such a condition of affairs it is impossible that the light of civilization and religion can ever penetrate these dark abodes .
it has been made known to the world by my predecessors that the united states have on several occasions endeavored to acquire cuba from spain by honorable negotiation .
if this were accomplished , the last relic of the african slave trade would instantly disappear .
we would not , if we could , acquire cuba in any other manner .
this is due to our national character .
all the territory which we have acquired since the origin of the government has been by fair purchase from france , spain , and mexico or by the free and voluntary act of the independent state of texas in blending her destinies with our own .
this course we shall ever pursue , unless circumstances should occur which we do not now anticipate , rendering a departure from it clearly justifiable under the imperative and overruling law of self - preservation .
the island of cuba , from its geographical position , commands the mouth of the mississippi and the immense and annually increasing trade , foreign and coastwise , from the valley of that noble river , now embracing half the sovereign states of the union .
with that island under the dominion of a distant foreign power this trade , of vital importance to these states , is exposed to the danger of being destroyed in time of war , and it has hitherto been subjected to perpetual injury and annoyance in time of peace .
our relations with spain , which ought to be of the most friendly character , must always be placed in jeopardy whilst the existing colonial government over the island shall remain in its present condition .
whilst the possession of the island would be of vast importance to the united states , its value to spain is comparatively unimportant .
such was the relative situation of the parties when the great napoleon transferred louisiana to the united states .
jealous as he ever was of the national honor and interests of france , no person throughout the world has imputed blame to him for accepting a pecuniary equivalent for this cession .
the publicity which has been given to our former negotiations upon this subject and the large appropriation which may be required to effect the purpose render it expedient before making another attempt to renew the negotiation that i should lay the whole subject before congress .
this is especially necessary , as it may become indispensable to success that i should be intrusted with the means of making an advance to the spanish government immediately after the signing of the treaty , without awaiting the ratification of it by the senate .
i am encouraged to make this suggestion by the example of mr. jefferson previous to the purchase of louisiana from france and by that of mr. polk in view of the acquisition of territory from mexico .
i refer the whole subject to congress and commend it to their careful consideration .
i repeat the recommendation made in my message of december last in favor of an appropriation " to be paid to the spanish government for the purpose of distribution among the claimants in the amistad case . "
president polk first made a similar recommendation in december , 1847 , and it was repeated by my immediate predecessor in december , 1853 .
i entertain no doubt that indemnity is fairly due to these claimants under our treaty with spain of october 27 , 1795 ; and whilst demanding justice we ought to do justice .
an appropriation promptly made for this purpose could not fail to exert a favorable influence on our negotiations with spain .
our position in relation to the independent states south of us on this continent , and especially those within the limits of north america , is of a peculiar character .
the northern boundary of mexico is coincident with our own southern boundary from ocean to ocean , and we must necessarily feel a deep interest in all that concerns the well - being and the fate of so near a neighbor .
we have always cherished the kindest wishes for the success of that republic , and have indulged the hope that it might at last , after all its trials , enjoy peace and prosperity under a free and stable government .
we have never hitherto interfered , directly or indirectly , with its internal affairs , and it is a duty which we owe to ourselves to protect the integrity of its territory against the hostile interference of any other power .
our geographical position , our direct interest in all that concerns mexico , and our well - settled policy in regard to the north american continent render this an indispensable duty .
mexico has been in a state of constant revolution almost ever since it achieved its independence .
one military leader after another has usurped the government in rapid succession , and the various constitutions from time to time adopted have been set at naught almost as soon as they were proclaimed .
the successive governments have afforded no adequate protection , either to mexican citizens or foreign residents , against lawless violence .
heretofore a seizure of the capital by a military chieftain has been generally followed by at least the nominal submission of the country to his rule for a brief period , but not so at the present crisis of mexican affairs .
a civil war has been raging for some time throughout the republic between the central government at the city of mexico , which has endeavored to subvert the constitution last framed by military power , and those who maintain the authority of that constitution .
the antagonist parties each hold possession of different states of the republic , and the fortunes of the war are constantly changing .
meanwhile the most reprehensible means have been employed by both parties to extort money from foreigners , as well as natives , to carry on this ruinous contest .
the truth is that this fine country , blessed with a productive soil and a benign climate , has been reduced by civil dissension to a condition of almost hopeless anarchy and imbecility .
it would be vain for this government to attempt to enforce payment in money of the claims of american citizens , now amounting to more than $ 10,000,000 , against mexico , because she is destitute of all pecuniary means to satisfy these demands .
our late minister was furnished with ample powers and instructions for the adjustment of all pending questions with the central government of mexico , and he performed his duty with zeal and ability .
the claims of our citizens , some of them arising out of the violation of an express provision of the treaty of guadalupe hidalgo , and others from gross injuries to persons as well as property , have remained unredressed and even unnoticed .
remonstrances against these grievances have been addressed without effect to that government .
meantime in various parts of the republic instances have been numerous of the murder , imprisonment , and plunder of our citizens by different parties claiming and exercising a local jurisdiction ; but the central government , although repeatedly urged thereto , have made no effort either to punish the authors of these outrages or to prevent their recurrence .
no american citizen can now visit mexico on lawful business without imminent danger to his person and property .
there is no adequate protection to either , and in this respect our treaty with that republic is almost a dead letter .
this state of affairs was brought to a crisis in may last by the promulgation of a decree levying a contribution pro rata upon all the capital in the republic between certain specified amounts , whether held by mexicans or foreigners .
mr. forsyth , regarding this decree in the light of a " forced loan , " formally protested against its application to his countrymen and advised them not to pay the contribution , but to suffer it to be forcibly exacted .
acting upon this advice , an american citizen refused to pay the contribution , and his property was seized by armed men to satisfy the amount .
not content with this , the government proceeded still further and issued a decree banishing him from the country .
our minister immediately notified them that if this decree should be carried into execution he would feel it to be his duty to adopt " the most decided measures that belong to the powers and obligations of the representative office . "
notwithstanding this warning , the banishment was enforced , and mr. forsyth promptly announced to the government the suspension of the political relations of his legation with them until the pleasure of his own government should be ascertained .
this government did not regard the contribution imposed by the decree of the 15th may last to be in strictness a " forced loan , " and as such prohibited by the tenth article of the treaty of 1826 between great britain and mexico , to the benefits of which american citizens are entitled by treaty ; yet the imposition of the contribution upon foreigners was considered an unjust and oppressive measure .
besides , internal factions in other parts of the republic were at the same time levying similar exactions upon the property of our citizens and interrupting their commerce .
there had been an entire failure on the part of our minister to secure redress for the wrongs which our citizens had endured , notwithstanding his persevering efforts .
and from the temper manifested by the mexican government he had repeatedly assured us that no favorable change could be expected until the united states should " give striking evidence of their will and power to protect their citizens , " and that " severe chastening is the only earthly remedy for our grievances . "
from this statement of facts it would have been worse than idle to direct mr. forsyth to retrace his steps and resume diplomatic relations with that government , and it was therefore deemed proper to sanction his withdrawal of the legation from the city of mexico .
abundant cause now undoubtedly exists for a resort to hostilities against the government still holding possession of the capital .
should they succeed in subduing the constitutional forces , all reasonable hope will then have expired of a peaceful settlement of our difficulties .
on the other hand , should the constitutional party prevail and their authority be established over the republic , there is reason to hope that they will be animated by a less unfriendly spirit and may grant that redress to american citizens which justice requires so far as they may possess the means .
but for this expectation i should at once have recommended to congress to grant the necessary power to the president to take possession of a sufficient portion of the remote and unsettled territory of mexico , to be held in pledge until our injuries shall be redressed and our just demands be satisfied .
we have already exhausted every milder means of obtaining justice .
in such a case this remedy of reprisals is recognized by the law of nations , not only as just in itself , but as a means of preventing actual war .
but there is another view of our relations with mexico , arising from the unhappy condition of affairs along our southwestern frontier , which demands immediate action .
in that remote region , where there are but few white inhabitants , large bands of hostile and predatory indians roam promiscuously over the mexican states of chihuahua and sonora and our adjoining territories .
the local governments of these states are perfectly helpless and are kept in a state of constant alarm by the indians .
they have not the power , if they possessed the will , even to restrain lawless mexicans from passing the border and committing depredations on our remote settlers .
a state of anarchy and violence prevails throughout that distant frontier .
the laws are a dead letter and life and property wholly insecure .
for this reason the settlement of arizona is arrested , whilst it is of great importance that a chain of inhabitants should extend all along its southern border sufficient for their own protection and that of the united states mail passing to and from california .
well - founded apprehensions are now entertained that the indians and wandering mexicans , equally lawless , may break up the important stage and postal communication recently established between our atlantic and pacific possessions .
this passes very near to the mexican boundary throughout the whole length of arizona .
i can imagine no possible remedy for these evils and no mode of restoring law and order on that remote and unsettled frontier but for the government of the united states to assume a temporary protectorate over the northern portions of chihuahua and sonora and to establish military posts within the same ; and this i earnestly recommend to congress .
this protection may be withdrawn as soon as local governments shall be established in these mexican states capable of performing their duties to the united states , restraining the lawless , and preserving peace along the border .
i do not doubt that this measure will be viewed in a friendly spirit by the governments and people of chihuahua and sonora , as it will prove equally effectual for the protection of their citizens on that remote and lawless frontier as for citizens of the united states .
and in this connection permit me to recall your attention to the condition of arizona .
the population of that territory , numbering , as is alleged , more than 10,000 souls , are practically without a government , without laws , and without any regular administration of justice .
murder and other crimes are committed with impunity .
this state of things calls loudly for redress , and i therefore repeat my recommendation for the establishment of a territorial government over arizona .
the political condition of the narrow isthmus of central america , through which transit routes pass between the atlantic and pacific oceans , presents a subject of deep interest to all commercial nations .
it is over these transits that a large proportion of the trade and travel between the european and asiatic continents is destined to pass .
to the united states these routes are of incalculable importance as a means of communication between their atlantic and pacific possessions .
the latter now extend throughout seventeen degrees of latitude on the pacific coast , embracing the important state of california and the flourishing territories of oregon and washington .
all commercial nations therefore have a deep and direct interest that these communications shall be rendered secure from interruption .
if an arm of the sea connecting the two oceans penetrated through nicaragua and costa rica , it could not be pretended that these states would have the right to arrest or retard its navigation to the injury of other nations .
the transit by land over this narrow isthmus occupies nearly the same position .
it is a highway in which they themselves have little interest when compared with the vast interests of the rest of the world .
whilst their rights of sovereignty ought to be respected , it is the duty of other nations to require that this important passage shall not be interrupted by the civil wars and revolutionary outbreaks which have so frequently occurred in that region .
the stake is too important to be left at the mercy of rival companies claiming to hold conflicting contracts with nicaragua .
the commerce of other nations is not to stand still and await the adjustment of such petty controversies .
the government of the united states expect no more than this , and they will not be satisfied with less .
they would not , if they could , derive any advantage from the nicaragua transit not common to the rest of the world .
its neutrality and protection for the common use of all nations is their only object .
they have no objection that nicaragua shall demand and receive a fair compensation from the companies and individuals who may traverse the route , but they insist that it shall never hereafter be closed by an arbitrary decree of that government .
if disputes arise between it and those with whom they may have entered into contracts , these must be adjusted by some fair tribunal provided for the purpose , and the route must not be closed pending the controversy .
this is our whole policy , and it can not fail to be acceptable to other nations .
all these difficulties might be avoided if , consistently with the good faith of nicaragua , the use of this transit could be thrown open to general competition , providing at the same time for the payment of a reasonable rate to the nicaraguan government on passengers and freight .
in august , 1852 , the accessory transit company made its first interoceanic trip over the nicaraguan route , and continued in successful operation , with great advantage to the public , until the 18th february , 1856 , when it was closed and the grant to this company as well as its charter were summarily and arbitrarily revoked by the government of president rivas .
previous to this date , however , in 1854 , serious disputes concerning the settlement of their accounts had arisen between the company and the government , threatening the interruption of the route at any moment .
these the united states in vain endeavored to compose .
it would be useless to narrate the various proceedings which took place between the parties up till the time when the transit was discontinued .
suffice it to say that since february , 1856 , it has remained closed , greatly to the prejudice of citizens of the united states .
since that time the competition has ceased between the rival routes of panama and nicaragua , and in consequence thereof an unjust and unreasonable amount has been exacted from our citizens for their passage to and from californiaa treaty was signed on the 16th day of november , 1857 , by the secretary of state and minister of nicaragua , under the stipulations of which the use and protection of the transit route would have been secured , not only to the united states , but equally to all other nations .
how and on what pretext this treaty has failed to receive the ratification of the nicaraguan government will appear by the papers herewith communicated from the state department .
the principal objection seems to have been to the provision authorizing the united states to employ force to keep the route open in case nicaragua should fail to perform her duty in this respect .
from the feebleness of that republic , its frequent changes of government , and its constant internal dissensions , this had become a most important stipulation , and one essentially necessary , not only for the security of the route , but for the safety of american citizens passing and repassing to and from our pacific possessions .
were such a stipulation embraced in a treaty between the united states and nicaragua , the knowledge of this fact would of itself most probably prevent hostile parties from committing aggressions on the route , and render our actual interference for its protection unnecessary .
the executive government of this country in its intercourse with foreign nations is limited to the employment of diplomacy alone .
when this fails it can proceed no further .
it can not legitimately resort to force without the direct authority of congress , except in resisting and repelling hostile attacks .
it would have no authority to enter the territories of nicaragua even to prevent the destruction of the transit and protect the lives and property of our own citizens on their passage .
it is true that on a sudden emergency of this character the president would direct any armed force in the vicinity to march to their relief , but in doing this he would act upon his own responsibility .
under these circumstances i earnestly recommend to congress the passage of an act authorizing the president , under such restrictions as they may deem proper , to employ the land and naval forces of the united states in preventing the transit from being obstructed or closed by lawless violence , and in protecting the lives and property of american citizens traveling thereupon , requiring at the same time that these forces shall be withdrawn the moment the danger shall have passed away .
without such a provision our citizens will be constantly exposed to interruption in their progress and to lawless violence .
a similar necessity exists for the passage of such an act for the protection of the panama and tehuantepec routes .
in reference to the panama route , the united states , by their existing treaty with new granada , expressly guarantee the neutrality of the isthmus , " with the view that the free transit from the one to the other sea may not be interrupted or embarrassed in any future time while this treaty exists."in regard to the tehuantepec route , which has been recently opened under the most favorable auspices , our treaty with mexico of the 30th december , 1853 , secures to the citizens of the united states a right of transit over it for their persons and merchandise and stipulates that neither government shall " interpose any obstacle " thereto .
it also concedes to the united states the " right to transport across the isthmus , in closed bags , the mails of the united states not intended for distribution along the line of the communication ; also the effects of the united states government and its citizens which may be intended for transit and not for distribution on the isthmus , free of custom - house or other charges by the mexican government."these treaty stipulations with new granada and mexico , in addition to the considerations applicable to the nicaragua route , seem to require legislation for the purpose of carrying them into effect .
the injuries which have been inflicted upon our citizens in costa rica and nicaragua during the last two or three years have received the prompt attention of this government .
some of these injuries were of the most aggravated character .
the transaction at virgin bay in april , 1856 , when a company of unarmed americans , who were in no way connected with any belligerent conduct or party , were fired upon by the troops of costa rica and numbers of them killed and wounded , was brought to the knowledge of congress by my predecessor soon after its occurrence , and was also presented to the government of costa rica for that immediate investigation and redress which the nature of the case demanded .
a similar course was pursued with reference to other outrages in these countries , some of which were hardly less aggravated in their character than the transaction at virgin bay .
at the time , however , when our present minister to nicaragua was appointed , in december , 1857 , no redress had been obtained for any of these wrongs and no reply even had been received to the demands which had been made by this government upon that of costa rica more than a year before .
our minister was instructed , therefore , to lose no time in expressing to those governments the deep regret with which the president had witnessed this inattention to the just claims of the united states and in demanding their prompt and satisfactory adjustment .
unless this demand shall be complied with at an early day it will only remain for this government to adopt such other measures as may be necessary in order to obtain for itself that justice which it has in vain attempted to secure by peaceful means from the governments of nicaragua and costa rica .
while it has shown , and will continue to show , the most sincere regard for the rights and honor of these republics , it can not permit this regard to be met by an utter neglect on their part of what is due to the government and citizens of the united states .
against new granada we have long - standing causes of complaint , arising out of the unsatisfied claims of our citizens upon that republic , and to these have been more recently added the outrages committed upon our citizens at panama in april , 1856 .
a treaty for the adjustment of these difficulties was concluded by the secretary of state and the minister of new granada in september , 1857 , which contained just and acceptable provisions for that purpose .
this treaty was transmitted to bogota and was ratified by the government of new granada , but with certain amendments .
it was not , however , returned to this city until after the close of the last session of the senate .
it will be immediately transmitted to that body for their advice and consent , and should this be obtained it will remove all our existing causes of complaint against new granada on the subject of claims .
questions have arisen between the two governments as to the right of new granada to levy a tonnage duty upon the vessels of the united states in its ports of the isthmus and to levy a passenger tax upon our citizens arriving in that country , whether with a design to remain there or to pass from ocean to ocean by the transit route ; and also a tax upon the mail of the united states transported over the panama railroad .
the government of new granada has been informed that the united states would consider the collection of either of these taxes as an act in violation of the treaty between the two countries , and as such would be resisted by the united states .
at the same time , we are prepared to discuss these questions in a spirit of amity and justice and with a sincere desire to adjust them in a satisfactory manner .
a negotiation for that purpose has already been commenced .
no effort has recently been made to collect these taxes nor is any anticipated under present circumstances .
with the empire of brazil our relations are of the most friendly character .
the productions of the two countries , and especially those of an agricultural nature , are such as to invite extensive mutual exchanges .
a large quantity of american flour is consumed in brazil , whilst more than treble the amount in value of brazilian coffee is consumed in the united states .
whilst this is the case , a heavy duty has been levied until very recently upon the importation of american flour into brazil .
i am gratified , however , to be able to inform you that in september last this has been reduced from $ 1.32 to about 49 cents per barrel , and the duties on other articles of our production have been diminished in nearly the same proportion .
i regret to state that the government of brazil still continues to levy an export duty of about 11 per cent on coffee , notwithstanding this article is admitted free from duty in the united states .
this is a heavy charge upon the consumers of coffee in our country , as we purchase half of the entire surplus crop of that article raised in brazil .
our minister , under instructions , will reiterate his efforts to have this export duty removed , and it is hoped that the enlightened government of the emperor will adopt this wise , just , and equal policy .
in that event , there is good reason to believe that the commerce between the two countries will greatly increase , much to the advantage of both .
the claims of our citizens against the government of brazil are not in the aggregate of very large amount ; but some of these rest upon plain principles of justice and their settlement ought not to be longer delayed .
a renewed and earnest , and i trust a successful , effort will be made by our minister to procure their final adjustment .
on the 2d of june last congress passed a joint resolution authorizing the president " to adopt such measures and use such force as in his judgment may be necessary and advisable " " for the the purpose of the differences between the united states and the republic of paraguay , in connection with the attack on the united states steamer water witch and with other measures referred to " in his annual message , and on the 12th of july following they made an appropriation to defray the expenses and compensation of a commissioner to that republic should the president deem it proper to make such all appointment .
in compliance with these enactments , i have appointed a commissioner , who has proceeded to paraguay with full powers and instructions to settle these differences in an amicable and peaceful manner if this be practicable .
his experience and discretion justify the hope that he may prove successful in convincing the paraguayan government that it is due both to honor and justice that they should voluntarily and promptly make atonement for the wrongs which they have committed against the united states and indemnify our injured citizens whom they have forcibly despoiled of their property .
should our commissioner prove unsuccessful after a sincere and earnest effort to accomplish the object of his mission , then no alternative will remain but the employment of force to obtain " just satisfaction " from paraguay .
in view of this contingency , the secretary of the navy , under my direction , has fitted out and dispatched a naval force to rendezvous near buenos ayres , which , it is believed , will prove sufficient for the occasion .
it is my earnest desire , however , that it may not be found necessary to resort to this last alternative .
when congress met in december last the business of the country had just been crushed by one of those periodical revulsions which are the inevitable consequence of our unsound and extravagant system of bank credits and inflated currency .
with all the elements of national wealth in abundance , our manufactures were suspended , our useful public and private enterprises were arrested , and thousands of laborers were deprived of employment and reduced to want .
universal distress prevailed among the commercial , manufacturing , and mechanical classes .
this revulsion was felt the more severely in the united states because similar causes had produced the like deplorable effects throughout the commercial nations of europe .
all were experiencing sad reverses at the same moment .
our manufacturers everywhere suffered severely , not because of the recent reduction in the tariff of duties on imports , but because there was no demand at any price for their productions .
the people were obliged to restrict themselves in their purchases to articles of prime necessity .
in the general prostration of business the iron manufacturers in different states probably suffered more than any other class , and much destitution was the inevitable consequence among the great number of workmen who had been employed in this useful branch of industry .
there could be no supply where there was no demand .
to present an example , there could be no demand for railroad iron after our magnificent system of railroads , extending its benefits to every portion of the union , had been brought to a dead pause .
the same consequences have resulted from similar causes to many other branches of useful manufactures .
it is self - evident that where there is no ability to purchase manufactured articles these can not be sold , and consequently must cease to be produced .
no government , and especially a government of such limited powers as that of the united states , could have prevented the late revulsion .
the whole commercial world seemed for years to have been rushing to this catastrophe .
the same ruinous consequences would have followed in the united states whether the duties upon foreign imports had remained as they were under the tariff of 1846 or had been raised to a much higher standard .
the tariff of 1857 had no agency in the result .
the general causes existing throughout the world could not have been controlled by the legislation of any particular country .
the periodical revulsions which have existed in our past history must continue to return at intervals so long as our present unbounded system of bank credits shall prevail .
they will , however , probably be the less severe in future , because it is not to be expected , at least for many years to come , that the commercial nations of europe , with whose interests our own are so materially involved , will expose themselves to similar calamities .
but this subject was treated so much at large in my last annual message that i shall not now pursue it further .
still , i respectfully renew the recommendation in favor of the passage of a uniform bankrupt law applicable to banking institutions .
this is all the direct power over the subject which i believe the federal government possesses .
such a law would mitigate , though it might not prevent , the evil .
the instinct of self - preservation might produce a wholesome restraint upon their banking business if they knew in advance that a suspension of specie payments would inevitably produce their civil death .
but the effects of the revulsion are now slowly but surely passing away .
the energy and enterprise of our citizens , with our unbounded resources , will within the period of another year restore a state of wholesome industry and trade .
capital has again accumulated in our large cities .
the rate of interest is there very low .
confidence is gradually reviving , and so soon as it is discovered that this capital can be profitably employed in commercial and manufacturing enterprises and in the construction of railroads and other works of public and private improvement prosperity will again smile throughout the land .
it is vain , however , to disguise the fact from ourselves that a speculative inflation of our currency without a corresponding inflation in other countries whose manufactures come into competition with our own must ever produce disastrous results to our domestic manufactures .
no tariff short of absolute prohibition can prevent these evil consequences .
in connection with this subject it is proper to refer to our financial condition .
the same causes which have produced pecuniary distress throughout the country have so reduced the amount of imports from foreign countries that the revenue has proved inadequate to meet the necessary expenses of the government .
to supply the deficiency , congress , by the act of december 23 , 1857 , authorized the issue of $ 20,000,000 of treasury notes ; and this proving inadequate , they authorized , by the act of june 14 , 1858 , a loan of $ 20,000,000 , " to be applied to the payment of appropriations made by law."no statesman would advise that we should go on increasing the national debt to meet the ordinary expenses of the government .
this would be a most ruinous policy .
in case of war our credit must be our chief resource , at least for the first year , and this would be greatly impaired by having contracted a large debt in time of peace .
it is our true policy to increase our revenue so as to equal our expenditures .
it would be ruinous to continue to borrow .
besides , it may be proper to observe that the incidental protection thus afforded by a revenue tariff would at the present moment to some extent increase the confidence of the manufacturing interests and give a fresh impulse to our reviving business .
to this surely no person will object .
in regard to the mode of assessing and collecting duties under a strictly revenue tariff , i have long entertained and often expressed the opinion that sound policy requires this should be done by specific duties in cases to which these can be properly applied .
they are well adapted to commodities which are usually sold by weight or by measure , and which from their nature are of equal or of nearly equal value .
such , for example , are the articles of iron of different classes , raw sugar , and foreign wines and spirits .
in my deliberate judgment specific duties are the best , if not the only , means of securing the revenue against false and fraudulent invoices , and such has been the practice adopted for this purpose by other commercial nations .
besides , specific duties would afford to the american manufacturer the incidental advantages to which he is fairly entitled under a revenue tariff .
the present system is a sliding scale to his disadvantage .
under it , when prices are high and business prosperous , the duties rise in amount when he least requires their aid .
on the contrary , when prices fall and he is struggling against adversity , the duties are diminished in the same proportion , greatly to his injury .
neither would there be danger that a higher rate of duty than that intended by congress could be levied in the form of specific duties .
it would be easy to ascertain the average value of any imported article for a series of years , and , instead of subjecting it to an ad valorem duty at a certain rate per centum , to substitute in its place an equivalent specific duty .
by such an arrangement the consumer would not be injured .
it is true he might have to pay a little more duty on a given article in one year , but , if so , he would pay a little less in another , and in a series of years these would counterbalance each other and amount to the same thing so far as his interest is concerned .
this inconvenience would be trifling when contrasted with the additional security thus afforded against frauds upon the revenue , in which every consumer is directly interested .
i have thrown out these suggestions as the fruit of my own observation , to which congress , in their better judgment , will give such weight as they may justly deserve .
the report of the secretary of the treasury will explain in detail the operations of that department of the government .
the receipts into the treasury from all sources during the fiscal year ending june 30 , 1858 , including the treasury notes authorized by the act of december 23 , 1857 , were $ 70,273,869.59 , which amount , with the balance of $ 17,710,114.27 remaining in the treasury at the commencement of the year , made an aggregate for the service of the year of $ 87,983,983.86.the public expenditures during the fiscal year ending june 30 , 1858 , amounted to $ 81,585,667.76 , of which $ 9,684,537.99 were applied to the payment of the public debt and the redemption of treasury notes with the interest thereon , leaving in the treasury on july 1 , 1858 , being the commencement of the present fiscal year , $ 6,398,316.10.the receipts into the treasury during the first quarter of the present fiscal year , commencing the 1st of july , 1858 , including one - half of the loan of $ 20,000,000 , with the premium upon it , authorized by the act of june 14 , 1858 , were $ 25,230,879.46 , and the estimated receipts for the remaining three quarters to the 30th of june , 1859 , from ordinary sources are $ 38,500,000 , making , with the balance before stated , an aggregate of $ 70,129,195.56.the expenditures during the first quarter of the present fiscal year were $ 21,708,198.51 , of which $ 1,010,142.37 were applied to the payment of the public debt and the redemption of treasury notes and the interest thereon .
the estimated expenditures during the remaining three quarters to june 30 , 1859 , are $ 52,357,698.48 , making an aggregate of $ 74,065,896.99 , being an excess of expenditure beyond the estimated receipts into the treasury from ordinary sources during the fiscal year to the 30th of june , 1859 , of $ 3,936,701.43 .
extraordinary means are placed by law within the command of the secretary of the treasury , by the reissue of treasury notes redeemed and by negotiating the balance of the loan authorized by the act of june 14 , 1858 , to the extent of $ 11,000,000 , which , if realized during the present fiscal year , will leave a balance in the treasury on the 1st day of july , 1859 , of $ 7,063,298.57.the estimated receipts during the next fiscal year , ending june 30 , 1860 , are $ 62,000,000 , which , with the above - estimated balance of $ 7,063,298.57 make an aggregate for the service of the next fiscal year of $ 69,063,298.57 .
the estimated expenditures during the next fiscal year , ending june 30 , 1860 , are $ 73,139,147.46 , which leaves a deficit of estimated means , compared with the estimated expenditures , for that year , commencing on july 1 , 1859 , of $ 4,075,848.89.in addition to this sum the postmaster - general will require from the treasury for the service of the post - office department $ 3,838,728 , as explained in the report of the secretary of the treasury , which will increase the estimated deficit on june 30 , 1860 , to $ 7,914,576.89 .
to provide for the payment of this estimated deficiency , which will be increased by such appropriations as may be made by congress not estimated for in the report of the treasury department , as well as to provide for the gradual redemption from year to year of the outstanding treasury notes , the secretary of the treasury recommends such a revision of the present tariff as will raise the required amount .
after what i have already said i need scarcely add that i concur in the opinion expressed in his report -- that the public debt should not be increased by an additional loan -- and would therefore strongly urge upon congress the duty of making at their present session the necessary provision for meeting these liabilities .
the public debt on july 1 , 1858 , the commencement of the present fiscal year , was $ 25,155,977.66.during the first quarter of the present year the sum of $ 10,000,000 has been negotiated of the loan authorized by the act of june 14 , 1858 , making the present outstanding public debt , exclusive of treasury notes , $ 35,155,977.66 .
there was on the 1st of july , 1858 , of treasury notes issued by authority of the act of december 23 , 1857 , unredeemed , the sum of $ 19,754,800 , making the amount of actual indebtedness at that date $ 54,910,777.66 .
to this will be added $ 10,000,000 during the present fiscal year , this being the remaining half of the loan of $ 20,000,000 not yet negotiated .
the rapid increase of the public debt and the necessity which exists for a modification of the tariff to meet even the ordinary expenses of the government ought to admonish us all , in our respective spheres of duty , to the practice of rigid economy .
the objects of expenditure should be limited in number , as far as this may be practicable , and the appropriations necessary to carry them into effect ought to be disbursed under the strictest accountability .
enlightened economy does not consist in the refusal to appropriate money for constitutional purposes essential to the defense , progress , and prosperity of the republic , but in taking care that none of this money shall be wasted by mismanagement in its application to the objects designated by law .
comparisons between the annual expenditure at the present time and what it was ten or twenty years ago are altogether fallacious .
the rapid increase of our country in extent and population renders a corresponding increase of expenditure to some extent unavoidable .
this is constantly creating new objects of expenditure and augmenting the amount required for the old .
the true questions , then , are , have these objects been unnecessarily multiplied , or has the amount expended upon any or all of them been larger than comports with due economy ?
in accordance with these principles , the heads of the different executive departments of the government have been instructed to reduce their estimates for the next fiscal year to the lowest standard consistent with the efficiency of the service , and this duty they have performed in a spirit of just economy .
the estimates of the treasury , war , navy , and interior departments have each been in some degree reduced , and unless a sudden and unforeseen emergency should arise it is not anticipated that a deficiency will exist in either within the present or the next fiscal year .
the post - office department is placed in a peculiar position , different from the other departments , and to this i shall hereafter refer .
i invite congress to institute a rigid scrutiny to ascertain whether the expenses in all the departments can not be still further reduced , and i promise them all the aid in my power in pursuing the investigation .
i transmit herewith the reports made to me by the secretaries of war , of the navy , of the interior , and of the postmaster - general .
they each contain valuable information and important recommendations , to which i invite the attention of congress .
in my last annual message i took occasion to recommend the immediate construction of ten small steamers of light draft , for the purpose of increasing the efficiency of the navy .
congress responded to the recommendation by authorizing the construction of eight of them .
the progress which has been made in executing this authority is stated in the report of the secretary of the navy .
i concur with him in the opinion that a greater number of this class of vessels is necessary for the purpose of protecting in a more efficient manner the persons and property of american citizens on the high seas and in foreign countries , as well as in guarding more effectually our own coasts .
i accordingly recommend the passage of an act for this purpose .
the suggestions contained in the report of the secretary of the interior , especially those in regard to the disposition of the public domain , the pension and bounty - land system , the policy toward the indians , and the amendment of our patent laws , are worthy of the serious consideration of congress .
the post - office department occupies a position very different from that of the other departments .
for many years it was the policy of the government to render this a self - sustaining department ; and if this can not now be accomplished , in the present condition of the country , we ought to make as near an approach to it as may be practicable .
the postmaster - general is placed in a most embarrassing position by the existing laws .
he is obliged to carry these into effect .
he has no other alternative .
he finds , however , that this can not be done without heavy demands upon the treasury over and above what is received for postage , and these have been progressively increasing from year to year until they amounted for the last fiscal year , ending on the 30th of june , 1858 , to more than $ 4,500,000 , whilst it is estimated that for the present fiscal year they will amount to $ 6,290,000 .
these sums are exclusive of the annual appropriation of $ 700,000 for " compensation for the mail service performed for the two houses of congress and the other departments and officers of the government in the transmission of free matter."the cause of these large deficits is mainly attributable to the increased expense of transporting the mails .
in 1852 the sum paid for this service was but a fraction above four millions and a quarter .
since that year it has annually increased , until in 1858 it has reached more than eight millions and a quarter , and for the service of 1859 it is estimated that it will amount to more than $ 10,000,000.the receipts of the post - office department can be made to approach or to equal its expenditure only by means of the legislation of congress .
in applying any remedy care should be taken that the people shall not be deprived of the advantages which they are fairly entitled to enjoy from the post - office department .
the principal remedies recommended to the consideration of congress by the postmaster - general are to restore the former rate of postage upon single letters to 5 cents ; to substitute for the franking privilege the delivery to those now entitled to enjoy it of post - office stamps for their correspondence , and to direct the department in making contracts for the transportation of the mail to confine itself to the payment of the sum necessary for this single purpose , without requiring it to be transported in post coaches or carriages of any particular description .
under the present system the expense to the government is greatly increased by requiring that the mail shall be carried in such vehicles as will accommodate passengers .
this will be done , without pay from the department , over all roads where the travel will remunerate the contractors .
these recommendations deserve the grave consideration of congress .
i would again call your attention to the construction of a pacific railroad .
time and reflection have but served to confirm me in the truth and justice of the observations which i made on this subject in my last annual message , to which i beg leave respectfully to refer .
it is freely admitted that it would be inexpedient for this government to exercise the power of constructing the pacific railroad by its own immediate agents .
such a policy would increase the patronage of the executive to a dangerous extent , and introduce a system of jobbing and corruption which no vigilance on the part of federal officials could either prevent or detect .
this can only be done by the keen eye and active and careful supervision of individual and private interest .
the construction of this road ought therefore to be committed to companies incorporated by the states or other agencies whose pecuniary interests would be directly involved .
congress might then assist them in the work by grants of land or of money , or both , under such conditions and restrictions as would secure the transportation of troops and munitions of war free from any charge and that of the united states mail at a fair and reasonable price .
the progress of events since the commencement of your last session has shown how soon difficulties disappear before a firm and determined resolution .
at that time such a road was deemed by wise and patriotic men to be a visionary project .
the great distance to be overcome and the intervening mountains and deserts in the way were obstacles which , in the opinion of many , could not be surmounted .
now , after the lapse of but a single year , these obstacles , it has been discovered , are far less formidable than they were supposed to be , and mail stages with passengers now pass and repass regularly twice in each week , by a common wagon road , between san francisco and st. louis and memphis in less than twenty - five days .
the service has been as regularly performed as it was in former years between new york and this city .
whilst disclaiming all authority to appropriate money for the construction of this road , except that derived from the war - making power of the constitution , there are important collateral considerations urging us to undertake the work as speedily as possible .
the first and most momentous of these is that such a road would be a powerful bond of union between the states east and west of the rocky mountains .
this is so self - evident as to require no illustration .
but again , in a commercial point of view , i consider this the great question of the day .
with the eastern front of our republic stretching along the atlantic and its western front along the pacific , if all the parts should be united by a safe , easy , and rapid intercommunication we must necessarily command a very large proportion of the trade both of europe and asia .
our recent treaties with china and japan will open these rich and populous empires to our commerce ; and the history of the world proves that the nation which has gained possession of the trade with eastern asia has always become wealthy and powerful .
the peculiar geographical position of california and our pacific possessions invites american capital and enterprise into this fruitful field .
to reap the rich harvest , however , it is an indispensable prerequisite that we shall first have a railroad to convey and circulate its products throughout every portion of the union .
besides , such a railroad through our temperate latitude , which would not be impeded by the frosts and snows of winter nor by the tropical heats of summer , would attract to itself much of the travel and the trade of all nations passing between europe and asia .
on the 21st of august last lieutenant j. n. maffit , of the united states brig dolphin , captured the slaver echo ( formerly the putnam , of new orleans ) near kay verde , on the coast of cuba , with more than 300 african negroes on board .
the prize , under the command of lieutenant bradford , of the united states navy , arrived at charleston on the 27th august , when the negroes , 306 in number , were delivered into the custody of the united states marshal for the district of south carolina .
they were first placed in castle pinckney , and afterwards in fort sumter , for safe - keeping , and were detained there until the 19th september , when the survivors , 271 in number , were delivered on board the united states steamer niagara to be transported to the coast of africa under the charge of the agent of the united states , pursuant to the provisions of the act of the 3d march , 1819 , " in addition to the acts prohibiting the slave trade . "
under the second section of this act the president is " authorized to make such regulations and arrangements as he may deem expedient for the safe - keeping , support , and removal beyond the limits of the united states of all such negroes , mulattoes , or persons of color " captured by vessels of the united states as may be delivered to the marshal of the district into which they are brought , " and to appoint a proper person or persons residing upon the coast of africa as agent or agents for receiving the negroes , mulattoes , or persons of color delivered from on board vessels seized in the prosecution of the slave trade by commanders of united states armed vessels."a doubt immediately arose as to the true construction of this act .
it is quite clear from its terms that the president was authorized to provide " for the safe - keeping , support , and removal " of these negroes up till the time of their delivery to the agent on the coast of africa , but no express provision was made for their protection and support after they had reached the place of their destination .
still , an agent was to be pointed to receive them in africa , and it could not have been supposed that congress intended he should desert them at the moment they were received and turn them loose on that inhospitable coast to perish for want of food or to become again the victims of the slave trade .
had this been the intention of congress , the employment of an agent to receive them , who is required to reside on the coast , was unnecessary , and they might have been landed by our vessels anywhere in africa and left exposed to the sufferings and the fate which would certainly await them .
mr. monroe , in his special message of december 17 , 1819 , at the first session after the act was passed , announced to congress what in his opinion was its true construction .
he believed it to be his duty under it to follow these unfortunates into africa and make provision for them there until they should be able to provide for themselves .
in communicating this interpretation of the act to congress he stated that some doubt had been entertained as to its true intent and meaning , and he submitted the question to them so that they might , " should it be deemed advisable , amend the same before further proceedings are had under it . "
nothing was done by congress to explain the act , and mr. monroe proceeded to carry it into execution according to his own interpretation .
this , then , became the practical construction .
when the africans from on board the echo were delivered to the marshal at charleston , it became my duty to consider what disposition ought to be made of them under the law .
for many reasons it was expedient to remove them from that locality as speedily as possible .
although the conduct of the authorities and citizens of charleston in giving countenance to the execution of the law was just what might have been expected from their high character , yet a prolonged continuance of 300 africans in the immediate vicinity of that city could not have failed to become a source of inconvenience and anxiety to its inhabitants .
where to send them was the question .
there was no portion of the coast of africa to which they could be removed with any regard to humanity except to liberia .
under these circumstances an agreement was entered into with the colonization society on the 7th of september last , a copy of which is herewith transmitted , under which the society engaged , for the consideration of $ 45,000 , to receive these africans in liberia from the agent of the united states and furnish them during the period of one year thereafter with comfortable shelter , clothing , provisions , and medical attendance , causing the children to receive schooling , and all , whether children or adults , to be instructed in the arts of civilized life suitable to their condition .
this aggregate of $ 45,000 was based upon an allowance of $ 150 for each individual ; and as there has been considerable mortality among them and may be more before they reach africa , the society have agreed , in an equitable spirit , to make such a deduction from the amount as under the circumstances may appear just and reasonable .
this can not be fixed until we shall ascertain the actual number which may become a charge to the society .
it was also distinctly agreed that under no circumstances shall this government be called upon for any additional expenses .
the agents of the society manifested a laudable desire to conform to the wishes of the government throughout the transaction .
they assured me that after a careful calculation they would be required to expend the sum of $ 150 on each individual in complying with the agreement , and they would have nothing left to remunerate them for their care , trouble , and responsibility .
at all events , i could make no better arrangement , and there was no other alternative .
during the period when the government itself , through its own agents , undertook the task of providing for captured negroes in africa the cost per head was very much greater .
there having been no outstanding appropriation applicable to this purpose , i could not advance any money on the agreement .
i therefore recommend that an appropriation may be made of the amount necessary to carry it into effect .
other captures of a similar character may , and probably will , be made by our naval forces , and i earnestly recommend that congress may amend the second section of the act of march 3 , 1819 , so as to free its construction from the ambiguity which has so long existed and render the duty of the president plain in executing its provisions .
i recommend to your favorable regard the local interests of the district of columbia .
as the residence of congress and the executive departments of the government , we can not fail to feel a deep concern in its welfare .
this is heightened by the high character and the peaceful and orderly conduct of its resident inhabitants .
i can not conclude without performing the agreeable duty of expressing my gratification that congress so kindly responded to the recommendation of my last annual message by affording me sufficient time before the close of their late session for the examination of all the bills presented to me for approval .
this change in the practice of congress has proved to be a wholesome reform .
it exerted a beneficial influence on the transaction of legislative business and elicited the general approbation of the country .
it enabled congress to adjourn with that dignity and deliberation so becoming to the representatives of this great republic , without having crowded into general appropriation bills provisions foreign to their nature and of doubtful constitutionality and expediency .
let me warmly and strongly commend this precedent established by themselves as a guide to their proceedings during the present session .

to the house of representatives of the united states : 
 i return with my objections to the house of representatives , in which it originated , the bill entitled " an act donating public lands to the several states and territories which may provide colleges for the benefit of agriculture and the mechanic arts , " presented to me on the 18th instant .
this bill makes a donation to the several states of 20,000 acres of the public lands for each senator and representative in the present congress , and also an additional donation of 20,000 acres for each additional representative to which any state may be entitled under the census of 1860 .
according to a report from the interior department , based upon the present number of senators and representatives , the lands given to the states amount to 6,060,000 acres , and their value , at the minimum government price of $ 1.25 per acre , to $ 7,575,000 .
the object of this gift , as stated by the bill , is " the endowment , support , and maintenance of at least one college ( in each state ) where the leading object shall be , without excluding other scientific or classical studies , to teach such branches of learning as are related to agriculture and the mechanic arts , as the legislatures of the states may respectively prescribe , in order to promote the liberal and practical education of the industrial classes in the several pursuits and professions in life . "
as there does not appear from the bill to be any beneficiaries in existence to which this endowment can be applied , each state is required " to provide , within five years at least , not less than one college , or the grant to said state shall cease . "
in that event the " said state shall be bound to pay the united states the amount received of any lands previously sold , and that the title to purchasers under the state shall be valid . "
the grant in land itself is confined to such states as have public lands within their limits worth $ 1.25 per acre in the opinion of the governor .
for the remaining states the secretary of the interior is directed to issue " land scrip to the amount of their distributive shares in acres under the provisions of this act , said scrip to be sold by said states , and the proceeds thereof applied to the uses and purposes prescribed in this act , and for no other use or purpose whatsoever . "
the lands are granted and the scrip is to be issued " in sections or subdivisions of sections of not less than one - quarter of a section . "
according to an estimate from the interior department , the number of acres which will probably be accepted by states having public lands within their own limits will not exceed 580,000 acres ( and it may be much less ) , leaving a balance of 5,480,000 acres to be provided for by scrip .
these grants of land and land scrip to each of the thirty - three states are made upon certain conditions , the principal of which is that if the fund shall be lost or diminished on account of unfortunate investments or otherwise the deficiency shall be replaced and made good by the respective states .
i shall now proceed to state my objections to this bill .
i deem it to be both inexpedient and unconstitutional .
1 .
this bill has been passed at a period when we can with great difficulty raise sufficient revenue to sustain the expenses of the government .
should it become a law the treasury will be deprived of the whole , or nearly the whole , of our income from the sale of public lands , which for the next fiscal year has been estimated at $ 5,000,000 .
a bare statement of the case will make this evident .
the minimum price at which we dispose of our lands is $ 1.25 per acre .
at the present moment , however , the price has been reduced to those who purchase the bounty - land warrants of the old soldiers to 85 cents per acre , and of these warrants there are still outstanding and unlocated , as appears by a report ( february 12 , 1859 ) from the general land office , the amount of 11,990,391 acres .
this has already greatly reduced the current sales by the government and diminished the revenue from this source .
if in addition thirty - three states shall enter the market with their land scrip , the price must be greatly reduced below even 85 cents per acre , as much to the prejudice of the old soldiers who have not already parted with their land warrants as to government .
it is easy to perceive that with this glut of the market government can sell little or no lands at $ 1.25 per acre , when the price of bounty - land warrants and scrip shall be reduced to half this sum .
this source of revenue will be almost entirely dried up .
under the bill the states may sell their land scrip at any price it may bring .
there is no limitation whatever in this respect .
indeed , they must sell for what the scrip will bring , for without this fund they can not proceed to establish their colleges within the five years to which they are limited .
it is manifest , therefore , that to the extent to which this bill will prevent the sale of public lands at $ 1.25 per acre , to that amount it will have precisely the same effect upon the treasury as if we should impose a tax to create a loan to endow these state colleges .
surely the present is the most unpropitious moment which could have been selected for the passage of this bill .
2 .
waiving for the present the question of constitutional power , what effect will this bill have on the relations established between the federal and state governments ?
the constitution is a grant to congress of a few enumerated but most important powers , relating chiefly to war , peace , foreign and domestic commerce , negotiation , and other subjects which can be best or alone exercised beneficially by the common government .
all other powers are reserved to the states and to the people .
for the efficient and harmonious working of both , it is necessary that their several spheres of action should be kept distinct from each other .
this alone can prevent conflict and mutual injury .
should the time ever arrive when the state governments shall look to the federal treasury for the means of supporting themselves and maintaining their systems of education and internal policy , the character of both governments will be greatly deteriorated .
the representatives of the states and of the people , feeling a more immediate interest in obtaining money to lighten the burdens of their constituents than for the promotion of the more distant objects intrusted to the federal government , will naturally incline to obtain means from the federal government for state purposes .
if a question shall arise between an appropriation of land or money to carry into effect the objects of the federal government and those of the states , their feelings will be enlisted in favor of the latter .
this is human nature ; and hence the necessity of keeping the two governments entirely distinct .
the preponderance of this home feeling has been manifested by the passage of the present bill .
the establishment of these colleges has prevailed over the pressing wants of the common treasury .
no nation ever had such an inheritance as we possess in the public lands .
these ought to be managed with the utmost care , but at the same time with a liberal spirit toward actual settlers .
in the first year of a war with a powerful naval nation the revenue from customs must in a great degree cease .
a resort to loans will then become necessary , and these can always be obtained , as our fathers obtained them , on advantageous terms by pledging the public lands as security .
in this view of the subject it would be wiser to grant money to the states for domestic purposes than to squander away the public lands and transfer them in large bodies into the hands of speculators .
a successful struggle on the part of the state governments with the general government for the public lands would deprive the latter of the means of performing its high duties , especially at critical and dangerous periods .
besides , it would operate with equal detriment to the best interests of the states .
it would remove the most wholesome of all restraints on legislative bodies -- that of being obliged to raise money by taxation from their constituents -- and would lead to extravagance , if not to corruption .
what is obtained easily and without responsibility will be lavishly expended .
3 .
this bill , should it become a law , will operate greatly to the injury of the new states .
the progress of settlements and the increase of an industrious population owning an interest in the soil they cultivate are the causes which will build them up into great and flourishing commonwealths .
nothing could be more prejudicial to their interests than for wealthy individuals to acquire large tracts of the public land and hold them for speculative purposes .
the low price to which this land scrip will probably be reduced will tempt speculators to buy it in large amounts and locate it on the best lands belonging to the government .
the eventual consequence must be that the men who desire to cultivate the soil will be compelled to purchase these very lands at rates much higher than the price at which they could be obtained from the government .
4 .
it is extremely doubtful , to say the least , whether this bill would contribute to the advancement of agriculture and the mechanic arts -- objects the dignity and value of which can not be too highly appreciated .
the federal government , which makes the donation , has confessedly no constitutional power to follow it into the states and enforce the application of the fund to the intended objects .
as donors we shall possess no control over our own gift after it shall have passed from our hands .
it is true that the state legislatures are required to stipulate that they will faithfully execute the trust in the manner prescribed by the bill .
but should they fail to do this , what would be the consequence ?
the federal government has no power , and ought to have no power , to compel the execution of the trust .
it would be in as helpless a condition as if , even in this , the time of great need , we were to demand any portion of the many millions of surplus revenue deposited with the states for safekeeping under the act of 1836 .
5 .
this bill will injuriously interfere with existing colleges in the different states , in many of which agriculture is taught as a science and in all of which it ought to be so taught .
these institutions of learning have grown up with the growth of the country , under the fostering care of the states and the munificence of individuals , to meet the advancing demands for education .
they have proved great blessings to the people .
many , indeed most , of them are poor and sustain themselves with difficulty .
what the effect will be on these institutions of creating an indefinite number of rival colleges sustained by the endowment of the federal government it is not difficult to determine .
under this bill it is provided that scientific and classical studies shall not be excluded from them .
indeed , it would be almost impossible to sustain them without such a provision , for no father would incur the expense of sending a son to one of these institutions for the sole purpose of making him a scientific farmer or mechanic .
the bill itself negatives this idea , and declares that their object is " to promote the liberal and practical education of the industrial classes in the several pursuits and professions of life . "
this certainly ought to be the case .
in this view of the subject it would be far better , if such an appropriation of land must be made to institutions of learning in the several states , to apply it directly to the establishment of professorships of agriculture and the mechanic arts in existing colleges , without the intervention of the state legislatures .
it would be difficult to foresee how these legislatures will manage this fund .
each representative in congress for whose district the proportion of 20,000 acres has been granted will probably insist that the proceeds shall be expended within its limits .
there will undoubtedly be a struggle between different localities in each state concerning the division of the gift , which may end in disappointing the hopes of the true friends of agriculture .
for this state of things we are without remedy .
not so in regard to state colleges .
we might grant land to these corporations to establish agricultural and mechanical professorships , and should they fail to comply with the conditions on which they accepted the grant we might enforce specific performance of these before the ordinary courts of justice .
6 .
but does congress possess the power under the constitution to make a donation of public lands to the different states of the union to provide colleges for the purpose of educating their own people ?
i presume the general proposition is undeniable that congress does not possess the power to appropriate money in the treasury , raised by taxes on the people of the united states , for the purpose of educating the people of the respective states .
it will not be pretended that any such power is to be found among the specific powers granted to congress nor that " it is necessary and proper for carrying into execution " any one of these powers .
should congress exercise such a power , this would be to break down the barriers which have been so carefully constructed in the constitution to separate federal from state authority .
we should then not only " lay and collect taxes , duties , imposts , and excises " for federal purposes , but for every state purpose which congress might deem expedient or useful .
this would be an actual consolidation of the federal and state governments so far as the great taxing and money power is concerned , and constitute a sort of partnership between the two in the treasury of the united states , equally ruinous to both .
but it is contended that the public lands are placed upon a different footing from money raised by taxation and that the proceeds arising from their sale are not subject to the limitations of the constitution , but may be appropriated or given away by congress , at its own discretion , to states , corporations , or individuals for any purpose they may deem expedient .
the advocates of this bill attempt to sustain their position upon the language of the second clause of the third section of the fourth article of the constitution , which declares that " the congress shall have power to dispose of and make all needful rules and regulations respecting the territory or other property belonging to the united states . "
they contend that by a fair interpretation of the words " dispose of " in this clause congress possesses the power to make this gift of public lands to the states for purposes of education .
it would require clear and strong evidence to induce the belief that the framers of the constitution , after having limited the powers of congress to certain precise and specific objects , intended by employing the words " dispose of " to give that body unlimited power over the vast public domain .
it would be a strange anomaly , indeed , to have created two funds -- the one by taxation , confined to the execution of the enumerated powers delegated to congress , and the other from the public lands , applicable to all subjects , foreign and domestic , which congress might designate ; that this fund should be " disposed of , " not to pay the debts of the united states , nor " to raise and support armies , " nor " to provide and maintain a navy , " nor to accomplish any one of the other great objects enumerated in the constitution , but be diverted from them to pay the debts of the states , to educate their people , and to carry into effect any other measure of their domestic policy .
this would be to confer upon congress a vast and irresponsible authority , utterly at war with the well - known jealousy of federal power which prevailed at the formation of the constitution .
the natural intendment would be that as the constitution confined congress to well - defined specific powers , the funds placed at their command , whether in land or money , should be appropriated to the performance of the duties corresponding with these powers .
if not , a government has been created with all its other powers carefully limited , but without any limitation in respect to the public lands .
but i can not so read the words " dispose of " as to make them embrace the idea of " giving away . "
the true meaning of words is always to be ascertained by the subject to which they are applied and the known general intent of the lawgiver .
congress is a trustee under the constitution for the people of the united states to " dispose of " their public lands , and i think i may venture to assert with confidence that no case can be found in which a trustee in the position of congress has been authorized to " dispose of " property by its owner where it has been held that these words authorized such trustee to give away the fund intrusted to his care .
no trustee , when called upon to account for the disposition of the property placed under his management before any judicial tribunal , would venture to present such a plea in his defense .
the true meaning of these words is clearly stated by chief justice taney in delivering the opinion of the court ( 19 howard , p. 436 ) .
he says in reference to this clause of the constitution : 
 it begins its enumeration of powers by that of disposing ; in other words , making sale of the lands or raising money from them , which , as we have already said , was the main object of the cession ( from the states ) , and which is the first thing provided for in the article .
it is unnecessary to refer to the history of the times to establish the known fact that this statement of the chief justice is perfectly well rounded .
that it never was intended by the framers of the constitution that these lands should be given away by congress is manifest from the concluding portion of the same clause .
by it congress has power not only " to dispose of " the territory , but of the " other property of the united states . "
in the language of the chief justice ( p. 437 ) : 
 and the same power of making needful rules respecting the territory is in precisely the same language applied to the other property of the united states , associating the power over the territory in this respect with the power over movable or personal property ; that is , the ships , arms , or munitions of war which then belonged in common to the state sovereignties .
the question is still clearer in regard to the public lands in the states and territories within the louisiana and florida purchases .
these lands were paid for out of the public treasury from money raised by taxation .
now if congress had no power to appropriate the money with which these lands were purchased , is it not clear that the power over the lands is equally limited ?
the mere conversion of this money into land could not confer upon congress new power over the disposition of land which they had not possessed over money .
if it could , then a trustee , by changing the character of the fund intrusted to his care for special objects from money into land , might give the land away or devote it to any purpose he thought proper , however foreign from the trust .
the inference is irresistible that this land partakes of the very same character with the money paid for it , and can be devoted to no objects different from those to which the money could have been devoted .
if this were not the case , then by the purchase of a new territory from a foreign government out of the public treasury congress could enlarge their own powers and appropriate the proceeds of the sales of the land thus purchased , at their own discretion , to other and far different objects from what they could have applied the purchase money which had been raised by taxation .
it has been asserted truly that congress in numerous instances have granted lands for the purposes of education .
these grants have been chiefly , if not exclusively , made to the new states as they successively entered the union , and consisted at the first of one section and afterwards of two sections of the public land in each township for the use of schools , as well as of additional sections for a state university .
such grants are not , in my opinion , a violation of the constitution .
the united states is a great landed proprietor , and from the very nature of this relation it is both the right and the duty of congress as their trustee to manage these lands as any other prudent proprietor would manage them for his own best advantage .
now no consideration could be presented of a stronger character to induce the american people to brave the difficulties and hardships of frontier life and to settle upon these lands and to purchase them at a fair price than to give to them and to their children an assurance of the means of education .
if any prudent individual had held these lands , he could not have adopted a wiser course to bring them into market and enhance their value than to give a portion of them for purposes of education .
as a mere speculation he would pursue this course .
no person will contend that donations of land to all the states of the union for the erection of colleges within the limits of each can be embraced by this principle .
it can not be pretended that an agricultural college in new york or virginia would aid the settlement or facilitate the sale of public lands in minnesota or california .
this can not possibly be embraced within the authority which a prudent proprietor of land would exercise over his own possessions .
i purposely avoid any attempt to define what portions of land may be granted , and for what purposes , to improve the value and promote the settlement and sale of the remainder without violating the constitution .
in this case i adopt the rule that " sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof . "

to the senate and house of representatives of the united states : 
 i have received from j. calhoun , esq . ,
president of the late constitutional convention of kansas , a copy , duly certified by himself , of the constitution framed by that body , with the expression of a hope that i would submit the same to the consideration of congress " with the view of the admission of kansas into the union as an independent state . "
in compliance with this request , i herewith transmit to congress , for their action , the constitution of kansas , with the ordinance respecting the public lands , as well as the letter of mr. calhoun , dated at lecompton on the 14th ultimo , by which they were accompanied .
having received but a single copy of the constitution and ordinance , i send this to the senate .
a great delusion seems to pervade the public mind in relation to the condition of parties in kansas .
this arises from the difficulty of inducing the american people to realize the fact that any portion of them should be in a state of rebellion against the government under which they live .
when we speak of the affairs of kansas , we are apt to refer merely to the existence of two violent political parties in that territory , divided on the question of slavery , just as we speak of such parties in the states .
this presents no adequate idea of the true state of the case .
the dividing line there is not between two political parties , both acknowledging the lawful existence of the government , but between those who are loyal to this government and those who have endeavored to destroy its existence by force and by usurpation -- between those who sustain and those who have done all in their power to overthrow the territorial government established by congress .
this government they would long since have subverted had it not been protected from their assaults by the troops of the united states .
such has been the condition of affairs since my inauguration .
ever since that period a large portion of the people of kansas have been in a state of rebellion against the government , with a military leader at their head of a most turbulent and dangerous character .
they have never acknowledged , but have constantly renounced and defied , the government to which they owe allegiance , and have been all the time in a state of resistance against its authority .
they have all the time been endeavoring to subvert it and to establish a revolutionary government , under the so - called topeka constitution , in its stead .
even at this very moment the topeka legislature are in session .
whoever has read the correspondence of governor walker with the state department , recently communicated to the senate , will be convinced that this picture is not overdrawn .
he always protested against the withdrawal of any portion of the military force of the united states from the territory , deeming its presence absolutely necessary for the preservation of the regular government and the execution of the laws .
in his very first dispatch to the secretary of state , dated june 2 , 1857 , he says : 
 the most alarming movement , however , proceeds from the assembling on the 9th june of the so - called topeka legislature , with a view to the enactment of an entire code of laws .
of course it will be my endeavor to prevent such a result , as it would lead to inevitable and disastrous collision , and , in fact , renew the civil war in kansas .
this was with difficulty prevented by the efforts of governor walker ; but soon thereafter , on the 14th of july , we find him requesting general harney to furnish him a regiment of dragoons to proceed to the city of lawrence ; and this for the reason that he had received authentic intelligence , verified by his own actual observation , that a dangerous rebellion had occurred , " involving an open defiance of the laws and the establishment of an insurgent government in that city . "
in the governor&#39;s dispatch of july 15 he informs the secretary of state that-- 
 this movement at lawrence was the beginning of a plan , originating in that city , to organize insurrection throughout the territory , and especially in all towns , cities , or counties where the republican party have a majority .
lawrence is the hotbed of all the abolition movements in this territory .
it is the town established by the abolition societies of the east , and whilst there are respectable people there , it is filled by a considerable number of mercenaries who are paid by abolition societies to perpetuate and diffuse agitation throughout kansas and prevent a peaceful settlement of this question .
having failed in inducing their own so - called topeka state legislature to organize this insurrection , lawrence has commenced it herself , and if not arrested the rebellion will extend throughout the territory .
and again : 
 in order to send this communication immediately by mail , i must close by assuring you that the spirit of rebellion pervades the great mass of the republican party of this territory , instigated , as i entertain no doubt they are , by eastern societies , having in view results most disastrous to the government and to the union ; and that the continued presence of general harney here is indispensable , as originally stipulated by me , with a large body of dragoons and several batteries , 
 on the 20th july , 1857 , general lane , under the authority of the topeka convention , undertook , as governor walker informs us -- to organize the whole so - called free - state party into volunteers and to take the names of all who refuse enrollment .
the professed object is to protect the polls , at the election in august , of the new insurgent topeka state legislature .
the object of taking the names of all who refuse enrollment is to terrify the free - state conservatives into submission .
this is proved by recent atrocities committed on such men by topekaites .
the speedy location of large bodies of regular troops here , with two batteries , is necessary .
the lawrence insurgents await the development of this new revolutionary military organization .
in the governor&#39;s dispatch of july 27 he says that " general lane and his staff everywhere deny the authority of the territorial laws and counsel a total disregard of these enactments . "
without making further quotations of a similar character from other dispatches of governor walker , it appears by a reference to mr. stanton&#39;s communication to general cass of the 9th of december last that the " important step of calling the legislature together was taken after i ( he ) had become satisfied that the election ordered by the convention on the 21st instant could not be conducted without collision and bloodshed . "
so intense was the disloyal feeling among the enemies of the government established by congress that an election which afforded them an opportunity , if in the majority , of making kansas a free state , according to their own professed desire , could not be conducted without collision and bloodshed .
the truth is that up till the present moment the enemies of the existing government still adhere to their topeka revolutionary constitution and government .
the very first paragraph of the message of governor robinson , dated on the 7th of december , to the topeka legislature now assembled at lawrence contains an open defiance of the constitution and laws of the united states .
the governor says : 
 the convention which framed the constitution at topeka originated with the people of kansas territory .
they have adopted and ratified the same twice by a direct vote , and also indirectly through two elections of state officers and members of the state legislature .
yet it has pleased the administration to regard the whole proceeding revolutionary .
this topeka government , adhered to with such treasonable pertinacity , is a government in direct opposition to the existing government prescribed and recognized by congress .
it is a usurpation of the same character as it would be for a portion of the people of any state of the union to undertake to establish a separate government within its limits for the purpose of redressing any grievance , real or imaginary , of which they might complain against the legitimate state government .
such a principle , if carried into execution , would destroy all lawful authority and produce universal anarchy .
from this statement of facts the reason becomes palpable why the enemies of the government authorized by congress have refused to vote for delegates to the kansas constitutional convention , and also afterwards on the question of slavery , submitted by it to the people .
it is because they have ever refused to sanction or recognize any other constitution than that framed at topeka .
had the whole lecompton constitution been submitted to the people the adherents of this organization would doubtless have voted against it , because if successful they would thus have removed an obstacle out of the way of their own revolutionary constitution .
they would have done this , not upon a consideration of the merits of the whole or any part of the lecompton constitution , but simply because they have ever resisted the authority of the government authorized by congress , from which it emanated .
such being the unfortunate condition of affairs in the territory , what was the right as well as the duty of the law - abiding people ?
were they silently and patiently to submit to the topeka usurpation , or adopt the necessary measures to establish a constitution under the authority of the organic law of congress ?
that this law recognized the right of the people of the territory , without any enabling act from congress , to form a state constitution is too clear for argument .
for congress " to leave the people of the territory perfectly free , " in framing their constitution , " to form and regulate their domestic institutions in their own way , subject only to the constitution of the united states , " and then to say that they shall not be permitted to proceed and frame a constitution in their own way without an express authority from congress , appears to be almost a contradiction in terms .
it would be much more plausible to contend that congress had no power to pass such an enabling act than to argue that the people of a territory might be kept out of the union for an indefinite period , and until it might please congress to permit them to exercise the right of self - government .
this would be to adopt not " their own way , " but the way which congress might prescribe .
it is impossible that any people could have proceeded with more regularity in the formation of a constitution than the people of kansas have done .
it was necessary , first , to ascertain whether it was the desire of the people to be relieved from their territorial dependence and establish a state government .
for this purpose the territorial legislature in 1855 passed a law " for taking the sense of the people of this territory upon the expediency of calling a convention to form a state constitution , " at the general election to be held in october , 1856 .
the " sense of the people " was accordingly taken and they decided in favor of a convention .
it is true that at this election the enemies of the territorial government did not vote , because they were then engaged at topeka , without the slightest pretext of lawful authority , in framing a constitution of their own for the purpose of subverting the territorial government .
in pursuance of this decision of the people in favor of a convention , the territorial legislature , on the 27th day of february , 1857 , passed an act for the election of delegates on the third monday of june , 1857 , to frame a state constitution .
this law is as fair in its provisions as any that ever passed a legislative body for a similar purpose .
the right of suffrage at this election is clearly and justly defined . "
every bona fide inhabitant of the territory of kansas , " on the third monday of june , the day of the election , who was a citizen of the united states above the age of 21 , and had resided therein for three months previous to that date , was entitled to vote .
in order to avoid all interference from neighboring states or territories with the freedom and fairness of the election , provision was made for the registry of the qualified voters , and in pursuance thereof 9,251 voters were registered .
governor walker did his whole duty in urging all the qualified citizens of kansas to vote at this election .
in his inaugural address , on the 27th may last , he informed them that-- 
 under our practice the preliminary act of framing a state constitution is uniformly performed through the instrumentality of a convention of delegates chosen by the people themselves .
that convention is now about to be elected by you under the call of the territorial legislature , created and still recognized by the authority of congress and clothed by it , in the comprehensive language of the organic law , with full power to make such an enactment .
the territorial legislature , then , in assembling this convention , were fully sustained by the act of congress , and the authority of the convention is distinctly recognized in my instructions from the president of the united states .
the governor also clearly and distinctly warns them what would be the consequences if they should not participate in the election .
the people of kansas , then ( he says ) , are invited by the highest authority known to the constitution to participate freely and fairly in the election of delegates to frame a constitution and state government .
the law has performed its entire appropriate function when it extends to the people the fight of suffrage , but it can not compel the performance of that duty .
throughout our whole union , however , and wherever free government prevails those who abstain from the exercise of the right of suffrage authorize those who do vote to act for them in that contingency ; and the absentees are as much bound under the law and constitution , where there is no fraud or violence , by the act of the majority of those who do vote as if all had participated in the election .
otherwise , as voting must be voluntary , self - government would be impracticable and monarchy or despotism would remain as the only alternative .
it may also be observed that at this period any hope , if such had existed , that the topeka constitution would ever be recognized by congress must have been abandoned .
congress had adjourned on the 3d march previous , having recognized the legal existence of the territorial legislature in a variety of forms , which i need not enumerate .
indeed , the delegate elected to the house of representatives under a territorial law had been admitted to his seat and had just completed his term of service on the day previous to my inauguration .
this was the propitious moment for settling all difficulties in kansas .
this was the time for abandoning the revolutionary topeka organization and for the enemies of the existing government to conform to the laws and to unite with its friends in framing a state constitution ; but this they refused to do , and the consequences of their refusal to submit to lawful authority and vote at the election of delegates may yet prove to be of a most deplorable character .
would that the respect for the laws of the land which so eminently distinguished the men of the past generation could be revived .
it is a disregard and violation of law which have for years kept the territory of kansas in a state of almost open rebellion against its government .
it is the same spirit which has produced actual rebellion in utah .
our only safety consists in obedience and conformity to law .
should a general spirit against its enforcement prevail , this will prove fatal to us as a nation .
we acknowledge no master but the law , and should we cut loose from its restraints and everyone do what seemeth good in his own eyes our case will indeed be hopeless .
the enemies of the territorial government determined still to resist the authority of congress .
they refused to vote for delegates to the convention , not because , from circumstances which i need not detail , there was an omission to register the comparatively few voters who were inhabitants of certain counties of kansas in the early spring of 1857 , but because they had predetermined at all hazards to adhere to their revolutionary organization and defeat the establishment of any other constitution than that which they had framed at topeka .
the election was therefore suffered to pass by default .
but of this result the qualified electors who refused to vote can never justly complain .
from this review it is manifest that the lecompton convention , according to every principle of constitutional law , was legally constituted and was invested with power to frame a constitution .
the sacred principle of popular sovereignty has been invoked in favor of the enemies of law and order in kansas .
but in what manner is popular sovereignty to be exercised in this country if not through the instrumentality of established law ?
in certain small republics of ancient times the people did assemble in primary meetings , passed laws , and directed public affairs .
in our country this is manifestly impossible .
popular sovereignty can be exercised here only through the ballot box ; and if the people will refuse to exercise it in this manner , as they have done in kansas at the election of delegates , it is not for them to complain that their rights have been violated .
the kansas convention , thus lawfully constituted , proceeded to frame a constitution , and , having completed their work , finally adjourned on the 7th day of november last .
they did not think proper to submit the whole of this constitution to a popular vote , but they did submit the question whether kansas should be a free or a slave state to the people .
this was the question which had convulsed the union and shaken it to its very center .
this was the question which had lighted up the flames of civil war in kansas and had produced dangerous sectional parties throughout the confederacy .
it was of a character so paramount in respect to the condition of kansas as to rivet the anxious attention of the people of the whole country upon it , and it alone .
no person thought of any other question .
for my own part , when i instructed governor walker in general terms in favor of submitting the constitution to the people , i had no object in view except the all - absorbing question of slavery .
in what manner the people of kansas might regulate their other concerns was not a subject which attracted any attention .
in fact , the general provisions of our recent state constitutions , after an experience of eight years , are so similar and so excellent that it would be difficult to go far wrong at the present day in framing a new constitution .
i then believed and still believe that under the organic act the kansas convention were bound to submit this all - important question of slavery to the people .
it was never , however , my opinion that , independently of this act , they would have been bound to submit any portion of the constitution to a popular vote in order to give it validity .
had i entertained such an opinion , this would have been in opposition to many precedents in our history , commencing in the very best age of the republic .
it would have been in opposition to the principle which pervades our institutions , and which is every day carried out into practice , that the people have the right to delegate to representatives chosen by themselves their sovereign power to frame constitutions , enact laws , and perform many other important acts without requiring that these should be subjected to their subsequent approbation .
it would be a most inconvenient limitation of their own power , imposed by the people upon themselves , to exclude them from exercising their sovereignty in any lawful manner they think proper .
it is true that the people of kansas might , if they had pleased , have required the convention to submit the constitution to a popular vote ; but this they have not done .
the only remedy , therefore , in this case is that which exists in all other similar cases .
if the delegates who framed the kansas constitution have in any manner violated the will of their constituents , the people always possess the power to change their constitution or their laws according to their own pleasure .
the question of slavery was submitted to an election of the people of kansas on the 21st december last , in obedience to the mandate of the constitution .
here again a fair opportunity was presented to the adherents of the topeka constitution , if they were the majority , to decide this exciting question " in their own way " and thus restore peace to the distracted territory ; but they again refused to exercise their right of popular sovereignty , and again suffered the election to pass by default .
i heartily rejoice that a wiser and better spirit prevailed among a large majority of these people on the first monday of january , and that they did on that day vote under the lecompton constitution for a governor and other state officers , a member of congress , and for members of the legislature .
this election was warmly contested by the parties , and a larger vote was polled than at any previous election in the territory .
we may now reasonably hope that the revolutionary topeka organization will be speedily and finally abandoned , and this will go far toward the final settlement of the unhappy differences in kansas .
if frauds have been committed at this election , either by one or both parties , the legislature and the people of kansas , under their constitution , will know how to redress themselves and punish these detestable but too common crimes without any outside interference .
the people of kansas have , then , " in their own way " and in strict accordance with the organic act , framed a constitution and state government , have submitted the all - important question of slavery to the people , and have elected a governor , a member to represent them in congress , members of the state legislature , and other state officers .
they now ask admission into the union under this constitution , which is republican in its form .
it is for congress to decide whether they will admit or reject the state which has thus been created .
for my own part , i am decidedly in favor of its admission , and thus terminating the kansas question .
this will carry out the great principle of nonintervention recognized and sanctioned by the organic act , which declares in express language in favor of " nonintervention by congress with slavery in the states or territories , " leaving " the people thereof perfectly free to form and regulate their domestic institutions in their own way , subject only to the constitution of the united states . "
in this manner , by localizing the question of slavery and confining it to the people whom it immediately concerned , every patriot anxiously expected that this question would be banished from the halls of congress , where it has always exerted a baneful influence throughout the whole country .
it is proper that i should briefly refer to the election held under an act of the territorial legislature on the first monday of january last on the lecompton constitution .
this election was held after the territory had been prepared for admission into the union as a sovereign state , and when no authority existed in the territorial legislature which could possibly destroy its existence or change its character .
the election , which was peaceably conducted under my instructions , involved a strange inconsistency .
a large majority of the persons who voted against the lecompton constitution were at the very same time and place recognizing its valid existence in the most solemn and authentic manner by voting under its provisions .
i have yet received no official information of the result of this election .
as a question of expediency , after the right has been maintained , it may be wise to reflect upon the benefits to kansas and to the whole country which would result from its immediate admission into the union , as well as the disasters which may follow its rejection .
domestic peace will be the happy consequence of its admission , and that fine territory , which has hitherto been torn by dissensions , will rapidly increase in population and wealth and speedily realize the blessings and the comforts which follow in the train of agricultural and mechanical industry .
the people will then be sovereign and can regulate their own affairs in their own way .
if a majority of them desire to abolish domestic slavery within the state , there is no other possible mode by which this can be effected so speedily as by prompt admission .
the will of the majority is supreme and irresistible when expressed in an orderly and lawful manner .
they can make and unmake constitutions at pleasure .
it would be absurd to say that they can impose fetters upon their own power which they can not afterwards remove .
if they could do this , they might tie their own hands for a hundred as well as for ten years .
these are fundamental principles of american freedom , and are recognized , i believe , in some form or other by every state constitution ; and if congress , in the act of admission , should think proper to recognize them i can perceive no objection to such a course .
this has been done emphatically in the constitution of kansas .
it declares in the bill of rights that " all political power is inherent in the people and all free governments are rounded on their authority and instituted for their benefit , and therefore they have at all times an inalienable and indefeasible right to alter , reform , or abolish their form of government in such manner as they may think proper . "
the great state of new york is at this moment governed under a constitution framed and established in direct opposition to the mode prescribed by the previous constitution .
if , therefore , the provision changing the kansas constitution after the year 1864 could by possibility be construed into a prohibition to make such a change previous to that period , this prohibition would be wholly unavailing .
the legislature already elected may at its very first session submit the question to a vote of the people whether they will or will not have a convention to amend their constitution and adopt all necessary means for giving effect to the popular will .
it has been solemnly adjudged by the highest judicial tribunal known to our laws that slavery exists in kansas by virtue of the constitution of the united states .
kansas is therefore at this moment as much a slave state as georgia or south carolina .
without this the equality of the sovereign states composing the union would be violated and the use and enjoyment of a territory acquired by the common treasure of all the states would be closed against the people and the property of nearly half the members of the confederacy .
slavery can therefore never be prohibited in kansas except by means of a constitutional provision , and in no other manner can this be obtained so promptly , if a majority of the people desire it , as by admitting it into the union under its present constitution .
on the other hand , should congress reject the constitution under the idea of affording the disaffected in kansas a third opportunity of prohibiting slavery in the state , which they might have done twice before if in the majority , no man can foretell the consequences .
if congress , for the sake of those men who refused to vote for delegates to the convention when they might have excluded slavery from the constitution , and who afterwards refused to vote on the 21st december last , when they might , as they claim , have stricken slavery from the constitution , should now reject the state because slavery remains in the constitution , it is manifest that the agitation upon this dangerous subject will be renewed in a more alarming form than it has ever yet assumed .
every patriot in the country had indulged the hope that the kansas and nebraska act would put a final end to the slavery agitation , at least in congress , which had for more than twenty years convulsed the country and endangered the union .
this act involved great and fundamental principles , and if fairly carried into effect will settle the question .
should the agitation be again revived , should the people of the sister states be again estranged from each other with more than their former bitterness , this will arise from a cause , so far as the interests of kansas are concerned , more trifling and insignificant than has ever stirred the elements of a great people into commotion .
to the people of kansas the only practical difference between admission or rejection depends simply upon the fact whether they can themselves more speedily change the present constitution if it does not accord with the will of the majority , or frame a second constitution to be submitted to congress hereafter .
even if this were a question of mere expediency , and not of right , the small difference of time one way or the other is of not the least importance when contrasted with the evils which must necessarily result to the whole country from a revival of the slavery agitation .
in considering this question it should never be forgotten that in proportion to its insignificance , let the decision be what it may so far as it may affect the few thousand inhabitants of kansas who have from the beginning resisted the constitution and the laws , for this very reason the rejection of the constitution will be so much the more keenly felt by the people of fourteen of the states of this union , where slavery is recognized under the constitution of the united states .
again , the speedy admission of kansas into the union would restore peace and quiet to the whole country .
already the affairs of this territory have engrossed an undue proportion of public attention .
they have sadly affected the friendly relations of the people of the states with each other and alarmed the fears of patriots for the safety of the union .
kansas once admitted into the union , the excitement becomes localized and will soon die away for want of outside aliment .
then every difficulty will be settled at the ballot box .
besides -- and this is no trifling consideration -- i shall then be enabled to withdraw the troops of the united states from kansas and employ them on branches of service where they are much needed .
they have been kept there , on the earnest importunity of governor walker , to maintain the existence of the territorial government and secure the execution of the laws .
he considered that at least 2,000 regular troops , under the command of general harney , were necessary for this purpose .
acting upon his reliable information , i have been obliged in some degree to interfere with the expedition to utah in order to keep down rebellion in kansas .
this has involved a very heavy expense to the government .
kansas once admitted , it is believed there will no longer be any occasion there for troops of the united states .
i have thus performed my duty on this important question , under a deep sense of responsibility to god and my country .
my public life will terminate within a brief period , and i have no other object of earthly ambition than to leave my country in a peaceful and prosperous condition and to live in the affections and respect of my countrymen .
the dark and ominous clouds which now appear to be impending over the union i conscientiously believe may be dissipated with honor to every portion of it by the admission of kansas during the present session of congress , whereas if she should be rejected i greatly fear these clouds will become darker and more ominous than any which have ever yet threatened the constitution and the union .
april 6 , 1858- proclamation regarding the rebellion in utah 
 whereas the territory of utah was settled by certain emigrants from the states and from foreign countries who have for several years past manifested a spirit of insubordination to the constitution and laws of the united states .
the great mass of those settlers , acting under the influence of leaders to whom they seem to have surrendered their judgment , refuse to be controlled by any other authority .
they have been often advised to obedience , and these friendly counsels have been answered with defiance .
the officers of the federal government have been driven from the territory for no offense but an effort to do their sworn duty ; others have been prevented from going there by threats of assassination ; judges have been violently interrupted in the performance of their functions , and the records of the courts have been seized and destroyed or concealed .
many other acts of unlawful violence have been perpetrated , and the right to repeat them has been openly claimed by the leading inhabitants , with at least the silent acquiescence of nearly all the others .
their hostility to the lawful government of the country has at length become so violent that no officer bearing a commission from the chief magistrate of the union can enter the territory or remain there with safety , and all those officers recently appointed have been unable to go to salt lake or anywhere else in utah beyond the immediate power of the army .
indeed , such is believed to be the condition to which a strange system of terrorism has brought the inhabitants of that region that no one among them could express an opinion favorable to this government , or even propose to obey its laws , without exposing his life and property to peril .
after carefully considering this state of affairs and maturely weighing the obligation i was under to see the laws faithfully executed , it seemed to me right and proper that i should make such use of the military force at my disposal as might be necessary to protect the federal officers in going into the territory of utah and in performing their duties after arriving there .
i accordingly ordered a detachment of the army to march for the city of salt lake , or within reach of that place , and to act in case of need as a posse for the enforcement of the laws .
but in the meantime the hatred of that misguided people for the just and legal authority of the government had become so intense that they resolved to measure their military strength with that of the union .
they have organized an armed force far from contemptible in point of numbers and trained it , if not with skill , at least with great assiduity and perseverance .
while the troops of the united states were on their march a train of baggage wagons , which happened to be unprotected , was attacked and destroyed by a portion of the mormon forces and the provisions and stores with which the train was laden were wantonly burnt .
in short , their present attitude is one of decided and unreserved enmity to the united states and to all their loyal citizens .
their determination to oppose the authority of the government by military force has not only been expressed in words , but manifested in overt acts of the most unequivocal character .
fellow - citizens of utah , this is rebellion against the government to which you owe allegiance ; it is levying war against the united states , and involves you in the guilt of treason .
persistence in it will bring you to condign punishment , to ruin , and to shame ; for it is mere madness to suppose that with your limited resources you can successfully resist the force of this great and powerful nation .
if you have calculated upon the forbearance of the united states , if you have permitted yourselves to suppose that this government will fail to put forth its strength and bring you to submission , you have fallen into a grave mistake .
you have settled upon territory which lies , geographically , in the heart of the union .
the land you live upon was purchased by the united states and paid for out of their treasury ; the proprietary right and title to it is in them , and not in you .
utah is bounded on every side by states and territories whose people are true to the union .
it is absurd to believe that they will or can permit you to erect in their very midst a government of your own , not only independent of the authority which they all acknowledge , but hostile to them and their interests .
do not deceive yourselves nor try to mislead others by propagating the idea that this is a crusade against your religion .
the constitution and laws of this country can take no notice of your creed , whether it be true or false .
that is a question between your god and yourselves , in which i disclaim all right to interfere .
if you obey the laws , keep the peace , and respect the just rights of others , you will be perfectly secure , and may live on in your present faith or change it for another at your pleasure .
every intelligent man among you knows very well that this government has never , directly or indirectly , sought to molest you in your worship , to control you in your ecclesiastical affairs , or even to influence you in your religious opinions .
this rebellion is not merely a violation of your legal duty ; it is without just cause , without reason , without excuse .
you never made a complaint that was not listened to with patience ; you never exhibited a real grievance that was not redressed as promptly as it could be .
the laws and regulations enacted for your government by congress have been equal and just , and their enforcement was manifestly necessary for your own welfare and happiness .
you have never asked their repeal .
they are similar in every material respect to the laws which have been passed for the other territories of the union , and which everywhere else ( with one partial exception ) have been cheerfully obeyed .
no people ever lived who were freer from unnecessary legal restraints than you .
human wisdom never devised a political system which bestowed more blessings or imposed lighter burdens than the government of the united states in its operation upon the territories .
but being anxious to save the effusion of blood and to avoid the indiscriminate punishment of a whole people for crimes of which it is not probable that all are equally guilty , i offer now a free and full pardon to all who will submit themselves to the just authority of the federal government .
if you refuse to accept it , let the consequences fall upon your own heads .
but i conjure you to pause deliberately and reflect well before you reject this tender of peace and good will .
now , therefore , i , james buchanan , president of the united states , have thought proper to issue this my proclamation , enjoining upon all public officers in the territory of utah to be diligent and faithful , to the full extent of their power , in the execution of the laws ; commanding all citizens of the united states in said territory to aid and assist the officers in the performance of their duties ; offering to the inhabitants of utah who shall submit to the laws a free pardon for the seditions and treasons heretofore by them committed ; warning those who shall persist , after notice of this proclamation , in the present rebellion against the united states that they must expect no further lenity , but look to be rigorously dealt with according to their deserts ; and declaring that the military forces now in utah and hereafter to be sent there will not be withdrawn until the inhabitants of that territory shall manifest a proper sense of the duty which they owe to this government .
in testimony whereof i have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the united states to be affixed to these presents .
done at the city of washington the 6th day of april , 1858 , and of the independence of the united states the eighty - second .
james buchanan .
by the president : 
 lewis cass , secretary of state .

fellow - citizens of the senate and house of representatives : in obedience to the command of the constitution , it has now become my duty " to give to congress information of the state of the union and recommend to their consideration such measures " as i judge to be " necessary and expedient."but first and above all , our thanks are due to almighty god for the numerous benefits which he has bestowed upon this people , and our united prayers ought to ascend to him that he would continue to bless our great republic in time to come as he has blessed it in time past .
since the adjournment of the last congress our constituents have enjoyed an unusual degree of health .
the earth has yielded her fruits abundantly and has bountifully rewarded the toil of the husbandman .
our great staples have commanded high prices , and up till within a brief period our manufacturing , mineral , and mechanical occupations have largely partaken of the general prosperity .
we have possessed all the elements of material wealth in rich abundance , and yet , notwithstanding all these advantages , our country in its monetary interests is at the present moment in a deplorable condition .
in the midst of unsurpassed plenty in all the productions of agriculture and in all the elements of national wealth , we find our manufactures suspended , our public works retarded , our private enterprises of different kinds abandoned , and thousands of useful laborers thrown out of employment and reduced to want .
the revenue of the government , which is chiefly derived from duties on imports from abroad , has been greatly reduced , whilst the appropriations made by congress at its last session for the current fiscal year are very large in amount .
under these circumstances a loan may be required before the close of your present session ; but this , although deeply to be regretted , would prove to be only a slight misfortune when compared with the suffering and distress prevailing among the people .
with this the government can not fail deeply to sympathize , though it may be without the power to extend relief .
it is our duty to inquire what has produced such unfortunate results and whether their recurrence can be prevented .
in all former revulsions the blame might have been fairly attributed to a variety of cooperating causes , but not so upon the present occasion .
it is apparent that our existing misfortunes have proceeded solely from our extravagant and vicious system of paper currency and bank credits , exciting the people to wild speculations and gambling in stocks .
these revulsions must continue to recur at successive intervals so long as the amount of the paper currency and bank loans and discounts of the country shall be left to the discretion of 1,400 irresponsible banking institutions , which from the very law of their nature will consult the interest of their stockholders rather than the public welfare .
the framers of the constitution , when they gave to congress the power " to coin money and to regulate the value thereof " and prohibited the states from coining money , emitting bills of credit , or making anything but gold and silver coin a tender in payment of debts , supposed they had protected the people against the evils of an excessive and irredeemable paper currency .
they are not responsible for the existing anomaly that a government endowed with the sovereign attribute of coining money and regulating the value thereof should have no power to prevent others from driving this coin out of the country and filling up the channels of circulation with paper which does not represent gold and silver .
it is one of the highest and most responsible duties of government to insure to the people a sound circulating medium , the amount of which ought to be adapted with the utmost possible wisdom and skill to the wants of internal trade and foreign exchanges .
if this be either greatly above or greatly below the proper standard , the marketable value of every man 's property is increased or diminished in the same proportion , and injustice to individuals as well as incalculable evils to the community are the consequence .
unfortunately , under the construction of the federal constitution which has now prevailed too long to be changed this important and delicate duty has been dissevered from the coining power and virtually transferred to more than 1,400 state banks acting independently of each other and regulating their paper issues almost exclusively by a regard to the present interest of their stockholders .
exercising the sovereign power of providing a paper currency instead of coin for the country , the first duty which these banks owe to the public is to keepin their vaults a sufficient amount of gold and silver to insure the convertibility of their notes into coin at all times and under all circumstances .
no bank ought ever to be chartered without such restrictions on its business as to secure this result .
all other restrictions are comparatively vain .
this is the only true touchstone , the only efficient regulator of a paper currency -- the only one which can guard the public against overissues and bank suspensions .
as a collateral and eventual security , it is doubtless wise , and in all cases ought to be required , that banks shall hold an amount of united states or state securities equal to their notes in circulation and pledged for their redemption .
this , however , furnishes no adequate security against overissue .
on the contrary , it may be perverted to inflate the currency .
indeed , it is possible by this means to convert all the debts of the united states and state governments into bank notes , without reference to the specie required to redeem them .
however valuable these securities may be in themselves , they can not be converted into gold and silver at the moment of pressure , as our experience teaches , in sufficient time to prevent bank suspensions and the depreciation of bank notes .
in england , which is to a considerable extent a paper - money country , though vastly behind our own in this respect , it was deemed advisable , anterior to the act of parliament of 1844 , which wisely separated the issue of notes from the banking department , for the bank of england always to keep on hand gold and silver equal to one - third of its combined circulation and deposits .
if this proportion was no more than sufficient to secure the convertibility of its notes with the whole of great britain and to some extent the continent of europe as a field for its circulation , rendering it almost impossible that a sudden and immediate run to a dangerous amount should be made upon it , the same proportion would certainly be insufficient under our banking system .
each of our 1,400 banks has but a limited circumference for its circulation , and in the course of a very few days the depositors and note holders might demand from such a bank a sufficient amount in specie to compel it to suspend , even although it had coin in its vaults equal to one - third of its immediate liabilities .
and yet i am not aware , with the exception of the banks of louisiana , that any state bank throughout the union has been required by its charter to keep this or any other proportion of gold and silver compared with the amount of its combined circulation and deposits .
what has been the consequence ?
in a recent report made by the treasury department on the condition of the banks throughout the different states , according to returns dated nearest to january , 1857 , the aggregate amount of actual specie in their vaults is $ 58,349,838 , of their circulation $ 214,778,822 , and of their deposits $ 230,351,352 .
thus it appears that these banks in the aggregate have considerably less than one dollar in seven of gold and silver compared with their circulation and deposits .
it was palpable , therefore , that the very first pressure must drive them to suspension and deprive the people of a convertible currency , with all its disastrous consequences .
it is truly wonderful that they should have so long continued to preserve their credit when a demand for the payment of one - seventh of their immediate liabilities would have driven them into insolvency .
and this is the condition of the banks , notwithstanding that four hundred millions of gold from california have flowed in upon us within the last eight years , and the tide still continues to flow .
indeed , such has been the extravagance of bank credits that the banks now hold a considerably less amount of specie , either in proportion to their capital or to their circulation and deposits combined , than they did before the discovery of gold in california .
whilst in the year 1848 their specie in proportion to their capital was more than equal to one dollar for four and a half , in 1857 it does not amount to one dollar for every six dollars and thirty - three cents of their capital .
in the year 1848 the specie was equal within a very small fraction to one dollar in five of their circulation and deposits ; in 1857 it is not equal to one dollar in seven and a half of their circulation and deposits .
from this statement it is easy to account for our financial history for the last forty years .
it has been a history of extravagant expansions in the business of the country , followed by ruinous contractions .
at successive intervals the best and most enterprising men have been tempted to their ruin by excessive bank loans of mere paper credit , exciting them to extravagant importations of foreign goods , wild speculations , and ruinous and demoralizing stock gambling .
when the crisis arrives , as arrive it must , the banks can extend no relief to the people .
in a vain struggle to redeem their liabilities in specie they are compelled to contract their loans and their issues , and at last , in the hour of distress , when their assistance is most needed , they and their debtors together sink into insolvency .
it is this paper system of extravagant expansion , raising the nominal price of every article far beyond its real value when compared with the cost of similar articles in countries whose circulation is wisely regulated , which has prevented us from competing in our own markets with foreign manufacturers , has produced extravagant importations , and has counteracted the effect of the large incidental protection afforded to our domestic manufactures by the present revenue tariff .
but for this the branches of our manufactures composed of raw materials , the production of our own country -- such as cotton , iron , and woolen fabrics -- would not only have acquired almost exclusive possession of the home market , but would have created for themselves a foreign market throughout the world .
deplorable , however , as may be our present financial condition , we may yet indulge in bright hopes for the future .
no other nation has ever existed which could have endured such violent expansions and contractions of paper credits without lasting injury ; yet the buoyancy of youth , the energies of our population , and the spirit which never quails before difficulties will enable us soon to recover from our present financial embarrassments , and may even occasion us speedily to forget the lesson which they have taught .
in the meantime it is the duty of the government , by all proper means within its power , to aid in alleviating the sufferings of the people occasioned by the suspension of the banks and to provide against a recurrence of the same calamity .
unfortunately , in either aspect of the ease it can do but little .
thanks to the independent treasury , the government has not suspended payment , as it was compelled to do by the failure of the banks in 1837 .
it will continue to discharge its liabilities to the people in gold and silver .
its disbursements in coin will pass into circulation and materially assist in restoring a sound currency .
from its high credit , should we be compelled to make a temporary loan , it can be effected on advantageous terms .
this , however , shall if possible be avoided , but if not , then the amount shall be limited to the lowest practicable sum .
i have therefore determined that whilst no useful government works already in progress shall be suspended , new works not already commenced will be postponed if this can be done without injury to the country .
those necessary for its defense shall proceed as though there had been no crisis in our monetary affairs .
but the federal government can not do much to provide against a recurrence of existing evils .
even if insurmountable constitutional objections did not exist against the creation of a national bank , this would furnish no adequate preventive security .
the history of the last bank of the united states abundantly proves the truth of this assertion .
such a bank could not , if it would , regulate the issues and credits of 1,400 state banks in such a manner as to prevent the ruinous expansions and contractions in our currency which afflicted the country throughout the existence of the late bank , or secure us against future suspensions .
in 1825 an effort was made by the bank of england to curtail the issues of the country banks under the most favorable circumstances .
the paper currency had been expanded to a ruinous extent , and the bank put forth all its power to contract it in order to reduce prices and restore the equilibrium of the foreign exchanges .
it accordingly commenced a system of curtailment of its loans and issues , in the vain hope that the joint stock and private banks of the kingdom would be compelled to follow its example .
it found , however , that as it contracted they expanded , and at the end of the process , to employ the language of a very high official authority , " whatever reduction of the paper circulation was effected by the bank of england ( in 1825 ) was more than made up by the issues of the country banks."but a bank of the united states would not , if it could , restrain the issues and loans of the state banks , because its duty as a regulator of the currency must often be in direct conflict with the immediate interest of its stockholders .
if we expect one agent to restrain or control another , their interests must , at least in some degree , be antagonistic .
but the directors of a bank of the united states would feel the same interest and the same inclination with the directors of the state banks to expand the currency , to accommodate their favorites and friends with loans , and to declare large dividends .
such has been our experience in regard to the last bank .
after all , we must mainly rely upon the patriotism and wisdom of the states for the prevention and redress of the evil .
if they will afford us a real specie basis for our paper circulation by increasing the denomination of bank notes , first to twenty and afterwards to fifty dollars ; if they will require that the banks shall at all times keep on hand at least one dollar of gold and silver for every three dollars of their circulation and deposits , and if they will provide by a self - executing enactment , which nothing can arrest , that the moment they suspend they shall go into liquidation , i believe that such provisions , with a weekly publication by each bank of a statement of its condition , would go far to secure us against future suspensions of specie payments .
congress , in my opinion , possess the power to pass a uniform bankrupt law applicable to all banking institutions throughout the united states , and i strongly recommend its exercise .
this would make it the irreversible organic law of each bank 's existence that a suspension of specie payments shall produce its civil death .
the instinct of self - preservation would then compel it to perform its duties in such a manner as to escape the penalty and preserve its life .
the existence of banks and the circulation of bank paper are so identified with the habits of our people that they can not at this day be suddenly abolished without much immediate injury to the country .
if we could confine them to their appropriate sphere and prevent them from administering to the spirit of wild and reckless speculation by extravagant loans and issues , they might be continued with advantage to the public .
but this i say , after long and much reflection : if experience shall prove it to be impossible to enjoy the facilities which well - regulated banks might afford without at the same time suffering the calamities which the excesses of the banks have hitherto inflicted upon the country , it would then be far the lesser evil to deprive them altogether of the power to issue a paper currency and confine them to the functions of banks of deposit and discount .
our relations with foreign governments are upon the whole in a satisfactory condition .
the diplomatic difficulties which existed between the government of the united states and that of great britain at the adjournment of the last congress have been happily terminated by the appointment of a british minister to this country , who has been cordially received .
whilst it is greatly to the interest , as i am convinced it is the sincere desire , of the governments and people of the two countries to be on terms of intimate friendship with each other , it has been our misfortune almost always to have had some irritating , if not dangerous , outstanding question with great britain .
since the origin of the government we have been employed in negotiating treaties with that power , and afterwards in discussing their true intent and meaning .
in this respect the convention of april 19 , 1850 , commonly called the clayton and bulwer treaty , has been the most unfortunate of all , because the two governments place directly opposite and contradictory constructions upon its first and most important article .
whilst in the united states we believed that this treaty would place both powers upon an exact equality by the stipulation that neither will ever " occupy , or fortify , or colonize , or assume , or exercise any dominion " over any part of central america , it is contended by the british government that the true construction of this language has left them in the rightful possession of all that portion of central america which was in their occupancy at the date of the treaty ; in fact , that the treaty is a virtual recognition on the part of the united states of the right of great britain , either as owner or protector , to the whole extensive coast of central america , sweeping round from the rio hondo to the port and harbor of san juan de nicaragua , together with the adjacent bay islands , except the comparatively small portion of this between the sarstoon and cape honduras .
according to their construction , the treaty does no more than simply prohibit them from extending their possessions in central america beyond the present limits .
it is not too much to assert that if in the united states the treaty had been considered susceptible of such a construction it never would have been negotiated under the authority of the president , nor would it have received the approbation of the senate .
the universal conviction in the united states was that when our government consented to violate its traditional and time - honored policy and to stipulate with a foreign government never to occupy or acquire territory in the central american portion of our own continent , the consideration for this sacrifice was that great britain should , in this respect at least , be placed in the same position with ourselves .
whilst we have no right to doubt the sincerity of the british government in their construction of the treaty , it is at the same time my deliberate conviction that this construction is in opposition both to its letter and its spirit .
under the late administration negotiations were instituted between the two governments for the purpose , if possible , of removing these difficulties , and a treaty having this laudable object in view was signed at london on the 17th october , 1856 , and was submitted by the president to the senate on the following 10th of december .
whether this treaty , either in its original or amended form , would have accomplished the object intended without giving birth to new and embarrassing complications between the two governments , may perhaps be well questioned .
certain it is , however , it was rendered much less objectionable by the different amendments made to it by the senate .
the treaty as amended was ratified by me on the 12th march , 1857 , and was transmitted to london for ratification by the british government .
that government expressed its willingness to concur in all the amendments made by the senate with the single exception of the clause relating to ruatan and the other islands in the bay of honduras .
the article in the original treaty as submitted to the senate , after reciting that these islands and their inhabitants " having been , by a convention bearing date the 27th day of august , 1856 , between her britannic majesty and the republic of honduras , constituted and declared a free territory under the sovereignty of the said republic of honduras , " stipulated that " the two contracting parties do hereby mutually engage to recognize and respect in all future time the independence and rights of the said free territory as a part of the republic of honduras."upon an examination of this convention between great britain and honduras of the 27th august , 1856 , it was found that whilst declaring the bay islands to be " a free territory under the sovereignty of the republic of honduras " it deprived that republic of rights without which its sovereignty over them could scarcely be said to exist .
it divided them from the remainder of honduras and gave to their inhabitants a separate government of their own , with legislative , executive , and judicial officers elected by themselves .
it deprived the government of honduras of the taxing power in every form and exempted the people of the islands from the performance of military duty except for their own exclusive defense .
it also prohibited that republic from erecting fortifications upon them for their protection , thus leaving them open to invasion from any quarter ; and , finally , it provided " that slavery shall not at any time hereafter be permitted to exist therein."had honduras ratified this convention , she would have ratified the establishment of a state substantially independent within her own limits , and a state at all times subject to british influence and control .
moreover , had the united states ratified the treaty with great britain in its original form , we should have been bound " to recognize and respect in all future time " these stipulations to the prejudice of honduras .
being in direct opposition to the spirit and meaning of the clayton and bulwer treaty as understood in the united states , the senate rejected the entire clause , and substituted in its stead a simple recognition of the sovereign right of honduras to these islands in the following language : the two contracting parties do hereby mutually engage to recognize and respect the islands of ruatan , bonaco , utila , barbaretta , helena , and moral , situate in the bay of honduras and off the coast of the republic of honduras , as under the sovereignty and as part of the said republic of honduras .
great britain rejected this amendment , assigning as the only reason that the ratifications of the convention of the 27th august , 1856 , between her and honduras had not been " exchanged , owing to the hesitation of that government . "
had this been done , it is stated that " her majesty 's government would have had little difficulty in agreeing to the modification proposed by the senate , which then would have had in effect the same signification as the original wording . "
whether this would have been the effect , whether the mere circumstance of the exchange of the ratifications of the british convention with honduras prior in point of time to the ratification of our treaty with great britain would " in effect " have had " the same signification as the original wording , " and thus have nullified the amendment of the senate , may well be doubted .
it is , perhaps , fortunate that the question has never arisen .
the british government , immediately after rejecting the treaty as amended , proposed to enter into a new treaty with the united states , similar in all respects to the treaty which they had just refused to ratify , if the united states would consent to add to the senate 's clear and unqualified recognition of the sovereignty of honduras over the bay islands the following conditional stipulation : whenever and so soon as the republic of honduras shall have concluded and ratified a treaty with great britain by which great britain shall have ceded and the republic of honduras shall have accepted the said islands , subject to the provisions and conditions contained in such treaty .
this proposition was , of course , rejected .
after the senate had refused to recognize the british convention with honduras of the 27th august , 1856 , with full knowledge of its contents , it was impossible for me , necessarily ignorant of " the provisions and conditions " which might be contained in a future convention between the same parties , to sanction them in advance .
the fact is that when two nations like great britain and the united states , mutually desirous , as they are , and i trust ever may be , of maintaining the most friendly relations with each other , have unfortunately concluded a treaty which they understand in senses directly opposite , the wisest course is to abrogate such a treaty by mutual consent and to commence anew .
had this been done promptly , all difficulties in central america would most probably ere this have been adjusted to the satisfaction of both parties .
the time spent in discussing the meaning of the clayton and bulwer treaty would have been devoted to this praiseworthy purpose , and the task would have been the more easily accomplished because the interest of the two countries in central america is identical , being confined to securing safe transits over all the routes across the isthmus .
whilst entertaining these sentiments , i shall , nevertheless , not refuse to contribute to any reasonable adjustment of the central american questions which is not practically inconsistent with the american interpretation of the treaty .
overtures for this purpose have been recently made by the british government in a friendly spirit , which i cordially reciprocate , but whether this renewed effort will result in success i am not yet prepared to express an opinion .
a brief period will determine .
with france our ancient relations of friendship still continue to exist .
the french government have in several recent instances , which need not be enumerated , evinced a spirit of good will and kindness toward our country , which i heartily reciprocate .
it is , notwithstanding , much to be regretted that two nations whose productions are of such a character as to invite the most extensive exchanges and freest commercial intercourse should continue to enforce ancient and obsolete restrictions of trade against each other .
our commercial treaty with france is in this respect an exception from our treaties with all other commercial nations .
it jealously levies discriminating duties both on tonnage and on articles the growth , produce , or manufacture of the one country when arriving in vessels belonging to the other .
more than forty years ago , on the 3d march , 1815 , congress passed an act offering to all nations to admit their vessels laden with their national productions into the ports of the united states upon the same terms with our own vessels provided they would reciprocate to us similar advantages .
this act confined the reciprocity to the productions of the respective foreign nations who might enter into the proposed arrangement with the united states .
the act of may 24 , 1828 , removed this restriction and offered a similar reciprocity to all such vessels without reference to the origin of their cargoes .
upon these principles our commercial treaties and arrangements have been rounded , except with france , and let us hope that this exception may not long exist .
our relations with russia remain , as they have ever been , on the most friendly footing .
the present emperor , as well as his predecessors , have never failed when the occasion offered to manifest their good will to our country , and their friendship has always been highly appreciated by the government and people of the united states .
with all other european governments , except that of spain , our relations are as peaceful as we could desire .
i regret to say that no progress whatever has been made since the adjournment of congress toward the settlement of any of the numerous claims of our citizens against the spanish government .
besides , the outrage committed on our flag by the spanish war frigate ferrolana on the high seas off the coast of cuba in march , 1855 , by firing into the american mail steamer el dorado and detaining and searching her , remains unacknowledged and unredressed .
the general tone and temper of the spanish government toward that of the united states are much to be regretted .
our present envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary to madrid has asked to be recalled , and it is my purpose to send out a new minister to spain with special instructions on all questions pending between the two governments , and with a determination to have them speedily and amicably adjusted if this be possible .
in the meantime , whenever our minister urges the just claims of our citizens on the notice of the spanish government he is met with the objection that congress has never made the appropriation recommended by president polk in his annual message of december , 1847 , " to be paid to the spanish government for the purpose of distribution among the claimants in the amistad case . "
a similar recommendation was made by my immediate predecessor in his message of december , 1853 , and entirely concurring with both in the opinion that this indemnity is justly due under the treaty with spain of the 27th of october , 1795 , i earnestly recommend such an appropriation to the favorable consideration of congress .
a treaty of friendship and commerce was concluded at constantinople on the 13th december , 1856 , between the united states and persia , the ratifications of which were exchanged at constantinople on the 13th june , 1857 , and the treaty was proclaimed by the president on the 18th august , 1857 .
this treaty , it is believed , will prove beneficial to american commerce .
the shah has manifested an earnest disposition to cultivate friendly relations with our country , and has expressed a strong wish that we should be represented at teheran by a minister plenipotentiary ; and i recommend that an appropriation be made for this purpose .
recent occurrences in china have been unfavorable to a revision of the treaty with that empire of the 3d july , 1844 , with a view to the security and extension of our commerce .
the twenty - fourth article of this treaty stipulated for a revision of it in case experience should prove this to be requisite , " in which case the two governments will , at the expiration of twelve years from the date of said convention , treat amicably concerning the same by means of suitable persons appointed to conduct such negotiations . "
these twelve years expired on the 3d july , 1856 , but long before that period it was ascertained that important changes in the treaty were necessary , and several fruitless attempts were made by the commissioner of the united states to effect these changes .
another effort was about to be made for the same purpose by our commissioner in conjunction with the ministers of england and france , but this was suspended by the occurrence of hostilities in the canton river between great britain and the chinese empire .
these hostilities have necessarily interrupted the trade of all nations with canton , which is now in a state of blockade , and have occasioned a serious loss of life and property .
meanwhile the insurrection within the empire against the existing imperial dynasty still continues , and it is difficult to anticipate what will be the result .
under these circumstances i have deemed it advisable to appoint a distinguished citizen of pennsylvania envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary to proceed to china and to avail himself of any opportunities which may offer to effect changes in the existing treaty favorable to american commerce .
he left the united states for the place of his destination in july last in the war steamer minnesota .
special ministers to china have also been appointed by the governments of great britain and france .
whilst our minister has been instructed to occupy a neutral position in reference to the existing hostilities at canton , he will cordially cooperate with the british and french ministers in all peaceful measures to secure by treaty stipulations those just concessions to commerce which the nations of the world have a right to expect and which china can not long be permitted to withhold .
from assurances received i entertain no doubt that the three ministers will act in harmonious concert to obtain similar commercial treaties for each of the powers they represent .
we can not fail to feel a deep interest in all that concerns the welfare of the independent republics on our own continent , as well as of the empire of brazil .
our difficulties with new granada , which a short time since bore so threatening an aspect , are , it is to be hoped , in a fair train of settlement in a manner just and honorable to both parties .
the isthmus of central america , including that of panama , is the great highway between the atlantic and pacific over which a large portion of the commerce of the world is destined to pass .
the united states are more deeply interested than any other nation in preserving the freedom and security of all the communications across this isthmus .
it is our duty , therefore , to take care that they shall not be interrupted either by invasions from our own country or by wars between the independent states of central america .
under our treaty with new granada of the 12th december , 1846 , we are bound to guarantee the neutrality of the isthmus of panama , through which the panama railroad passes , " as well as the rights of sovereignty and property which new granada has and possesses over the said territory . "
this obligation is rounded upon equivalents granted by the treaty to the government and people of the united states .
under these circumstances i recommend to congress the passage of an act authorizing the president , in case of necessity , to employ the land and naval forces of the united states to carry into effect this guaranty of neutrality and protection .
i also recommend similar legislation for the security of any other route across the isthmus in which we may acquire an interest by treaty .
with the independent republics on this continent it is both our duty and our interest to cultivate the most friendly relations .
we can never feel indifferent to their fate , and must always rejoice in their prosperity .
unfortunately both for them and for us , our example and advice have lost much of their influence in consequence of the lawless expeditions which have been fitted out against some of them within the limits of our country .
nothing is better calculated to retard our steady material progress or impair our character as a nation than the toleration of such enterprises in violation of the law of nations .
it is one of the first and highest duties of any independent state in its relations with the members of the great family of nations to restrain its people from acts of hostile aggression against their citizens or subjects .
the most eminent writers on public law do not hesitate to denounce such hostile acts as robbery and murder .
weak and feeble states like those of central america may not feel themselves able to assert and vindicate their rights .
the case would be far different if expeditions were set on foot within our own territories to make private war against a powerful nation .
if such expeditions were fitted out from abroad against any portion of our own country , to burn down our cities , murder and plunder our people , and usurp our government , we should call any power on earth to the strictest account for not preventing such enormities .
ever since the administration of general washington acts of congress have been enforced to punish severely the crime of setting on foot a military expedition within the limits of the united states to proceed from thence against a nation or state with whom we are at peace .
the present neutrality act of april 20 , 1818 , is but little more than a collection of preexisting laws .
under this act the president is empowered to employ the land and naval forces and the militia " for the purpose of preventing the carrying on of any such expedition or enterprise from the territories and jurisdiction of the united states , " and the collectors of customs are authorized and required to detain any vessel in port when there is reason to believe she is about to take part in such lawless enterprises .
when it was first rendered probable that an attempt would be made to get up another unlawful expedition against nicaragua , the secretary of state issued instructions to the marshals and district attorneys , which were directed by the secretaries of war and the navy to the appropriate army and navy officers , requiring them to be vigilant and to use their best exertions in carrying into effect the provisions of the act of 1818 .
notwithstanding these precautions , the expedition has escaped from our shores .
such enterprises can do no possible good to the country , but have already inflicted much injury both on its interests and its character .
they have prevented peaceful emigration from the united states to the states of central america , which could not fail to prove highly beneficial to all the parties concerned .
in a pecuniary point of view alone our citizens have sustained heavy losses from the seizure and closing of the transit route by the san juan between the two oceans .
the leader of the recent expedition was arrested at new orleans , but was discharged on giving bail for his appearance in the insufficient sum of $ 2,000.i commend the whole subject to the serious attention of congress , believing that our duty and our interest , as well as our national character , require that we should adopt such measures as will be effectual in restraining our citizens from committing such outrages .
i regret to inform you that the president of paraguay has refused to ratify the treaty between the united states and that state as amended by the senate , the signature of which was mentioned in the message of my predecessor to congress at the opening of its session in december , 1853 .
the reasons assigned for this refusal will appear in the correspondence herewith submitted .
it being desirable to ascertain the fitness of the river la plata and its tributaries for navigation by steam , the united states steamer water witch was sent thither for that purpose in 1853 .
this enterprise was successfully carried on until february , 1855 , when , whilst in the peaceful prosecution of her voyage up the parana river , the steamer was fired upon by a paraguayan fort .
the fire was returned , but as the water witch was of small force and not designed for offensive operations , she retired from the conflict .
the pretext upon which the attack was made was a decree of the president of paraguay of october , 1854 , prohibiting foreign vessels of war from navigating the rivers of that state .
as paraguay , however , was the owner of but one bank of the river of that name , the other belonging to corientes , a state of the argentine confederation , the right of its government to expect that such a decree would be obeyed can not be acknowledged .
but the water witch was not , properly speaking , a vessel of war .
she was a small steamer engaged in a scientific enterprise intended for the advantage of commercial states generally .
under these circumstances i am constrained to consider the attack upon her as unjustifiable and as calling for satisfaction from the paraguayan government .
citizens of the united states also who were established in business in paraguay have had their property seized and taken from them , and have otherwise been treated by the authorities in an insulting and arbitrary manner , which requires redress .
a demand for these purposes will be made in a firm but conciliatory spirit .
this will the more probably be granted if the executive shall have authority to use other means in the event of a refusal .
this is accordingly recommended .
it is unnecessary to state in detail the alarming condition of the territory of kansas at the time of my inauguration .
the opposing parties then stood in hostile array against each other , and any accident might have relighted the flames of civil war .
besides , at this critical moment kansas was left without a governor by the resignation of governor geary .
on the 19th of february previous the territorial legislature had passed a law providing for the election of delegates on the third monday of june to a convention to meet on the first monday of september for the purpose of framing a constitution preparatory to admission into the union .
this law was in the main fair and just , and it is to be regretted that all the qualified electors had not registered themselves and voted under its provisions .
at the time of the election for delegates an extensive organization existed in the territory whose avowed object it was , if need be , to put down the lawful government by force and to establish a government of their own under the so - called topeka constitution .
the persons attached to this revolutionary organization abstained from taking any part in the election .
the act of the territorial legislature had omitted to provide for submitting to the people the constitution which might be framed by the convention , and in the excited state of public feeling throughout kansas an apprehension extensively prevailed that a design existed to force upon them a constitution in relation to slavery against their will .
in this emergency it became my duty , as it was my unquestionable right , having in view the union of all good citizens in support of the territorial laws , to express an opinion on the true construction of the provisions concerning slavery contained in the organic act of congress of the 30th may , 1854 .
congress declared it to be " the true intent and meaning of this act not to legislate slavery into any territory or state , nor to exclude it therefrom , but to leave the people thereof perfectly free to form and regulate their domestic institutions in their own way . "
under it kansas , " when admitted as a state , " was to " be received into the union with or without slavery , as their constitution may prescribe at the time of their admission."did congress mean by this language that the delegates elected to frame a constitution should have authority finally to decide the question of slavery , or did they intend by leaving it to the people that the people of kansas themselves should decide this question by a direct vote ?
on this subject i confess i had never entertained a serious doubt , and therefore in my instructions to governor walker of the 28th march last i merely said that when " a constitution shall be submitted to the people of the territory they must be protected in the exercise of their right of voting for or against that instrument , and the fair expression of the popular will must not be interrupted by fraud or violence."in expressing this opinion it was far from my intention to interfere with the decision of the people of kansas , either for or against slavery .
from this i have always carefully abstained .
intrusted with the duty of taking " care that the laws be faithfully executed , " my only desire was that the people of kansas should furnish to congress the evidence required by the organic act , whether for or against slavery , and in this manner smooth their passage into the union .
in emerging from the condition of territorial dependence into that of a sovereign state it was their duty , in my opinion , to make known their will by the votes of the majority on the direct question whether this important domestic institution should or should not continue to exist .
indeed , this was the only possible mode in which their will could be authentically ascertained .
the election of delegates to a convention must necessarily take place in separate districts .
from this cause it may readily happen , as has often been the case , that a majority of the people of a state or territory are on one side of a question , whilst a majority of the representatives from the several districts into which it is divided may be upon the other side .
this arises front the fact that in some districts delegates may be elected by small majorities , whilst in others those of different sentiments may receive majorities sufficiently great not only to overcome the votes given for the former , but to leave a large majority of the whole people in direct opposition to a majority of the delegates .
besides , our history proves that influences may be brought to bear on the representative sufficiently powerful to induce him to disregard the will of his constituents .
the truth is that no other authentic and satisfactory mode exists of ascertaining the will of a majority of the people of any state or territory on an important and exciting question like that of slavery in kansas except by leaving it to a direct vote .
how wise , then , was it for congress to pass over all subordinate and intermediate agencies and proceed directly to the source of all legitimate power under our institutions!how vain would any other principle prove in practice !
this may be illustrated by the case of kansas .
should she be admitted into the union with a constitution either maintaining or abolishing slavery against the sentiment of the people , this could have no other effect than to continue and to exasperate the existing agitation during the brief period required to make the constitution conform to the irresistible will of the majority .
the friends and supporters of the nebraska and kansas act , when struggling on a recent occasion to sustain its wise provisions before the great tribunal of the american people , never differed about its true meaning on this subject .
everywhere throughout the union they publicly pledged their faith and their honor that they would cheerfully submit the question of slavery to the decision of the bona fide people of kansas , without any restriction or qualification whatever .
all were cordially united upon the great doctrine of popular sovereignty , which is the vital principle of our free institutions .
had it then been insinuated from any quarter that it would be a sufficient compliance with the requisitions of the organic law for the members of a convention thereafter to be elected to withhold the question of slavery from the people and to substitute their own will for that of a legally ascertained majority of all their constituents , this would have been instantly rejected .
everywhere they remained true to the resolution adopted on a celebrated occasion recognizing " the right of the people of all the territories , including kansas and nebraska , acting through the legally and fairly expressed will of a majority of actual residents , and whenever the number of their inhabitants justifies it , to form a constitution with or without slavery and be admitted into the union upon terms of perfect equality with the other states."the convention to frame a constitution for kansas met on the first monday of september last .
they were called together by virtue of an act of the territorial legislature , whose lawful existence had been recognized by congress in different forms and by different enactments .
a large proportion of the citizens of kansas did not think proper to register their names and to vote at the election for delegates ; but an opportunity to do this having been fairly afforded , their refusal to avail themselves of their right could in no manner affect the legality of the convention .
this convention proceeded to frame a constitution for kansas , and finally adjourned on the 7th day of november .
but little difficulty occurred in the convention except on the subject of slavery .
the truth is that the general provisions of our recent state constitutions are so similar and , i may add , so excellent that the difference between them is not essential .
under the earlier practice of the government no constitution framed by the convention of a territory preparatory to its admission into the union as a state had been submitted to the people .
i trust , however , the example set by the last congress , requiring that the constitution of minnesota " should be subject to the approval and ratification of the people of the proposed state , " may be followed on future occasions .
i took it for granted that the convention of kansas would act in accordance with this example , rounded , as it is , on correct principles , and hence my instructions to governor walker in favor of submitting the constitution to the people were expressed in general and unqualified terms .
in the kansas - nebraska act , however , this requirement , as applicable to the whole constitution , had not been inserted , and the convention were not bound by its terms to submit any other portion of the instrument to an election except that which relates to the " domestic institution " of slavery .
this will be rendered clear by a simple reference to its language .
it was " not to legislate slavery into any territory or state , nor to exclude it therefrom , but to leave the people thereof perfectly free to form and regulate their domestic institutions in their own way . "
according to the plain construction of the sentence , the words " domestic institutions " have a direct , as they have an appropriate , reference to slavery . "
domestic institutions " are limited to the family .
the relation between master and slave and a few others are " domestic institutions , " and are entirely distinct from institutions of a political character .
besides , there was no question then before congress , nor , indeed , has there since been any serious question before the people of kansas or the country , except that which relates to the " domestic institution " of slavery .
the convention , after an angry and excited debate , finally determined , by a majority of only two , to submit the question of slavery to the people , though at the last forty - three of the fifty delegates present affixed their signatures to the constitution .
a large majority of the convention were in favor of establishing slavery in kansas .
they accordingly inserted an article in the constitution for this purpose similar in form to those which had been adopted by other territorial conventions .
in the schedule , however , providing for the transition from a territorial to a state government the question has been fairly and explicitly referred to the people whether they will have a constitution " with or without slavery . "
it declares that before the constitution adopted by the convention " shall be sent to congress for admission into the union as a state " an election shall be held to decide this question , at which all the white male inhabitants of the territory above the age of 21 are entitled to vote .
they are to vote by ballot , and " the ballots cast at said election shall be indorsed ' constitution with slavery ' and ' constitution with no slavery . ' "
if there be a majority in favor of the " constitution with slavery , " then it is to be transmitted to congress by the president of the convention in its original form ; if , on the contrary , there shall be a majority in favor of the " constitution with no slavery , " " then the article providing for slavery shall be stricken from the constitution by the president of this convention ; " and it is expressly declared that " no slavery shall exist in the state of kansas , except that the right of property in slaves now in the territory shall in no manner be interfered with ; " and in that event it is made his duty to have the constitution thus ratified transmitted to the congress of the united states for the admission of the state into the union .
at this election every citizen will have an opportunity of expressing his opinion by his vote " whether kansas shall be received into the union with or without slavery , " and thus this exciting question may be peacefully settled in the very mode required by the organic law .
the election will be held under legitimate authority , and if any portion of the inhabitants shall refuse to vote , a fair opportunity to do so having been presented , this will be their own voluntary act and they alone will be responsible for the consequences .
whether kansas shall be a free or a slave state must eventually , under some authority , be decided by an election ; and the question can never be more clearly or distinctly presented to the people than it is at the present moment .
should this opportunity be rejected she may be involved for years in domestic discord , and possibly in civil war , before she can again make up the issue now so fortunately tendered and again reach the point she has already attained .
kansas has for some years occupied too much of the public attention .
it is high time this should be directed to far more important objects .
when once admitted into the union , whether with or without slavery , the excitement beyond her own limits will speedily pass away , and she will then for the first time be left , as she ought to have been long since , to manage her own affairs in her own way .
if her constitution on the subject of slavery or on any other subject be displeasing to a majority of the people , no human power can prevent them from changing it within a brief period .
under these circumstances it may well be questioned whether the peace and quiet of the whole country are not of greater importance than the mere temporary triumph of either of the political parties in kansas .
should the constitution without slavery be adopted by the votes of the majority , the rights of property in slaves now in the territory are reserved .
the number of these is very small , but if it were greater the provision would be equally just and reasonable .
the slaves were brought into the territory under the constitution of the united states and are now the property of their masters .
this point has at length been finally decided by the highest judicial tribunal of the country , and this upon the plain principle that when a confederacy of sovereign states acquire a new territory at their joint expense both equality and justice demand that the citizens of one and all of them shall have the right to take into it whatsoever is recognized as property by the common constitution .
to have summarily confiscated the property in slaves already in the territory would have been an act of gross injustice and contrary to the practice of the older states of the union which have abolished slavery .
a territorial government was established for utah by act of congress approved the 9th september , 1850 , and the constitution and laws of the united states were thereby extended over it " so far as the same or any provisions thereof may be applicable . "
this act provided for the appointment by the president , by and with the advice and consent of the senate , of a governor ( who was to be ex officio superintendent of indian affairs ) , a secretary , three judges of the supreme court , a marshal , and a district attorney .
subsequent acts provided for the appointment of the officers necessary to extend our land and our indian system over the territory .
brigham young was appointed the first governor on the 20th september , 1850 , and has held the office ever since .
whilst governor young has been both governor and superintendent of indian affairs throughout this period , he has been at the same time the head of the church called the latter - day saints , and professes to govern its members and dispose of their property by direct inspiration and authority from the almighty .
his power has been , therefore , absolute over both church and state .
the people of utah almost exclusively belong to this church , and believing with a fanatical spirit that he is governor of the territory by divine appointment , they obey his commands as if these were direct revelations from heaven .
if , therefore , he chooses that his government shall come into collision with the government of the united states , the members of the mormon church will yield implicit obedience to his will .
unfortunately , existing facts leave but little doubt that such is his determination .
without entering upon a minute history of occurrences , it is sufficient to say that all the officers of the united states , judicial and executive , with the single exception of two indian agents , have found it necessary for their own personal safety to withdraw from the territory , and there no longer remains any government in utah but the despotism of brigham young .
this being the condition of affairs in the territory , i could not mistake the path of duty .
as chief executive magistrate i was bound to restore the supremacy of the constitution and laws within its limits .
in order to effect this purpose , i appointed a new governor and other federal officers for utah and sent with them a military force for their protection and to aid as a posse comitatus in case of need in the execution of the laws .
with the religious opinions of the mormons , as long as they remained mere opinions , however deplorable in themselves and revolting to the moral and religious sentiments of all christendom , i had no right to interfere .
actions alone , when in violation of the constitution and laws of the united states , become the legitimate subjects for the jurisdiction of the civil magistrate .
my instructions to governor cumming have therefore been framed in strict accordance with these principles .
at their date a hope was indulged that no necessity might exist for employing the military in restoring and maintaining the authority of the law , but this hope has now vanished .
governor young has by proclamation declared his determination to maintain his power by force , and has already committed acts of hostility against the united states .
unless he should retrace his steps the territory of utah will be in a state of open rebellion .
he has committed these acts of hostility notwithstanding major van vliet , an officer of the army , sent to utah by the commanding general to purchase provisions for the troops , had given him the strongest assurances of the peaceful intentions of the government , and that the troops would only be employed as a posse comitatus when called on by the civil authority to aid in the execution of the laws .
there is reason to believe that governor young has long contemplated this result .
he knows that the continuance of his despotic power depends upon the exclusion of all settlers from the territory except those who will acknowledge his divine mission and implicitly obey his will , and that an enlightened public opinion there would soon prostrate institutions at war with the laws both of god and man . "
he has therefore for several years , in order to maintain his independence , been industriously employed in collecting and fabricating arms and munitions of war and in disciplining the mormons for military service . "
as superintendent of indian affairs he has had an opportunity of tampering with the indian tribes and exciting their hostile feelings against the united states .
this , according to our information , he has accomplished in regard to some of these tribes , while others have remained true to their allegiance and have communicated his intrigues to our indian agents .
he has laid in a store of provisions for three years , which in case of necessity , as he informed major van vliet , he will conceal , " and then take to the mountains and bid defiance to all the powers of the government."a great part of all this may be idle boasting , but yet no wise government will lightly estimate the efforts which may be inspired by such frenzied fanaticism as exists among the mormons in utah .
this is the first rebellion which has existed in our territories , and humanity itself requires that we should put it down in such a manner that it shall be the last .
to trifle with it would be to encourage it and to render it formidable .
we ought to go there with such an imposing force as to convince these deluded people that resistance would be vain , and thus spare the effusion of blood .
we can in this manner best convince them that we are their friends , not their enemies .
in order to accomplish this object it will be necessary , according to the estimate of the war department , to raise four additional regiments ; and this i earnestly recommend to congress .
at the present moment of depression in the revenues of the country i am sorry to be obliged to recommend such a measure ; but i feel confident of the support of congress , cost what it may , in suppressing the insurrection and in restoring and maintaining the sovereignty of the constitution and laws over the territory of utah .
i recommend to congress the establishment of a territorial government over arizona , incorporating with it such portions of new mexico as they may deem expedient .
i need scarcely adduce arguments in support of this recommendation .
we are bound to protect the lives and the property of our citizens inhabiting arizona , and these are now without any efficient protection .
their present number is already considerable , and is rapidly increasing , notwithstanding the disadvantages under which they labor .
besides , the proposed territory is believed to be rich in mineral and agricultural resources , especially in silver and copper .
the mails of the united states to california are now carried over it throughout its whole extent , and this route is known to be the nearest and believed to be the best to the pacific .
long experience has deeply convinced me that a strict construction of the powers granted to congress is the only true , as well as the only safe , theory of the constitution .
whilst this principle shall guide my public conduct , i consider it clear that under the war - making power congress may appropriate money for the construction of a military road through the territories of the united states when this is absolutely necessary for the defense of any of the states against foreign invasion .
the constitution has conferred upon congress power " to declare war , " " to raise and support armies , " " to provide and maintain a navy , " and to call forth the militia to " repel invasions . "
these high sovereign powers necessarily involve important and responsible public duties , and among them there is none so sacred and so imperative as that of preserving our soil from the invasion of a foreign enemy .
the constitution has therefore left nothing on this point to construction , but expressly requires that " the united states shall protect each of them [ the states ] against invasion . "
now if a military road over our own territories be indispensably necessary to enable us to meet and repel the invader , it follows as a necessary consequence not only that we possess the power , but it is our imperative duty to construct such a road .
it would be an absurdity to invest a government with the unlimited power to make and conduct war and at the same time deny to it the only means of reaching and defeating the enemy at the frontier .
without such a road it is quite evident we can not " protect " california and our pacific possessions " against invasion . "
we can not by any other means transport men and munitions of war from the atlantic states in sufficient time successfully to defend these remote and distant portions of the republic .
experience has proved that the routes across the isthmus of central america are at best but a very uncertain and unreliable mode of communication .
but even if this were not the case , they would at once be closed against us in the event of war with a naval power so much stronger than our own as to enable it to blockade the ports at either end of these routes .
after all , therefore , we can only rely upon a military road through our own territories ; and ever since the origin of the government congress has been in the practice of appropriating money from the public treasury for the construction of such roads .
the difficulties and the expense of constructing a military railroad to connect our atlantic and pacific states have been greatly exaggerated .
the distance on the arizona route , near the thirty - second parallel of north latitude , between the western boundary of texas , on the rio grande , and the eastern boundary of california , on the colorado , from the best explorations now within our knowledge , does not exceed 470 miles , and the face of the country is in the main favorable .
for obvious reasons the government ought not to undertake the work itself by means of its own agents .
this ought to be committed to other agencies , which congress might assist , either by grants of land or money , or by both , upon such terms and conditions as they may deem most beneficial for the country .
provision might thus be made not only for the safe , rapid , and economical transportation of troops and munitions of war , but also of the public mails .
the commercial interests of the whole country , both east and west , would be greatly promoted by such a road , and , above all , it would be a powerful additional bond of union .
and although advantages of this kind , whether postal , commercial , or political , can not confer constitutional power , yet they may furnish auxiliary arguments in favor of expediting a work which , in my judgment , is clearly embraced within the war - making power .
for these reasons i commend to the friendly consideration of congress the subject of the pacific railroad , without finally committing myself to any particular route .
the report of the secretary of the treasury will furnish a detailed statement of the condition of the public finances and of the respective branches of the public service devolved upon that department of the government .
by this report it appears that the amount of revenue received from all sources into the treasury during the fiscal year ending the 30th june , 1857 , was $ 68,631,513.67 , which amount , with the balance of $ 19,901,325.45 remaining in the treasury at the commencement of the year , made an aggregate for the service of the year of $ 88,532,839.12.the public expenditures for the fiscal year ending 30th june , 1857 , amounted to $ 70,822,724.85 , of which $ 5,943,896.91 were applied to the redemption of the public debt , including interest and premium , leaving in the treasury at the commencement of the present fiscal year , on the 1st july , 1857 , $ 17,710,114.27.the receipts into the treasury for the first quarter of the present fiscal year , commencing 1st july , 1857 , were $ 20,929,819.81 , and the estimated receipts of the remaining three quarters to the 30th june , 1858 , are $ 36,750,000 , making , with the balance before stated , an aggregate of $ 75,389,934.08 for the service of the present fiscal year .
the actual expenditures during the first quarter of the present fiscal year were $ 23,714,528.37 , of which $ 3,895,232.39 were applied to the redemption of the public debt , including interest and premium .
the probable expenditures of the remaining three quarters to 30th june , 1858 , are $ 51,248,530.04 , including interest on the public debt , making an aggregate of $ 74,963,058.41 , leaving an estimated balance in the treasury at the close of the present fiscal year of $ 426,875.67.the amount of the public debt at the commencement of the present fiscal year was $ 29,060,386.90.the amount redeemed since the 1st of july was $ 3,895,232.39 , leaving a balance unredeemed at this time of $ 25,165,154.51.the amount of estimated expenditures for the remaining three quarters of the present fiscal year will in all probability be increased from the causes set forth in the report of the secretary .
his suggestion , therefore , that authority should be given to supply any temporary deficiency by the issue of a limited amount of treasury notes is approved , and i accordingly recommend the passage of such a law .
as stated in the report of the secretary , the tariff of march 3 , 1857 , has been in operation for so short a period of time and under circumstances so unfavorable to a just development of its results as a revenue measure that i should regard it as inexpedient , at least for the present , to undertake its revision .
i transmit herewith the reports made to me by the secretaries of war and of the navy , of the interior , and of the postmaster - general .
they all contain valuable and important information and suggestions , which i commend to the favorable consideration of congress .
i have already recommended the raising of four additional regiments , and the report of the secretary of war presents strong reasons proving this increase of the army under existing circumstances to be indispensable .
i would call the special attention of congress to the recommendation of the secretary of the navy in favor of the construction of ten small war steamers of light draft .
for some years the government has been obliged on many occasions to hire such steamers from individuals to supply its pressing wants .
at the present moment we have no armed vessel in the navy which can penetrate the rivers of china .
we have but few which can enter any of the harbors south of norfolk , although many millions of foreign and domestic commerce annually pass in and out of these harbors .
some of our most valuable interests and most vulnerable points are thus left exposed .
this class of vessels of light draft , great speed , and heavy guns would be formidable in coast defense .
the cost of their construction will not be great and they will require but a comparatively small expenditure to keep them in commission .
in time of peace they will prove as effective as much larger vessels and more useful .
one of them should be at every station where we maintain a squadron , and three or four should be constantly employed on our atlantic and pacific coasts .
economy , utility , and efficiency combine to recommend them as almost indispensable .
ten of these small vessels would be of incalculable advantage to the naval service , and the whole cost of their construction would not exceed $ 2,300,000 , or $ 230,000 each .
the report of the secretary of the interior is worthy of grave consideration .
it treats of the numerous important and diversified branches of domestic administration intrusted to him by law .
among these the most prominent are the public lands and our relations with the indians .
our system for the disposal of the public lands , originating with the fathers of the republic , has been improved as experience pointed the way , and gradually adapted to the growth and settlement of our western states and territories .
it has worked well in practice .
already thirteen states and seven territories have been carved out of these lands , and still more than a thousand millions of acres remain unsold .
what a boundless prospect this presents to our country of future prosperity and power!we have heretofore disposed of 363,862,464 acres of the public land .
whilst the public lands , as a source of revenue , are of great importance , their importance is far greater as furnishing homes for a hardy and independent race of honest and industrious citizens who desire to subdue and cultivate the soil .
they ought to be administered mainly with a view of promoting this wise and benevolent policy .
in appropriating them for any other purpose we ought to use even greater economy than if they had been converted into money and the proceeds were already in the public treasury .
to squander away this richest and noblest inheritance which any people have ever enjoyed upon objects of doubtful constitutionality or expediency would be to violate one of the most important trusts ever committed to any people .
whilst i do not deny to congress the power , when acting bona fide as a proprietor , to give away portions of them for the purpose of increasing the value of the remainder , yet , considering the great temptation to abuse this power , we can not be too cautious in its exercise .
actual settlers under existing laws are protected against other purchasers at the public sales in their right of preemption to the extent of a quarter section , or 160 acres , of land .
the remainder may then be disposed of at public or entered at private sale in unlimited quantities .
speculation has of late years prevailed to a great extent in the public lands .
the consequence has been that large portions of them have become the property of individuals and companies , and thus the price is greatly enhanced to those who desire to purchase for actual settlement .
in order to limit the area of speculation as much as possible , the extinction of the indian title and the extension of the public surveys ought only to keep pace with the tide of emigration .
if congress should hereafter grant alternate sections to states or companies , as they have done heretofore , i recommend that the intermediate sections retained by the government should be subject to preemption by actual settlers .
it ought ever to be our cardinal policy to reserve the public lands as much as may be for actual settlers , and this at moderate prices .
we shall thus not only best promote the prosperity of the new states and territories and the power of the union , but shall secure homes for our posterity for many generations .
the extension of our limits has brought within our jurisdiction many additional and populous tribes of indians , a large proportion of which are wild , untractable , and difficult to control .
predatory and warlike in their disposition and habits , it is impossible altogether to restrain them from committing aggressions on each other , as well as upon our frontier citizens and those emigrating to our distant states and territories .
hence expensive military expeditions are frequently necessary to overawe and chastise the more lawless and hostile .
the present system of making them valuable presents to influence them to remain at peace has proved ineffectual .
it is believed to be the better policy to colonize them in suitable localities where they can receive the rudiments of education and be gradually induced to adopt habits of industry .
so far as the experiment has been tried it has worked well in practice , and it will doubtless prove to be less expensive than the present system .
the whole number of indians within our territorial limits is believed to be , from the best data in the interior department , about 325,000 .
the tribes of cherokees , choctaws , chickasaws , and creeks settled in the territory set apart for them west of arkansas are rapidly advancing in education and in all the arts of civilization and self - government and we may indulge the agreeable anticipation that at no very distant day they will be incorporated into the union as one of the sovereign states .
it will be seen from the report of the postmaster - general that the post - office department still continues to depend on the treasury , as it has been compelled to do for several years past , for an important portion of the means of sustaining and extending its operations .
their rapid growth and expansion are shown by a decennial statement of the number of post - offices and the length of post - roads , commencing with the year 1827 .
in that year there were 7,000 post - offices ; in 1837 , 11,177 ; in 1847 , 15,146 , and in 1857 they number 26,586 .
in this year 1,725 post - offices have been established and 704 discontinued , leaving a net increase of 1,021 .
the postmasters of 368 offices are appointed by the president .
the length of post - roads in 1827 was 105,336 miles ; in 1837,141,242 miles ; in 1847 , 153,818 miles , and in the year 1857 there are 242,601 miles of post - road , including 22,530 miles of railroad on which the mails are transported .
the expenditures of the department for the fiscal year ending on the 30th june , 1857 , as adjusted by the auditor , amounted to $ 11,507,670 .
to defray these expenditures there was to the credit of the department on the 1st july , 1856 , the sum of $ 789,599 ; the gross revenue of the year , including the annual allowances for the transportation of free mail matter , produced $ 8,053,951 , and the remainder was supplied by the appropriation from the treasury of $ 2,250,000 granted by the act of congress approved august 18 , 1856 , and by the appropriation of $ 666,883 made by the act of march 3 , 1857 , leaving $ 252,763 to be carried to the credit of the department in the accounts of the current year .
i commend to your consideration the report of the department in relation to the establishment of the overland mail route from the mississippi river to san francisco , cal .
the route was selected with my full concurrence , as the one , in my judgment , best calculated to attain the important objects contemplated by congress .
the late disastrous monetary revulsion may have one good effect should it cause both the government and the people to return to the practice of a wise and judicious economy both in public and private expenditures .
an overflowing treasury has led to habits of prodigality and extravagance in our legislation .
it has induced congress to make large appropriations to objects for which they never would have provided had it been necessary to raise the amount of revenue required to meet them by increased taxation or by loans .
we are now compelled to pause in our career and to scrutinize our expenditures with the utmost vigilance ; and in performing this duty i pledge my cooperation to the extent of my constitutional competency .
it ought to be observed at the same time that true public economy does not consist in withholding the means necessary to accomplish important national objects intrusted to us by the constitution , and especially such as may be necessary for the common defense .
in the present crisis of the country it is our duty to confine our appropriations to objects of this character , unless in cases where justice to individuals may demand a different course .
in all cases care ought to be taken that the money granted by congress shall be faithfully and economically applied .
under the federal constitution " every bill which shall have passed the house of representatives and the senate shall , before it become a law , " be approved and signed by the president ; and if not approved , " he shall return it with his objections to that house in which it shall have originated . "
in order to perform this high and responsible duty , sufficient time must be allowed the president to read and examine every bill presented to him for approval .
unless this be afforded , the constitution becomes a dead letter in this particular , and ; even worse , it becomes a means of deception .
our constituents , seeing the president 's approval and signature attached to each act of congress , are induced to believe that he has actually performed his duty , when in truth nothing is in many cases more unfounded .
from the practice of congress such an examination of each bill as the constitution requires has been rendered impossible .
the most important business of each session is generally crowded into its last hours , and the alternative presented to the president is either to violate the constitutional duty which he owes to the people and approve bills which for want of time it is impossible he should have examined , or by his refusal to do this subject the country and individuals to great loss and inconvenience .
besides , a practice has grown up of late years to legislate in appropriation bills at the last hours of the session on new and important subjects .
this practice constrains the president either to suffer measures to become laws which he does not approve or to incur the risk of stopping the wheels of the government by vetoing an appropriation bill .
formerly such bills were confined to specific appropriations for carrying into effect existing laws and the well - established policy of the country , and little time was then requited by the president for their examination .
for my own part , i have deliberately determined that i shall approve no bills which i have not examined , and it will be a case of extreme and most urgent necessity which shall ever induce me to depart from this rule .
i therefore respectfully but earnestly recommend that the two houses would allow the president at least two days previous to the adjournment of each session within which no new bill shall be presented to him for approval .
under the existing joint rule one day is allowed , but this rule has been hitherto so constantly suspended in practice that important bills continue to be presented to him up till the very last moments of the session .
in a large majority of cases no great public inconvenience can arise from the want of time to examine their provisions , because the constitution has declared that if a bill be presented to the president within the last ten days of the session he is not required to return it , either with an approval or with a veto , " in which case it shall not be a law . "
it may then lie over and be taken up and passed at the next session .
great inconvenience would only be experienced in regard to appropriation bills , but , fortunately , under the late excellent law allowing a salary instead of a per diem to members of congress the expense and inconvenience of a called session will be greatly reduced .
i can not conclude without commending to your favorable consideration the interest of the people of this district .
without a representative on the floor of congress , they have for this very reason peculiar claims upon our just regard .
to this i know , from my long acquaintance with them , they are eminently entitled .

to the senate and house of representatives : 
 the brief period which remains of your present session and the great urgency and importance of legislative action before its termination for the protection of american citizens and their property whilst in transit across the isthmus routes between our atlantic and pacific possessions render it my duty again to recall this subject to your notice .
i have heretofore presented it in my annual messages , both in december , 1857 and 1858 , to which i beg leave to refer .
in the latter i state that-- 
 the executive government of this country in its intercourse with foreign nations is limited to the employment of diplomacy alone .
when this fails it can proceed no further .
it can not legitimately resort to force without the direct authority of congress , except in resisting and repelling hostile attacks .
it would have no authority to enter the territories of nicaragua even to prevent the destruction of the transit and protect the lives and property of our own citizens on their passage .
it is true that on a sudden emergency of this character the president would direct any armed force in the vicinity to march to their relief , but in doing this he would act upon his own responsibility .
under these circumstances i earnestly recommend to congress the passage of an act authorizing the president , under such restrictions as they may deem proper , to employ the land and naval forces of the united states in preventing the transit from being obstructed or closed by lawless violence and in protecting the lives and property of american citizens traveling thereupon , requiring at the same time that these forces shall be withdrawn the moment the danger shall have passed away .
without such a provision our citizens will be constantly exposed to interruption in their progress and to lawless violence .
a similar necessity exists for the passage of such an act for the protection of the panama and tehuantepec routes .
another subject , equally important , commanded the attention of the senate at the last session of congress .
the republics south of the united states on this continent have , unfortunately , been frequently in a state of revolution and civil war ever since they achieved their independence .
as one or the other party has prevailed and obtained possession of the ports open to foreign commerce , they have seized and confiscated american vessels and their cargoes in an arbitrary and lawless manner and exacted money from american citizens by forced loans and other violent proceedings to enable them to carry on hostilities .
the executive governments of great britain , france , and other countries , possessing the war - making power , can promptly employ the necessary means to enforce immediate redress for similar outrages upon their subjects .
not so the executive government of the united states .
if the president orders a vessel of war to any of these ports to demand prompt redress for outrages committed , the offending parties are well aware that in case of refusal the commander can do no more than remonstrate .
he can resort to no hostile act .
the question must then be referred to diplomacy , and in many cases adequate redress can never be obtained .
thus american citizens are deprived of the same protection under the flag of their country which the subjects of other nations enjoy .
the remedy for this state of things can only be supplied by congress , since the constitution has confided to that body alone the power to make war .
without the authority of congress the executive can not lawfully direct any force , however near it may be to the scene of difficulty , to enter the territory of mexico , nicaragua , or new granada for the purpose of defending the persons and property of american citizens , even though they may be violently assailed whilst passing in peaceful transit over the tehuantepec , nicaragua , or panama routes .
he can not , without transcending his constitutional power , direct a gun to be fired into a port or land a seaman or marine to protect the lives of our countrymen on shore or to obtain redress for a recent outrage on their property .
the banditti which infest our neighboring republic of mexico , always claiming to belong to one or other of the hostile parties , might make a sudden descent on vera cruz or on the tehuantepec route , and he would have no power to employ the force on shipboard in the vicinity for their relief , either to prevent the plunder of our merchants or the destruction of the transit .
in reference to countries where the local authorities are strong enough to enforce the laws , the difficulty here indicated can seldom happen ; but where this is not the case and the local authorities do not possess the physical power , even if they possess the will , to protect our citizens within their limits recent experience has shown that the american executive should itself be authorized to render this protection .
such a grant of authority , thus limited in its extent , could in no just sense be regarded as a transfer of the war - making power to the executive , but only as an appropriate exercise of that power by the body to whom it exclusively belongs .
the riot at panama in 1856 , in which a great number of our citizens lost their lives , furnishes a pointed illustration of the necessity which may arise for the exertion of this authority .
i therefore earnestly recommend to congress , on whom the responsibility exclusively rests , to pass a law before their adjournment conferring on the president the power to protect the lives and property of american citizens in the cases which i have indicated , under such restrictions and conditions as they may deem advisable .
the knowledge that such a law exists would of itself go far to prevent the outrages which it is intended to redress and to render the employment of force unnecessary .
without this the president may be placed in a painful position before the meeting of the next congress .
in the present disturbed condition of mexico and one or more of the other republics south of us , no person can foresee what occurrences may take place before that period .
in case of emergency , our citizens , seeing that they do not enjoy the same protection with subjects of european governments , will have just cause to complain .
on the other hand , should the executive interpose , and especially should the result prove disastrous and valuable lives be lost , he might subject himself to severe censure for having assumed a power not confided to him by the constitution .
it is to guard against this contingency that i now appeal to congress .
having thus recommended to congress a measure which i deem necessary and expedient for the interest and honor of the country , i leave the whole subject to their wisdom and discretion .

in my message to the house of representatives of the 28th march last i solemnly protested against the creation of a committee , at the head of which was placed my accuser , for the purpose of investigating whether the president had , " by money , patronage , or other improper means , sought to influence the action of congress or any committee thereof for or against the passage of any law appertaining to the rights of any state or territory . "
i protested against this because it was destitute of any specification ; because it referred to no particular act to enable the president to prepare for his defense ; because it deprived him of the constitutional guards which , in common with every citizen of the united states , he possesses for his protection , and because it assailed his constitutional independence as a coordinate branch of the government .
there is an enlightened justice , as well as a beautiful symmetry , in every part of the constitution .
this is conspicuously manifested in regard to impeachments .
the house of representatives possesses " the sole power of impeachment , " the senate " the sole power to try all impeachments ; " and the impeachable offenses are " treason , bribery , or other high crimes or misdemeanors . "
the practice of the house from the earliest times had been in accordance with its own dignity , the rights of the accused , and the demands of justice .
at the commencement of each judicial investigation which might lead to an impeachment specific charges were always preferred ; the accused had an opportunity of cross - examining the witnesses , and he was placed in full possession of the precise nature of the offense which he had to meet .
an impartial and elevated standing committee was charged with this investigation , upon which no member inspired with the ancient sense of honor and justice would have served had he ever expressed an opinion against the accused .
until the present occasion it was never deemed proper to transform the accuser into the judge and to confer upon him the selection of his own committee .
the charges made against me in vague and general terms were of such a false and atrocious character that i did not entertain a moment&#39;s apprehension for the result .
they were abhorrent to every principle instilled into me from my youth and every practice of my life , and i did not believe it possible that the man existed who would so basely perjure himself as to swear to the truth of any such accusations .
in this conviction i am informed i have not been mistaken .
in my former protest , therefore , i truly and emphatically declared that it was made for no reason personal to myself , but because the proceedings of the house were in violation of the rights of the coordinate executive branch of the government , subversive of its constitutional independence , and if unresisted would establish a precedent dangerous and embarrassing to all my successors .
notwithstanding all this , if the committee had not transcended the authority conferred upon it by the resolution of the house of representatives , broad and general as this was , i should have remained silent upon the subject .
what i now charge is that they have acted as though they possessed unlimited power , and , without any warrant whatever in the resolution under which they were appointed , have pursued a course not merely at war with the constitutional rights of the executive , but tending to degrade the presidential office itself to such a degree as to render it unworthy of the acceptance of any man of honor or principle .
the resolution of the house , so far as it is accusatory of the president , is confined to an inquiry whether he had used corrupt or improper means to influence the action of congress or any of its committees on legislative measures pending before them -- nothing more , nothing less .
i have not learned through the newspapers or in any other mode that the committee have touched the other accusatory branch of the resolution , charging the president with a violation of duty in failing to execute some law or laws .
this branch of the resolution is therefore out of the question .
by what authority , then , have the committee undertaken to investigate the course of the president in regard to the convention which framed the lecompton constitution ?
by what authority have they undertaken to pry into our foreign relations for the purpose of assailing him on account of the instructions given by the secretary of state to our minister in mexico relative to the tehuantepec route ?
by what authority have they inquired into the causes of removal from office , and this from the parties themselves removed , with a view to prejudice his character , notwithstanding this power of removal belongs exclusively to the president under the constitution , was so decided by the first congress in the year 1789 , and has accordingly ever since been exercised ?
there is in the resolution no pretext of authority for the committee to investigate the question of the printing of the post - office blanks ; nor is it to be supposed that the house , if asked , would have granted such an authority , because this question had been previously committed to two other committees -- one in the senate and the other in the house .
notwithstanding this absolute want of power , the committee rushed into this investigation in advance of all other subjects .
the committee proceeded for months , from march 22 , 1860 , to examine ex parte and without any notice to myself into every subject which could possibly affect my character .
interested and vindictive witnesses were summoned and examined before them ; and the first and only information of their testimony which , in almost every instance , i received was obtained from the publication of such portions of it as could injuriously affect myself in the new york journals .
it mattered not that these statements were , so far as i have learned , disproved by the most respectable witnesses who happened to be on the spot .
the telegraph was silent respecting these contradictions .
it was a secret committee in regard to the testimony in my defense , but it was public in regard to all the testimony which could by possibility reflect on my character .
the poison was left to produce its effect upon the public mind , whilst the antidote was carefully withheld .
in their examinations the committee violated the most sacred and honorable confidences existing among men .
private correspondence , which a truly honorable man would never even entertain a distant thought of divulging , was dragged to light .
different persons in official and confidential relations with myself , and with whom it was supposed i might have held conversations the revelation of which would do me injury , were examined .
even members of the senate and members of my own cabinet , both my constitutional advisers , were called upon to testify , for the purpose of discovering something , if possible , to my discredit .
the distribution of the patronage of the government is by far the most disagreeable duty of the president .
applicants are so numerous and their applications are pressed with such eagerness by their friends , both in and out of congress , that the selection of one for any desirable office gives offense to many .
disappointed applicants , removed officers , and those who for any cause , real or imaginary , had become hostile to the administration presented themselves or were invited by a summons to appear before the committee .
these are the most dangerous witnesses .
even with the best intentions they are so influenced by prejudice and disappointment that they almost inevitably discolor truth .
they swear to their own version of private conversations with the president without the possibility of contradiction .
his lips are sealed , and he is left at their mercy .
he can not , as a coordinate branch of the government , appear before a committee of investigation to contradict the oaths of such witnesses .
every coward knows that he can employ insulting language against the president with impunity , and every false or prejudiced witness can attempt to swear away his character before such a committee without the fear of contradiction .
thus for months , whilst doing my best at one end of the avenue to perform my high and responsible duties to the country , has there been a committee of the house of representatives in session at the other end of the avenue spreading a drag net , without the shadow of authority from the house , over the whole union , to catch any disappointed man willing to malign my character ; and all this in secret conclave .
the lion&#39;s mouth at venice , into which secret denunciations were dropped , is an apt illustration of the covode committee .
the star - chamber , tyrannical and odious as it was , never proceeded in such a manner .
for centuries there has been nothing like it in any civilized country , except the revolutionary , tribunal of france in the days of robespierre .
now i undertake to state and to prove that should the proceedings of the committee be sanctioned by the house and become a precedent for future times the balance of the constitution will be entirely upset , and there will no longer remain the three coordinate and independent branches of the government -- legislative , executive , and judicial .
the worst fears of the patriots and statesmen who framed the constitution in regard to the usurpations of the legislative on the executive and judicial branches will then be realized .
in the language of mr. madison , speaking on this very subject in the forty - eighth number of the federalist : 
 in a representative republic , where the executive magistracy is carefully limited , both in the extent and duration of its power , and where the legislative power is exercised by an assembly which is inspired , by a supposed influence over the people , with an intrepid confidence in its own strength , which is sufficiently numerous to feel all the passions which actuate a multitude , yet not so numerous as to be incapable of pursuing the objects of its passions by means which reason prescribes , it is against the enterprising ambition of this department that the people ought to indulge all their jealousy and exhaust all their precautions .
and in the expressive and pointed language of mr. jefferson , when speaking of the tendency of the legislative branch of government to usurp the rights of the weaker branches : 
 the concentrating these in the same hands is precisely the definition of despotic government .
it will be no alleviation that these powers will be exercised by a plurality of hands , and not by a single one .
one hundred and seventy - three despots would surely be as oppressive as one .
let those who doubt it turn their eyes on the republic of venice .
as little will it avail us that they are chosen by ourselves .
an elective despotism was not the government we fought for , but one which should not only be rounded on free principles , but in which the powers of government should be so divided and balanced among several bodies of magistracy as that no one could transcend their legal limits without being effectually checked and controlled by the others .
should the proceedings of the covode committee become a precedent , both the letter and spirit of the constitution will be violated .
one of the three massive columns on which the whole superstructure rests will be broken down .
instead of the executive being a coordinate it will become a subordinate branch of the government .
the presidential office will be dragged into the dust .
the house of representatives will then have rendered the executive almost necessarily subservient to its wishes , instead of being independent .
how is it possible that two powers in the state can be coordinate and independent of each other if the one claims and exercises the power to reprove and to censure all the official acts and all the private conversations of the other , and this upon ex parte testimony before a secret inquisitorial committee ; in short , to assume a general censorship over the other ?
the idea is as absurd in public as it would be in private life .
should the president attempt to assert and maintain his own independence , future covode committees may dragoon him into submission by collecting the hosts of disappointed office hunters , removed officers , and those who desire to live upon the public treasury , which must follow in the wake of every , administration , and they in secret conclave will swear away his reputation .
under such circumstances he must be a very bold man should he not surrender at discretion and consent to exercise his authority according to the will of those invested with this terrific power .
the sovereign people of the several states have elected him to the highest and most honorable office in the world .
he is their only direct representative in the government .
by their constitution they have made him commander in chief of their army and navy .
he represents them in their intercourse with foreign nations .
clothed with their dignity and authority , he occupies a proud position before all nations , civilized and savage .
with the consent of the senate , he appoints all the important officers of the government .
he exercises the veto power , and to that extent controls the legislation of congress .
for the performance of these high duties he is responsible to the people of the several states , and not in any degree to the house of representatives .
shall he surrender these high powers , conferred upon him as the representative of the american people for their benefit , to the house to be exercised under their overshadowing influence and control ?
shall he alone of all the citizens of the united states be denied a fair trial ?
shall he alone not be " informed of the nature and cause of the accusation " against him ?
shall he alone not " be confronted with the witnesses " against him ?
shall the house of representatives , usurping the powers of the senate , proceed to try the president through the agency of a secret committee of the body , where it is impossible he can make any defense , and then , without affording him an opportunity of being heard , pronounce a judgment of censure against him ?
the very same rule might be applied for the very same reason to every judge of every court of the united states .
from what part of the constitution is this terrible secret inquisitorial power derived ?
no such express power exists .
from which of the enumerated powers can it be inferred ?
it is true the house can not pronounce the formal judgment against him of " removal from office , " but they can by their judgment of censure asperse his reputation , and thus to the extent of their influence render the office contemptible .
an example is at hand of the reckless manner in which this power of censure can be employed in high party times .
the house on a recent occasion have attempted to degrade the president by adopting the resolution of mr. john sherman declaring that he , in conjunction with the secretary of the navy , " by receiving and considering the party relations of bidders for contracts and the effect of awarding contracts upon pending elections , have set an example dangerous to the public safety and deserving the reproof of this house . "
it will scarcely be credited that the sole pretext for this vote of censure was the simple fact that in disposing of the numerous letters of every imaginable character which i daily receive i had in the usual course of business referred a letter from colonel patterson , of philadelphia , in relation to a contract , to the attention of the secretary of the navy , the head of the appropriate department , without expressing or intimating any opinion whatever on the subject ; and to make the matter if possible still plainer , the secretary had informed the committee that " the president did not in any manner interfere in this case , nor has he in any other case of contract since i have been in the department . "
the absence of all proof to sustain this attempt to degrade the president , whilst it manifests the venom of the shaft aimed at him , has destroyed the vigor of the bow .
to return after this digression : should the house , by the institution of covode committees , votes of censure , and other devices to harass the president , reduce him to subservience to their will and render him their creature , then the well - balanced government which our fathers framed will be annihilated .
this conflict has already been commenced in earnest by the house against the executive .
a bad precedent rarely , if ever , dies .
it will , i fear , be pursued in the time of my successors , no matter what may be their political character .
should secret committees be appointed with unlimited authority to range over all the words and actions , and , if possible , the very thoughts , of the president with a view to discover something in his past life prejudicial to his character from parasites and informers , this would be an ordeal which scarcely any mere man since the fall could endure .
it would be to subject him to a reign of terror from which the stoutest and purest heart might shrink .
i have passed triumphantly through this ordeal .
my vindication is complete .
the committee have reported no resolution looking to an impeachment against me ; no resolution of censure ; not even a resolution pointing out any abuses in any of the executive departments of the government to be corrected by legislation .
this is the highest commendation which could be bestowed on the heads of these departments .
the sovereign people of the states will , however , i trust , save my successors , whoever they may be , from any such ordeal .
they are frank , bold , and honest .
they detest delators and informers .
i therefore , in the name and as the representative of this great people , and standing upon the ramparts of the constitution which they " have ordained and established , " do solemnly protest against these unprecedented and unconstitutional proceedings .
there was still another committee raised by the house on the 6th march last , on motion of mr. hoard , to which i had not the slightest objection .
the resolution creating it was confined to specific charges , which i have ever since been ready and willing to meet .
i have at all times invited and defied fair investigation upon constitutional principles .
i have received no notice that this committee have ever proceeded to the investigation .
why should the house of representatives desire to encroach on the other departments of the government ?
their rightful powers are ample for every legitimate purpose .
they are the impeaching body .
in their legislative capacity it is their most wise and wholesome prerogative to institute rigid examinations into the manner in which all departments of the government are conducted , with a view to reform abuses , to promote economy , and to improve every branch of administration .
should they find reason to believe in the course of their examinations that any grave offense had been committed by the president or any officer of the government rendering it proper , in their judgment , to resort to impeachment , their course would be plain .
they would then transfer the question from their legislative to their accusatory jurisdiction , and take care that in all the preliminary judicial proceedings preparatory to the vote of articles of impeachment the accused should enjoy the benefit of cross - examining the witnesses and all the other safeguards with which the constitution surrounds every american citizen .
if in a legislative investigation it should appear that the public interest required the removal of any officer of the government , no president has ever existed who , after giving him a fair hearing , would hesitate to apply the remedy .
this i take to be the ancient and well - established practice .
an adherence to it will best promote the harmony and the dignity of the intercourse between the coordinate branches of the government and render us all more respectable both in the eyes of our own countrymen and of foreign nations .

to the senate and house of representatives of the united states : 
 i deem it my duty to submit to congress a series of resolutions adopted by the legislature of virginia on the 19th instant , having in view a peaceful settlement of the exciting questions which now threaten the union .
they were delivered to me on thursday , the 24th instant , by ex - president tyler , who has left his dignified and honored retirement in the hope that he may render service to his country in this its hour of peril .
these resolutions , it will be perceived , extend an invitation " to all such states , whether slaveholding or nonslaveholding , as are willing to unite with virginia in an earnest effort to adjust the present unhappy controversies in the spirit in which the constitution was originally formed , and consistently with its principles , so as to afford to the people of the slaveholding states adequate guaranties for the securities of their rights , to appoint commissioners to meet , on the 4th day of february next , in the city of washington , similar commissioners appointed by virginia , to consider and , if practicable , agree upon some suitable adjustment . "
i confess i hail this movement on the part of virginia with great satisfaction .
from the past history of this ancient and renowned commonwealth we have the fullest assurance that what she has undertaken she will accomplish if it can be done by able , enlightened , and persevering efforts .
it is highly gratifying to know that other patriotic states have appointed and are appointing commissioners to meet those of virginia in council .
when assembled , they will constitute a body entitled in an eminent degree to the confidence of the country .
the general assembly of virginia have also resolved-- 
 that ex - president john tyler is hereby appointed , by the concurrent vote of each branch of the general assembly , a commissioner to the president of the united states , and judge john robertson is hereby appointed , by a like vote , a commissioner to the state of south carolina and the other states that have seceded or shall secede , with instructions respectfully to request the president of the united states and the authorities of such states to agree to abstain , pending the proceedings contemplated by the action of this general assembly , from any and all acts calculated to produce a collision of arms between the states and the government of the united states .
however strong may be my desire to enter into such an agreement , i am convinced that i do not possess the power .
congress , and congress alone , under the war - making power , can exercise the discretion of agreeing to abstain " from any and all acts calculated to produce a collision of arms " between this and any other government .
it would therefore be a usurpation for the executive to attempt to restrain their hands by an agreement in regard to matters over which he has no constitutional control .
if he were thus to act , they might pass laws which he should be bound to obey , though in conflict with his agreement .
under existing circumstances , my present actual power is confined within narrow limits .
it is my duty at all times to defend and protect the public property within the seceding states so far as this may be practicable , and especially to employ all constitutional means to protect the property of the united states and to preserve the public peace at this the seat of the federal government .
if the seceding states abstain " from any and all acts calculated to produce a collision of arms , " then the danger so much to be deprecated will no longer exist .
defense , and not aggression , has been the policy of the administration from the beginning .
but whilst i can enter into no engagement such as that proposed , i cordially commend to congress , with much confidence that it will meet their approbation , to abstain from passing any law calculated to produce a collision of arms pending the proceedings contemplated by the action of the general assembly of virginia .
i am one of those who will never despair of the republic .
i yet cherish the belief that the american people will perpetuate the union of the states on some terms just and honorable for all sections of the country .
i trust that the mediation of virginia may be the destined means , under providence , of accomplishing this inestimable benefit .
glorious as are the memories of her past history , such an achievement , both in relation to her own fame and the welfare of the whole country would surpass them all .

in answer to their resolution of the 11th instant ( ultimo ) , " that the president of the united states furnish to the house , if not incompatible with the public service , the reasons that have induced him to assemble so large a number of troops in this city , and why they are kept here ; and whether he has any information of a conspiracy upon the part of any portion of the citizens of this country to seize upon the capital and prevent the inauguration of the president elect , " the president submits that the number of troops assembled in this city is not large , as the resolution presupposes , its total amount being 653 men exclusive of the marines , who are , of course , at the navy - yard as their appropriate station .
these troops were ordered here to act as a posse comitatus , in strict subordination to the civil authority , for the purpose of presenting peace and order in the city of washington should this be necessary before or at the period of the inauguration of the president elect .
since the date of the resolution hon .
mr. howard , from the select committee , has made a report to the house on this subject .
it was thoroughly investigated by the committee , and although they have expressed the opinion that the evidence before them does not prove the existence of a secret organization here or elsewhere hostile to the government that has for its object , upon its own responsibility , an attack upon the capital or any of the public property here , or an interruption of any of the functions of the government , yet the house laid upon the table by a very large majority a resolution expressing the opinion " that the regular troops now in this city ought to be forthwith removed therefrom . "
this of itself was a sufficient reason for not withdrawing the troops .
but what was the duty of the president at the time the troops were ordered to this city ?
ought he to have waited before this precautionary measure was adopted until he could obtain proof that a secret organization existed to seize the capital ?
in the language of the select committee , this was " in a time of high excitement consequent upon revolutionary events transpiring all around us , the very air filled with rumors and individuals indulging in the most extravagant expressions of fears and threats . "
under these and other circumstances , which i need not detail , but which appear in the testimony before the select committee , i was convinced that i ought to act .
the safety of the immense amount of public property in this city and that of the archives of the government , in which all the states , and especially the new states in which the public lands are situated , have a deep interest ; the peace and order of the city itself and the security of the inauguration of the president elect , were objects of such vast importance to the whole country that i could not hesitate to adopt precautionary defensive measures .
at the present moment , when all is quiet , it is difficult to realize the state of alarm which prevailed when the troops were first ordered to this city .
this almost instantly subsided after the arrival of the first company , and a feeling of comparative peace and security has since existed both in washington and throughout the country .
had i refused to adopt this precautionary measure , and evil consequences , which many good men at the time apprehended , had followed , i should never have forgiven myself .

at the opening of your present session i called your attention to the dangers which threatened the existence of the union .
i expressed my opinion freely concerning the original causes of those dangers , and recommended such measures as i believed would have the effect of tranquilizing the country and saving it from the peril in which it had been needlessly and most unfortunately involved .
those opinions and recommendations i do not propose now to repeat .
my own convictions upon the whole subject remain unchanged .
the fact that a great calamity was impending over the nation was even at that time acknowledged by every intelligent citizen .
it had already made itself felt throughout the length and breadth of the land .
the necessary consequences of the alarm thus produced were most deplorable .
the imports fell off with a rapidity never known before , except in time of war , in the history of our foreign commerce ; the treasury was unexpectedly left without the means which it had reasonably counted upon to meet the public engagements ; trade was paralyzed ; manufactures were stopped ; the best public securities suddenly sunk in the market ; every species of property depreciated more or less , and thousands of poor men who depended upon their daily labor for their daily bread were turned out of employment .
i deeply regret that i am not able to give you any information upon the state of the union which is more satisfactory than what i was then obliged to communicate .
on the contrary , matters are still worse at present than they then were .
when congress met , a stronge hope pervaded the whole public mind that some amicable adjustment of the subject would speedily be made by the representatives of the states and of the people which might restore peace between the conflicting sections of the country .
that hope has been diminished by every hour of delay , and as the prospect of a bloodless settlement fades away the public distress becomes more and more aggravated .
as evidence of this it is only necessary to say that the treasury notes authorized by the act of 17th of december last were advertised according to the law and that no responsible bidder offered to take any considerable sum at par at a lower rate of interest than 12 per cent .
from these facts it appears that in a government organized like ours domestic strife , or even a well - grounded fear of civil hostilities , is more destructive to our public and private interests than the most formidable foreign war .
in my annual message i expressed the conviction , which i have long deliberately held , and which recent reflection has only tended to deepen and confirm , that no state has a right by its own act to secede from the union or throw off its federal obligations at pleasure .
i also declared my opinion to be that even if that right existed and should be exercised by any state of the confederacy the executive department of this government had no authority under the constitution to recognize its validity by acknowledging the independence of such state .
this left me no alternative , as the chief executive officer under the constitution of the united states , but to collect the public revenues and to protect the public property so far as this might be practicable under existing laws .
this is still my purpose .
my province is to execute and not to make the laws .
it belongs to congress exclusively to repeal , to modify , or to enlarge their provisions to meet exigencies as they may occur .
i possess no dispensing power .
i certainly had no right to make aggressive war upon any state , and i am perfectly satisfied that the constitution has wisely withheld that power even from congress .
but the right and the duty to use military force defensively against those who resist the federal officers in the execution of their legal functions and against those who assail the property of the federal government is clear and undeniable .
but the dangerous and hostile attitude of the states toward each other has already far transcended and cast in the shade the ordinary executive duties already provided for by law , and has assumed such vast and alarming proportions as to place the subject entirely above and beyond executive control .
the fact can not be disguised that we are in the midst of a great revolution .
in all its various bearings , therefore , i commend the question to congress as the only human tribunal under providence possessing the power to meet the existing emergency .
to them exclusively belongs the power to declare war or to authorize the employment of military force in all cases contemplated by the constitution , and they alone possess the power to remove grievances which might lead to war and to secure peace and union to this distracted country .
on them , and on them alone , rests the responsibility .
the union is a sacred trust left by our revolutionary fathers to their descendants , and never did any other people inherit so rich a legacy .
it has rendered us prosperous in peace and triumphant in war .
the national flag has floated in glory over every sea .
under its shadow american citizens have found protection and respect in all lands beneath the sun .
if we descend to considerations of purely material interest , when in the history of all time has a confederacy been bound together by such strong ties of mutual interest ?
each portion of it is dependent on all and all upon each portion for prosperity and domestic security .
free trade throughout the whole supplies the wants of one portion from the productions of another and scatters wealth everywhere .
the great planting and farming states require the aid of the commercial and navigating states to send their productions to domestic and foreign markets and to furnish the naval power to render their transportation secure against all hostile attacks .
should the union perish in the midst of the present excitement , we have already had a sad foretaste of the universal suffering which would result from its destruction .
the calamity would be severe in every portion of the union and would be quite as great , to say the least , in the southern as in the northern states .
the greatest aggravation of the evil , and that which would place us in the most unfavorable light both before the world and posterity , is , as i am firmly convinced , that the secession movement has been chiefly based upon a misapprehension at the south of the sentiments of the majority in several of the northern states .
let the question be transferred from political assemblies to the ballot box , and the people themselves would speedily redress the serious grievances which the south have suffered .
but , in heaven&#39;s name , let the trial be made before we plunge into armed conflict upon the mere assumption that there is no other alternative .
time is a great conservative power .
let us pause at this momentous point and afford the people , both north and south , an opportunity for reflection .
would that south carolina had been convinced of this truth before her precipitate action !
i therefore appeal through you to the people of the country to declare in their might that the union must and shall be preserved by all constitutional means .
i most earnestly recommend that you devote yourselves exclusively to the question how this can be accomplished in peace .
all other questions , when compared to this , sink into insignificance .
the present is no time for palliations .
action , prompt action , is required .
a delay in congress to prescribe or to recommend a distinct and practical proposition for conciliation may drive us to a point from which it will be almost impossible to recede .
a common ground on which conciliation and harmony can be produced is surely not unattainable .
the proposition to compromise by letting the north have exclusive control of the territory above a certain line and to give southern institutions protection below that line ought to receive universal approbation .
in itself , indeed , it may not be entirely satisfactory , but when the alternative is between a reasonable concession on both sides and a destruction of the union it is an imputation upon the patriotism of congress to assert that its members will hesitate for a moment .
even now the danger is upon us .
in several of the states which have not yet seceded the forts , arsenals , and magazines of the united states have been seized .
this is by far the most serious step which has been taken since the commencement of the troubles .
this public property has long been left without garrisons and troops for its protection , because no person doubted its security under the flag of the country in any state of the union .
besides , our small army has scarcely been sufficient to guard our remote frontiers against indian incursions .
the seizure of this property , from all appearances , has been purely aggressive , and not in resistance to any attempt to coerce a state or states to remain in the union .
at the beginning of these unhappy troubles i determined that no act of mine should increase the excitement in either section of the country .
if the political conflict were to end in a civil war , it was my determined purpose not to commence it nor even to furnish an excuse for it by any act of this government .
my opinion remains unchanged that justice as well as sound policy requires us still to seek a peaceful solution of the questions at issue between the north and the south .
entertaining this conviction , i refrained even from sending reenforcements to major anderson , who commanded the forts in charleston harbor , until an absolute necessity for doing so should make itself apparent , lest it might unjustly be regarded as a menace of military coercion , and thus furnish , if not a provocation , at least a pretext for an outbreak on the part of south carolina .
no necessity for these reenforcements seemed to exist .
i was assured by distinguished and upright gentlemen of south carolina that no attack upon major anderson was intended , but that , on the contrary , it was the desire of the state authorities as much as it was my own to avoid the fatal consequences which must eventually follow a military collision .
and here i deem it proper to submit for your information copies of a communication , dated december 28 , 1860 , addressed to me by r. w. barnwell , j. h. adams , and james l. orr , " commissioners " from south carolina , with the accompanying documents , and copies of my answer thereto , dated december 31 .
in further explanation of major anderson&#39;s removal from fort moultrie to fort sumter , it is proper to state that after my answer to the south carolina " commissioners " the war department received a letter from that gallant officer , dated on the 27th of december , 1860 , the day after this movement , from which the following is an extract : 
 i will add as my opinion that many things convinced me that the authorities of the state designed to proceed to a hostile act .
evidently referring to the orders , dated december 11 , of the late secretary of war .
under this impression i could not hesitate that it was my solemn duty to move my command from a fort which we could not probably have held longer than forty - eight or sixty hours to this one , where my power of resistance is increased to a very great degree .
it will be recollected that the concluding part of these orders was in the following terms : 
 the smallness of your force will not permit you , perhaps , to occupy more than one of the three forts , but an attack on or attempt to take possession of either one of them will be regarded as an act of hostility , and you may then put your command into either of them which you may deem most proper to increase its power of resistance .
you are also authorized to take similar defensive steps whenever you have tangible evidence of a design to proceed to a hostile act .

fellow - citizens of the senate and house of representatives : throughout the year since our last meeting the country has been eminently prosperous in all its material interests .
the general health has been excellent , our harvests have been abundant , and plenty smiles throughout the laud .
our commerce and manufactures have been prosecuted with energy and industry , and have yielded fair and ample returns .
in short , no nation in the tide of time has ever presented a spectacle of greater material prosperity than we have done until within a very recent period .
why is it , then , that discontent now so extensively prevails , and the union of the states , which is the source of all these blessings , is threatened with destruction?the long - continued and intemperate interference of the northern people with the question of slavery in the southern states has at length produced its natural effects .
the different sections of the union are now arrayed against each other , and the time has arrived , so much dreaded by the father of his country , when hostile geographical parties have been formed .
i have long foreseen and often forewarned my countrymen of the now impending danger .
this does not proceed solely from the claim on the part of congress or the territorial legislatures to exclude slavery from the territories , nor from the efforts of different states to defeat the execution of the fugitive - slave law .
all or any of these evils might have been endured by the south without danger to the union ( as others have been ) in the hope that time and reflection might apply the remedy .
the immediate peril arises not so much from these causes as from the fact that the incessant and violent agitation of the slavery question throughout the north for the last quarter of a century has at length produced its malign influence on the slaves and inspired them with vague notions of freedom .
hence a sense of security no longer exists around the family altar .
this feeling of peace at home has given place to apprehensions of servile insurrections .
many a matron throughout the south retires at night in dread of what may befall herself and children before the morning .
should this apprehension of domestic danger , whether real or imaginary , extend and intensify itself until it shall pervade the masses of the southern people , then disunion will become inevitable .
self - preservation is the first law of nature , and has been implanted in the heart of man by his creator for the wisest purpose ; and no political union , however fraught with blessings and benefits in all other respects , can long continue if the necessary consequence be to render the homes and the firesides of nearly half the parties to it habitually and hopelessly insecure .
sooner or later the bonds of such a union must be severed .
it is my conviction that this fatal period has not yet arrived , and my prayer to god is that he would preserve the constitution and the union throughout all generations .
but let us take warning in time and remove the cause of danger .
it can not be denied that for five and twenty years the agitation at the north against slavery has been incessant .
in 1835 pictorial handbills and inflammatory appeals were circulated extensively throughout the south of a character to excite the passions of the slaves , and , in the language of general jackson , " to stimulate them to insurrection and produce all the horrors of a servile war . "
this agitation has ever since been continued by the public press , by the proceedings of state and county conventions and by abolition sermons and lectures .
the time of congress has been occupied in violent speeches on this never - ending subject , and appeals , in pamphlet and other forms , indorsed by distinguished names , have been sent forth from this central point and spread broadcast over the union .
how easy would it be for the american people to settle the slavery question forever and to restore peace and harmony to this distracted country !
they , and they alone , can do it .
all that is necessary to accomplish the object , and all for which the slave states have ever contended , is to be let alone and permitted to manage their domestic institutions in their own way .
as sovereign states , they , and they alone , are responsible before god and the world for the slavery existing among them .
for this the people of the north are not more responsible and have no more fight to interfere than with similar institutions in russia or in brazil .
upon their good sense and patriotic forbearance i confess i still greatly rely .
without their aid it is beyond the power of any president , no matter what may be his own political proclivities , to restore peace and harmony among the states .
wisely limited and restrained as is his power under our constitution and laws , he alone can accomplish but little for good or for evil on such a momentous question .
and this brings me to observe that the election of any one of our fellow - citizens to the office of president does not of itself afford just cause for dissolving the union .
this is more especially true if his election has been effected by a mere plurality , and not a majority of the people , and has resulted from transient and temporary causes , which may probably never again occur .
in order to justify a resort to revolutionary resistance , the federal government must be guilty of " a deliberate , palpable , and dangerous exercise " of powers not granted by the constitution .
the late presidential election , however , has been held in strict conformity with its express provisions .
how , then , can the result justify a revolution to destroy this very constitution ?
reason , justice , a regard for the constitution , all require that we shall wait for some overt and dangerous act on the part of the president elect before resorting to such a remedy .
it is said , however , that the antecedents of the president - elect have been sufficient to justify the fears of the south that he will attempt to invade their constitutional rights .
but are such apprehensions of contingent danger in the future sufficient to justify the immediate destruction of the noblest system of government ever devised by mortals ?
from the very nature of his office and its high responsibilities he must necessarily be conservative .
the stern duty of administering the vast and complicated concerns of this government affords in itself a guaranty that he will not attempt any violation of a clear constitutional right .
after all , he is no more than the chief executive officer of the government .
his province is not to make but to execute the laws .
and it is a remarkable fact in our history that , notwithstanding the repeated efforts of the antislavery party , no single act has ever passed congress , unless we may possibly except the missouri compromise , impairing in the slightest degree the rights of the south to their property in slaves ; and it may also be observed , judging from present indications , that no probability exists of the passage of such an act by a majority of both houses , either in the present or the next congress .
surely under these circumstances we ought to be restrained from present action by the precept of him who spake as man never spoke , that " sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof . "
the day of evil may never come unless we shall rashly bring it upon ourselves .
it is alleged as one cause for immediate secession that the southern states are denied equal rights with the other states in the common territories .
but by what authority are these denied ?
not by congress , which has never passed , and i believe never will pass , any act to exclude slavery from these territories ; and certainly not by the supreme court , which has solemnly decided that slaves are property , and , like all other property , their owners have a right to take them into the common territories and hold them there under the protection of the constitution .
so far then , as congress is concerned , the objection is not to anything they have already done , but to what they may do hereafter .
it will surely be admitted that this apprehension of future danger is no good reason for an immediate dissolution of the union .
it is true that the territorial legislature of kansas , on the 23d february , 1860 , passed in great haste an act over the veto of the governor declaring that slavery " is and shall be forever prohibited in this territory . "
such an act , however , plainly violating the rights of property secured by the constitution , will surely be declared void by the judiciary whenever it shall be presented in a legal form .
only three days after my inauguration the supreme court of the united states solemnly adjudged that this power did not exist in a territorial legislature .
yet such has been the factious temper of the times that the correctness of this decision has been extensively impugned before the people , and the question has given rise to angry political conflicts throughout the country .
those who have appealed from this judgment of our highest constitutional tribunal to popular assemblies would , if they could , invest a territorial legislature with power to annul the sacred rights of property .
this power congress is expressly forbidden by the federal constitution to exercise .
every state legislature in the union is forbidden by its own constitution to exercise it .
it can not be exercised in any state except by the people in their highest sovereign capacity , when framing or amending their state constitution .
in like manner it can only be exercised by the people of a territory represented in a convention of delegates for the purpose of framing a constitution preparatory to admission as a state into the union .
then , and not until then , are they invested with power to decide the question whether slavery shall or shall not exist within their limits .
this is an act of sovereign authority , and not of subordinate territorial legislation .
were it otherwise , then indeed would the equality of the states in the territories be destroyed , and the rights of property in slaves would depend not upon the guaranties of the constitution , but upon the shifting majorities of an irresponsible territorial legislature .
such a doctrine , from its intrinsic unsoundness , can not long influence any considerable portion of our people , much less can it afford a good reason for a dissolution of the union .
the most palpable violations of constitutional duty which have yet been committed consist in the acts of different state legislatures to defeat the execution of the fugitive - slave law .
it ought to be remembered , however , that for these acts neither congress nor any president can justly be held responsible .
having been passed in violation of the federal constitution , they are therefore null and void .
all the courts , both state and national , before whom the question has arisen have from the beginning declared the fugitive - slave law to be constitutional .
the single exception is that of a state court in wisconsin , and this has not only been reversed by the proper appellate tribunal , but has met with such universal reprobation that there can be no danger from it as a precedent .
the validity of this law has been established over and over again by the supreme court of the united states with perfect unanimity .
it is rounded upon an express provision of the constitution , requiring that fugitive slaves who escape from service in one state to another shall be " delivered up " to their masters .
without this provision it is a well - known historical fact that the constitution itself could never have been adopted by the convention .
in one form or other , under the acts of 1793 and 1850 , both being substantially the same , the fugitive - slave law has been the law of the land from the days of washington until the present moment .
here , then , a clear case is presented in which it will be the duty of the next president , as it has been my own , to act with vigor in executing this supreme law against the conflicting enactments of state legislatures .
should he fail in the performance of this high duty , he will then have manifested a disregard of the constitution and laws , to the great injury of the people of nearly one - half of the states of the union .
but are we to presume in advance that he will thus violate his duty ?
this would be at war with every principle of justice and of christian charity .
let us wait for the overt act .
the fugitive - slave law has been carried into execution in every contested case since the commencement of the present administration , though often , it is to be regretted , with great loss and inconvenience to the master and with considerable expense to the government .
let us trust that the state legislatures will repeal their unconstitutional and obnoxious enactments .
unless this shall be done without unnecessary delay , it is impossible for any human power to save the union .
the southern states , standing on the basis of the constitution , have right to demand this act of justice from the states of the north .
should it be refused , then the constitution , to which all the states are parties , will have been willfully violated by one portion of them in a provision essential to the domestic security and happiness of the remainder .
in that event the injured states , after having first used all peaceful and constitutional means to obtain redress , would be justified in revolutionary resistance to the government of the union .
i have purposely confined my remarks to revolutionary resistance , because it has been claimed within the last few years that any state , whenever this shall be its sovereign will and pleasure , may secede from the union in accordance with the constitution and without any violation of the constitutional rights of the other members of the confederacy ; that as each became parties to the union by the vote of its own people assembled in convention , so any one of them may retire from the union in a similar manner by the vote of such a convention .
in order to justify secession as a constitutional remedy , it must be on the principle that the federal government is a mere voluntary association of states , to be dissolved at pleasure by any one of the contracting parties .
if this be so , the confederacy is a rope of sand , to be penetrated and dissolved by the first adverse wave of public opinion in any of the states .
in this manner our thirty - three states may resolve themselves into as many petty , jarring , and hostile republics , each one retiring from the union without responsibility whenever any sudden excitement might impel them to such a course .
by this process a union might be entirely broken into fragments in a few weeks which cost our forefathers many years of toil , privation , and blood to establish .
such a principle is wholly inconsistent with the history as well as the character of the federal constitution .
after it was framed with the greatest deliberation and care it was submitted to conventions of the people of the several states for ratification .
its provisions were discussed at length in these bodies , composed of the first men of the country .
its opponents contended that it conferred powers upon the federal government dangerous to the rights of the states , whilst its advocates maintained that under a fair construction of the instrument there was no foundation for such apprehensions .
in that mighty struggle between the first intellects of this or any other country it never occurred to any individual , either among its opponents or advocates , to assert or even to intimate that their efforts were all vain labor , because the moment that any state felt herself aggrieved she might secede from the union .
what a crushing argument would this have proved against those who dreaded that the rights of the states would be endangered by the constitution !
the truth is that it was not until many years after the origin of the federal government that such a proposition was first advanced .
it was then met and refuted by the conclusive arguments of general jackson , who in his message of the 16th of january , 1833 , transmitting the nullifying ordinance of south carolina to congress , employs the following language : the right of the people of a single state to absolve themselves at will and without the consent of the other states from their most solemn obligations , and hazard the liberties and happiness of the millions composing this union , can not be acknowledged .
such authority is believed to be utterly repugnant both to the principles upon which the general government is constituted and to the objects which it is expressly formed to attain .
it is not pretended that any clause in the constitution gives countenance to such a theory .
it is altogether rounded upon inference ; not from any language contained in the instrument itself , but from the sovereign character of the several states by which it was ratified .
but is it beyond the power of a state , like an individual , to yield a portion of its sovereign rights to secure the remainder ?
in the language of mr. madison , who has been called the father of the constitution -- it was formed by the states ; that is , by the people in each of the states acting in their highest sovereign capacity , and formed , consequently , by the same authority which formed the state constitutions .
nor is the government of the united states , created by the constitution , less a government , in the strict sense of the term , within the sphere of its powers than the governments created by the constitutions of the states are within their several spheres .
it is , like them , organized into legislative , executive , and judiciary departments .
it operates , like them directly on persons and things , and , like them , it has at command a physical force for executing the powers committed to it .
it was intended to be perpetual , and not to be annulled at the pleasure of any one of the contracting parties .
the old articles of confederation were entitled " articles of confederation and perpetual union between the states , " and by the thirteenth article it is expressly declared that " the articles of this confederation shall be inviolably observed by every state , and the union shall be perpetual . "
the preamble to the constitution of the united states , having express reference to the articles of confederation , recites that it was established " in order to form a more perfect union . "
and yet it is contended that this " more perfect union " does not include the essential attribute of perpetuity .
but that the union was designed to be perpetual appears conclusively from the nature and extent of the powers conferred by the constitution on the federal government .
these powers embrace the very highest attributes of national sovereignty .
they place both the sword and the purse under its control .
congress has power to make war and to make peace , to raise and support armies and navies , and to conclude treaties with foreign governments .
it is invested with the power to coin money and to regulate the value thereof , and to regulate commerce with foreign nations and among the several states .
it is not necessary to enumerate the other high powers which have been conferred upon the federal government .
in order to carry the enumerated powers into effect , congress possesses the exclusive right to lay and collect duties on imports , and , in common with the states , to lay and collect all other taxes .
but the constitution has not only conferred these high powers upon congress , but it has adopted effectual means to restrain the states from interfering with their exercise .
for that purpose it has in strong prohibitory language expressly declared that -- no state shall enter into any treaty , alliance , or confederation ; grant letters of marque and reprisal ; coin money ; emit bills of credit ; make anything but gold and silver coin a tender in payment of debts ; pass any bill of attainder , ex post facto law , or law impairing the obligation of contracts .
moreover -- no state shall without the consent of the congress lay any imposts or duties on imports or exports , except what may be absolutely necessary for executing its inspection laws .
and if they exceed this amount the excess shall belong , to the united states .
and -- no state shall without the consent of congress lay any duty of tonnage , keep troops or ships of war in time of peace , enter into any agreement or compact with another state or with a foreign power , or engage in war , unless actually invaded or in such imminent danger as will not admit of delay .
in order still further to secure the uninterrupted exercise of these high powers against state interposition , it is provided that -- this constitution and the laws of the united states which shall be made in pursuance thereof , and all treaties made or which shall be made under the authority of the united states , shall be the supreme law of the land , and the judges in every state shall be bound thereby , anything in the constitution or laws of any state to the contrary notwithstanding .
the solemn sanction of religion has been superadded to the obligations of official duty , and all senators and representatives of the united states , all members of state legislatures , and all executive and judicial officers , " both of the united states and of the several states , shall be bound by oath or affirmation to support this constitution."in order to carry into effect these powers , the constitution has established a perfect government in all its forms -- legislative , executive , and judicial ; and this government to the extent of its powers acts directly upon the individual citizens of every state , and executes its own decrees by the agency of its own officers .
in this respect it differs entirely from the government under the old confederation , which was confined to making requisitions on the states in their sovereign character .
this left it in the discretion of each whether to obey or to refuse , and they often declined to comply with such requisitions .
it thus became necessary for the purpose of removing this barrier and " in order to form a more perfect union " to establish a government which could act directly upon the people and execute its own laws without the intermediate agency of the states .
this has been accomplished by the constitution of the united states .
in short , the government created by the constitution , and deriving its authority from the sovereign people of each of the several states , has precisely the same right to exercise its power over the people of all these states in in the enumerated cases that each one of them possesses over subjects not delegated to the united states , but " reserved to the states respectively or to the people."to the extent of the delegated powers the constitution of the united states is as much a part of the constitution of each state and is as binding upon its people as though it had been textually inserted therein .
this government , therefore , is a great and powerful government , invested with all the attributes of sovereignty over the special subjects to which its authority extends .
its framers never intended to implant in its bosom the seeds of its own destruction , nor were they at its creation guilty of the absurdity of providing for its own dissolution .
it was not intended by its framers to be the baseless fabric of a vision , which at the touch of the enchanter would vanish into thin air , but a substantial and mighty fabric , capable of resisting the slow decay of time and of defying the storms of ages .
indeed , well may the jealous patriots of that day have indulged fears that a government of such high powers might violate the reserved rights of the states , and wisely did they adopt the rule of a strict construction of these powers to prevent the danger .
but they did not fear , nor had they any reason to imagine , that the constitution would ever be so interpreted as to enable any state by her own act , and without the consent of her sister states , to discharge her people from all or any of their federal obligations .
it may be asked , then , are the people of the states without redress against the tyranny and oppression of the federal government ?
by no means .
the right of resistance on the part of the governed against the oppression of their governments can not be denied .
it exists independently of all constitutions , and has been exercised at all periods of the world 's history .
under it old governments have been destroyed and new ones have taken their place .
it is embodied in strong and express language in our own declaration of independence .
but the distinction must ever be observed that this is revolution against an established government , and not a voluntary secession from it by virtue of an inherent constitutional right .
in short , let us look the danger fairly in the face .
secession is neither more nor less than revolution .
it may or it may not be a justifiable revolution , but still it is revolution .
what , in the meantime , is the responsibility and true position of the executive ?
he is bound by solemn oath , before god and the country , " to take care that the laws be faithfully executed , " and from this obligation he can not be absolved by any human power .
but what if the performance of this duty , in whole or in part , has been rendered impracticable by events over which he could have exercised no control ?
such at the present moment is the case throughout the state of south carolina so far as the laws of the united states to secure the administration of justice by means of the federal judiciary are concerned .
all the federal officers within its limits through whose agency alone these laws can be carried into execution have already resigned .
we no longer have a district judge , a district attorney , or a marshal in south carolina .
in fact , the whole machinery of the federal government necessary for the distribution of remedial justice among the people has been demolished , and it would be difficult , if not impossible , to replace it .
the only acts of congress on the statute book bearing upon this subject are those of february 28 , 1795 , and march 3 , 1807 .
these authorize the president , after he shall have ascertained that the marshal , with his posse comitatus , is unable to execute civil or criminal process in any particular case , to call forth the militia and employ the army and navy to aid him in performing this service , having first by proclamation commanded the insurgents " to disperse and retire peaceably to their respective abodes within a limited time " this duty can not by possibility be performed in a state where no judicial authority exists to issue process , and where there is no marshal to execute it , and where , even if there were such an officer , the entire population would constitute one solid combination to resist him .
the bare enumeration of these provisions proves how inadequate they are without further legislation to overcome a united opposition in a single state , not to speak of other states who may place themselves in a similar attitude .
congress alone has power to decide whether the present laws can or can not be amended so as to carry out more effectually the objects of the constitution .
the same insuperable obstacles do not lie in the way of executing the laws for the collection of the customs .
the revenue still continues to be collected as heretofore at the custom - house in charleston , and should the collector unfortunately resign a successor may be appointed to perform this duty .
then , in regard to the property of the united states in south carolina .
this has been purchased for a fair equivalent , " by the consent of the legislature of the state , " " for the erection of forts , magazines , arsenals , " etc . ,
and over these the authority " to exercise exclusive legislation " has been expressly granted by the constitution to congress .
it is not believed that any attempt will be made to expel the united states from this property by force ; but if in this i should prove to be mistaken , the officer in command of the forts has received orders to act strictly on the defensive .
in such a contingency the responsibility for consequences would rightfully rest upon the heads of the assailants .
apart from the execution of the laws , so far as this may be practicable , the executive has no authority to decide what shall be the relations between the federal government and south carolina .
he has been invested with no such discretion .
he possesses no power to change the relations heretofore existing between them , much less to acknowledge the independence of that state .
this would be to invest a mere executive officer with the power of recognizing the dissolution of the confederacy among our thirty - three sovereign states .
it bears no resemblance to the recognition of a foreign de facto government , involving no such responsibility .
any attempt to do this would , on his part , be a naked act of usurpation .
it is therefore my duty to submit to congress the whole question in all its beatings .
the course of events is so rapidly hastening forward that the emergency may soon arise when you may be called upon to decide the momentous question whether you possess the power by force of arms to compel a state to remain in the union .
i should feel myself recreant to my duty were i not to express an opinion on this important subject .
the question fairly stated is , has the constitution delegated to congress the power to coerce a state into submission which is attempting to withdraw or has actually withdrawn from the confederacy ?
if answered in the affirmative , it must be on the principle that the power has been conferred upon congress to declare and to make war against a state .
after much serious reflection i have arrived at the conclusion that no such power has been delegated to congress or to any other department of the federal government .
it is manifest upon an inspection of the constitution that this is not among the specific and enumerated powers granted to congress , and it is equally apparent that its exercise is not " necessary and proper for carrying into execution " any one of these powers .
so far from this power having been delegated to congress , it was expressly refused by the convention which framed the constitution .
it appears from the proceedings of that body that on the 31st may , 1787 , the clause " authorizing an exertion of the force of the whole against a delinquent state " came up for consideration .
mr. madison opposed it in a brief but powerful speech , from which i shall extract but a single sentence .
he observed : the use of force against a state would look more like a declaration of war than an infliction of punishment , and would probably be considered by the party attacked as a dissolution of all previous compacts by which it might be bound .
upon his motion the clause was unanimously postponed , and was never , i believe , again presented .
soon afterwards , on the 8th june , 1787 , when incidentally adverting to the subject , he said : " any government for the united states formed on the supposed practicability of using force against the unconstitutional proceedings of the states would prove as visionary and fallacious as the government of congress , " evidently meaning the then existing congress of the old confederation .
without descending to particulars , it may be safely asserted that the power to make war against a state is at variance with the whole spirit and intent of the constitution .
suppose such a war should result in the conquest of a state ; how are we to govern it afterwards ?
shall we hold it as a province and govern it by despotic power ?
in the nature of things , we could not by physical force control the will of the people and compel them to elect senators and representatives to congress and to perform all the other duties depending upon their own volition and required from the free citizens of a free state as a constituent member of the confederacy .
but if we possessed this power , would it be wise to exercise it under existing circumstances ?
the object would doubtless be to preserve the union .
war would not only present the most effectual means of destroying it , but would vanish all hope of its peaceable reconstruction .
besides , in the fraternal conflict a vast amount of blood and treasure would be expended , rendering future reconciliation between the states impossible .
in the meantime , who can foretell what would be the sufferings and privations of the people during its existence?the fact is that our union rests upon public opinion , and can never be cemented by the blood of its citizens shed in civil war .
if it can not live in the affections of the people , it must one day perish .
congress possesses many means of preserving it by conciliation , but the sword was not placed in their hand to preserve it by force .
but may i be permitted solemnly to invoke my countrymen to pause and deliberate before they determine to destroy this the grandest temple which has ever been dedicated to human freedom since the world began ?
it has been consecrated by the blood of our fathers , by the glories of the past , and by the hopes of the future .
the union has already made us the most prosperous , and ere long will , if preserved , render us the most powerful , nation on the face of the earth .
in every foreign region of the globe the title of american citizen is held in the highest respect , and when pronounced in a foreign land it causes the hearts of our countrymen to swell with honest pride .
surely when we reach the brink of the yawning abyss we shall recoil with horror from the last fatal plunge .
by such a dread catastrophe the hopes of the friends of freedom throughout the world would be destroyed , and a long night of leaden despotism would enshroud the nations .
our example for more than eighty years would not only be lost , but it would be quoted as a conclusive proof that man is unfit for self - government .
it is not every wrong -- nay , it is not every grievous wrong -- which can justify a resort to such a fearful alternative .
this ought to be the last desperate remedy of a despairing people , after every other constitutional means of conciliation had been exhausted .
we should reflect that under this free government there is an incessant ebb and flow in public opinion .
the slavery question , like everything human , will have its day .
i firmly believe that it has reached and passed the culminating point .
but if in the midst of the existing excitement the union shall perish , the evil may then become irreparable .
congress can contribute much to avert it by proposing and recommending to the legislatures of the several states the remedy for existing evils which the constitution has itself provided for its own preservation .
this has been tried at different critical periods of our history , and always with eminent success .
it is to be found in the fifth article , providing for its own amendment .
under this article amendments have been proposed by two - thirds of both houses of congress , and have been " ratified by the legislatures of three - fourths of the several states , " and have consequently become parts of the constitution .
to this process the country is indebted for the clause prohibiting congress from passing any law respecting an establishment of religion or abridging the freedom of speech or of the press or of the right of petition .
to this we are also indebted for the bill of rights which secures the people against any abuse of power by the federal government .
such were the apprehensions justly entertained by the friends of state rights at that period as to have rendered it extremely doubtful whether the constitution could have long survived without those amendments .
again the constitution was amended by the same process , after the election of president jefferson by the house of representatives , in february , 1803 .
this amendment was rendered necessary to prevent a recurrence of the dangers which had seriously threatened the existence of the government during the pendency of that election .
the article for its own amendment was intended to secure the amicable adjustment of conflicting constitutional questions like the present which might arise between the governments of the states and that of the united states .
this appears from contemporaneous history .
in this connection i shall merely call attention to a few sentences in mr. madison 's justly celebrated report , in 1799 , to the legislature of virginia .
in this he ably and conclusively defended the resolutions of the preceding legislature against the strictures of several other state legislatures .
these were mainly rounded upon the protest of the virginia legislature against the " alien and sedition acts , " as " palpable and alarming infractions of the constitution . "
in pointing out the peaceful and constitutional remedies -- and he referred to none other -- to which the states were authorized to resort on such occasions , he concludes by saying that -- the legislatures of the states might have made a direct representation to congress with a view to obtain a rescinding of the two offensive acts , or they might have represented to their respective senators in congress their wish that two - thirds thereof would propose an explanatory amendment to the constitution ; or two - thirds of themselves , if such had been their option , might by an application to congress have obtained a convention for the same object .
this is the very course which i earnestly recommend in order to obtain an " explanatory amendment " of the constitution on the subject of slavery .
this might originate with congress or the state legislatures , as may be deemed most advisable to attain the object .
the explanatory amendment might be confined to the final settlement of the true construction of the constitution on three special points:1 .
an express recognition of the right of property in slaves in the states where it now exists or may hereafter exist.2 .
the duty of protecting this right in all the common territories throughout their territorial existence , and until they shall be admitted as states into the union , with or without slavery , as their constitutions may prescribe.3 .
a like recognition of the right of the master to have his slave who has escaped from one state to another restored and " delivered up " to him , and of the validity of the fugitive - slave law enacted for this purpose , together with a declaration that all state laws impairing or defeating this right are violations of the constitution , and are consequently null and void .
it may be objected that this construction of the constitution has already been settled by the supreme court of the united states , and what more ought to be required ?
the answer is that a very large proportion of the people of the united states still contest the correctness of this decision , and never will cease from agitation and admit its binding force until clearly established by the people of the several states in their sovereign character .
such an explanatory amendment would , it is believed , forever terminate the existing dissensions , and restore peace and harmony among the states .
it ought not to be doubted that such an appeal to the arbitrament established by the constitution itself would be received with favor by all the states of the confederacy .
in any event , it ought to be tried in a spirit of conciliation before any of these states shall separate themselves from the union .
when i entered upon the duties of the presidential office , the aspect neither of our foreign nor domestic affairs was at all satisfactory .
we were involved in dangerous complications with several nations , and two of our territories were in a state of revolution against the government .
a restoration of the african slave trade had numerous and powerful advocates .
unlawful military expeditions were countenanced by many of our citizens , and were suffered , in defiance of the efforts of the government , to escape from our shores for the purpose of making war upon the offending people of neighboring republics with whom we were at peace .
in addition to these and other difficulties , we experienced a revulsion in monetary affairs soon after my advent to power of unexampled severity and of ruinous consequences to all the great interests of the country .
when we take a retrospect of what was then our condition and contrast this with its material prosperity at the time of the late presidential election , we have abundant reason to return our grateful thanks to that merciful providence which has never forsaken us as a nation in all our past trials .
our relations with great britain are of the most friendly character .
since the commencement of my administration the two dangerous questions arising from the clayton and bulwer treaty and from the right of search claimed by the british government have been amicably and honorably adjusted .
the discordant constructions of the clayton and bulwer treaty between the two governments , which at different periods of the discussion bore a threatening aspect , have resulted in a final settlement entirely satisfactory to this government .
in my last annual message i informed congress that the british government had not then " completed treaty arrangements with the republics of honduras and nicaragua in pursuance of the understanding between the two governments .
it is , nevertheless , confidently expected that this good work will ere long be accomplished . "
this confident expectation has since been fulfilled .
her britannic majesty concluded a treaty with honduras on the 28th november , 1859 , and with nicaragua on the 28th august , 1860 , relinquishing the mosquito protectorate .
besides , by the former the bay islands are recognized as a part of the republic of honduras .
it may be observed that the stipulations of these treaties conform in every " important particular to the amendments adopted by the senate of the united states to the treaty concluded at london on the 17th october , 1856 , between the two governments .
it will be recollected that this treaty was rejected by the british government because of its objection to the just and important amendment of the senate to the article relating to ruatan and the other islands in the bay of honduras .
it must be a source of sincere satisfaction to all classes of our fellow - citizens , and especially to those engaged in foreign commerce , that the claim on the part of great britain forcibly to visit and search american merchant vessels on the high seas in time of peace has been abandoned .
this was by far the most dangerous question to the peace of the two countries which has existed since the war of 1812 .
whilst it remained open they might at any moment have been precipitated into a war .
this was rendered manifest by the exasperated state of public feeling throughout our entire country produced by the forcible search of american merchant vessels by british cruisers on the coast of cuba in the spring of 1858 .
the american people hailed with general acclaim the orders of the secretary of the navy to our naval force in the gulf of mexico " to protect all vessels of the united states on the high seas from search or detention by the vessels of war of any other nation . "
these orders might have produced an immediate collision between the naval forces of the two countries .
this was most fortunately prevented by an appeal to the justice of great britain and to the law of nations as expounded by her own most eminent jurists .
the only question of any importance which still remains open is the disputed title between the two governments to the island of san juan , in the vicinity of washington territory .
as this question is still under negotiation , it is not deemed advisable at the present moment to make any other allusion to the subject .
the recent visit of the prince of wales , in a private character , to the people of this country has proved to be a most auspicious event .
in its consequences it can not fail to increase the kindred and kindly feelings which i trust may ever actuate the government and people of both countries in their political and social intercourse with each other .
with france , our ancient and powerful ally , our relations continue to be of the most friendly character .
a decision has recently been made by a french judicial tribunal , with the approbation of the imperial government , which can not fail to foster the sentiments of mutual regard that have so long existed between the two countries .
under the french law no person can serve in the armies of france unless he be a french citizen .
the law of france recognizing the natural right of expatriation , it follows as a necessary consequence that a frenchman by the fact of having become a citizen of the united states has changed his allegiance and has lost his native character .
he can not therefore be compelled to serve in the french armies in case he should return to his native country .
these principles were announced in 1852 by the french minister of war and in two late cases have been confirmed by the french judiciary .
in these , two natives of france have been discharged from the french army because they had become american citizens .
to employ the language of our present minister to france , who has rendered good service on this occasion . "
i do not think our french naturalized fellow - citizens will hereafter experience much annoyance on this subject."i venture to predict that the time is not far distant when the other continental powers will adopt the same wise and just policy which has done so much honor to the enlightened government of the emperor .
in any event , our government is bound to protect the rights of our naturalized citizens everywhere to the same extent as though they had drawn their first breath in this country .
we can recognize no distinction between our native and naturalized citizens .
between the great empire of russia and the united states the mutual friendship and regard which has so long existed still continues to prevail , and if possible to increase .
indeed , our relations with that empire are all that we could desire .
our relations with spain are now of a more complicated , though less dangerous , character than they have been for many years .
our citizens have long held and continue to hold numerous claims against the spanish government .
these had been ably urged for a series of years by our successive diplomatic representatives at madrid , but without obtaining redress .
the spanish government finally agreed to institute a joint commission for the adjustment of these claims , and on the 5th day of march , 1860 , concluded a convention for this purpose with our present minister at madrid .
under this convention what have been denominated the " cuban claims , " amounting to $ 128,635.54 , in which more than 100 of our fellow - citizens are interested , were recognized , and the spanish government agreed to pay $ 100,000 of this amount " within three months following the exchange of ratifications . "
the payment of the remaining $ 28,635.54 was to await the decision of the commissioners for or against the amistad claim ; but in any event the balance was to be paid to the claimants either by spain or the united states .
these terms , i have every reason to know , are highly satisfactory to the holders of the cuban claims .
indeed , they have made a formal offer authorizing the state department to settle these claims and to deduct the amount of the amistad claim from the sums which they are entitled to receive from spain .
this offer , of course , can not be accepted .
all other claims of citizens of the united states against spain , or the subjects of the queen of spain against the united states , including the amistad claim , were by this convention referred to a board of commissioners in the usual form .
neither the validity of the amistad claim nor of any other claim against either party , with the single exception of the cuban claims , was recognized by the convention .
indeed , the spanish government did not insist that the validity of the amistad claim should be thus recognized , notwithstanding its payment had been recommended to congress by two of my predecessors , as well as by myself , and an appropriation for that purpose had passed the senate of the united states .
they were content that it should be submitted to the board for examination and decision like the other claims .
both governments were bound respectively to pay the amounts awarded to the several claimants " at such times and places as may be fixed by and according to the tenor of said awards."i transmitted this convention to the senate for their constitutional action on the 3d of may , 1860 , and on the 27th of the succeeding june they determined that they would " not advise and consent " to its ratification .
these proceedings place our relations with spain in an awkward and embarrassing position .
it is more than probable that the final adjustment of these claims will devolve upon my successor .
i reiterate the recommendation contained in my annual message of december , 1858 , and repeated in that of december , 1859 , in favor of the acquisition of cuba from spain by fair purchase .
i firmly believe that such an acquisition would contribute essentially to the well - being and prosperity of both countries in all future time , as well as prove the certain means of immediately abolishing the african slave trade throughout the world .
i would not repeat this recommendation upon the present occasion if i believed that the transfer of cuba to the united states upon conditions highly favorable to spain could justly tarnish the national honor of the proud and ancient spanish monarchy .
surely no person ever attributed to the first napoleon a disregard of the national honor of france for transferring louisiana to the united states for a fair equivalent , both in money and commercial advantages .
with the emperor of austria and the remaining continental powers of europe , including that of the sultan , our relations continue to be of the most friendly character .
the friendly and peaceful policy pursued by the government of the united states toward the empire of china has produced the most satisfactory results .
the treaty of tien - tsin of the 18th june , 1858 , has been faithfully observed by the chinese authorities .
the convention of the 8th november , 1858 , supplementary to this treaty , for the adjustment and satisfaction of the claims of our citizens on china referred to in my last annual message , has been already carried into effect so far as this was practicable .
under this convention the sum of 500,000 taels , equal to about $ 700,000 , was stipulated to be paid in satisfaction of the claims of american citizens out of the one - fifth of the receipts for tonnage , import , and export duties on american vessels at the ports of canton , shanghai , and fuchau , and it was " agreed that this amount shall be in full liquidation of all claims of american citizens at the various ports to this date . "
debentures for this amount , to wit , 300,000 taels for canton , 100,000 for shanghai , and 100,000 for fuchau , were delivered , according to the terms of the convention , by the respective chinese collectors of the customs of these ports to the agent selected by our minister to receive the same .
since that time the claims of our citizens have been adjusted by the board of commissioners appointed for that purpose under the act of march 3 , 1859 , and their awards , which proved satisfactory to the claimants , have been approved by our minister .
in the aggregate they amount to the sum of $ 498,694.78 .
the claimants have already received a large proportion of the sums awarded to them out of the fund provided , and it is confidently expected that the remainder will ere long be entirely paid .
after the awards shall have been satisfied there will remain a surplus of more than $ 200,000 at the disposition of congress .
as this will , in equity , belong to the chinese government , would not justice require its appropriation to some benevolent object in which the chinese may be specially interested?our minister to china , in obedience to his instructions , has remained perfectly neutral in the war between great britain and france and the chinese empire , although , in conjunction with the russian minister , he was ever ready and willing , had the opportunity offered , to employ his good offices in restoring peace between the parties .
it is but an act of simple justice , both to our present minister and his predecessor , to state that they have proved fully equal to the delicate , trying , and responsible positions in which they have on different occasions been placed .
the ratifications of the treaty with japan concluded at yeddo on the 29th july , 1858 , were exchanged at washington on the 22d may last , and the treaty itself was proclaimed on the succeeding day .
there is good reason to expect that under its protection and influence our trade and intercourse with that distant and interesting people will rapidly increase .
the ratifications of the treaty were exchanged with unusual solemnity .
for this purpose the tycoon had accredited three of his most distinguished subjects as envoys extraordinary and ministers plenipotentiary , who were received and treated with marked distinction and kindness , both by the government and people of the united states .
there is every reason to believe that they have returned to their native land entirely satisfied with their visit and inspired by the most friendly feelings for our country .
let us ardently hope , in the language of the treaty itself , that " there shall henceforward be perpetual peace and friendship between the united states of america and his majesty the tycoon of japan and his successors."with the wise , conservative , and liberal government of the empire of brazil our relations continue to be of the most amicable character .
the exchange of the ratifications of the convention with the republic of new granada signed at washington on the 10th of september , 1857 , has been long delayed from accidental causes for which neither party is censurable .
these ratifications were duly exchanged in this city on the 5th of november last .
thus has a controversy been amicably terminated which had become so serious at the period of my inauguration as to require me , on the 17th of april , 1857 , to direct our minister to demand his passports and return to the united states .
under this convention the government of new granada has specially acknowledged itself to be responsible to our citizens " for damages which were caused by the riot at panama on the 15th april , 1856 . "
these claims , together with other claims of our citizens which had been long urged in vain , are referred for adjustment to a board of commissioners .
i submit a copy of the convention to congress , and recommend the legislation necessary to carry it into effect .
persevering efforts have been made for the adjustment of the claims of american citizens against the government of costa rica , and i am happy to inform you that these have finally prevailed .
a convention was signed at the city of san jose on the 2d july last , between the minister resident of the united states in costa rica and the plenipotentiaries of that republic , referring these claims to a board of commissioners and providing for the payment of their awards .
this convention will be submitted immediately to the senate for their constitutional action .
the claims of our citizens upon the republic of nicaragua have not yet been provided for by treaty , although diligent efforts for this purpose have been made by our minister resident to that republic .
these are still continued , with a fair prospect of success .
our relations with mexico remain in a most unsatisfactory condition .
in my last two annual messages i discussed extensively the subject of these relations , and do not now propose to repeat at length the facts and arguments then presented .
they proved conclusively that our citizens residing in mexico and our merchants trading thereto had suffered a series of wrongs and outrages such as we have never patiently borne from any other nation .
for these our successive ministers , invoking the faith of treaties , had in the name of their country persistently demanded redress and indemnification , but without the slightest effect .
indeed , so confident had the mexican authorities become of our patient endurance that they universally believed they might commit these outrages upon american citizens with absolute impunity .
thus wrote our minister in 1856 , and expressed the opinion that " nothing but a manifestation of the power of the government and of its purpose to punish these wrongs will avail."afterwards , in 1857 , came the adoption of a new constitution for mexico , the election of a president and congress under its provisions , and the inauguration of the president .
within one short month , however , this president was expelled from the capital by a rebellion in the army , and the supreme power of the republic was assigned to general zuloaga .
this usurper was in his turn soon compelled to retire and give place to general miramon .
under the constitution which had thus been adopted senor juarez , as chief justice of the supreme court , became the lawful president of the republic , and it was for the maintenance of the constitution and his authority derived from it that the civil war commenced and still continues to be prosecuted .
throughout the year 1858 the constitutional party grew stronger and stronger .
in the previous history of mexico a successful military revolution at the capital had almost universally been the signal for submission throughout the republic .
not so on the present occasion .
a majority of the citizens persistently sustained the constitutional government .
when this was recognized , in april , 1859 , by the government of the united states , its authority extended over a large majority of the mexican states and people , including vera cruz and all the other important seaports of the republic .
from that period our commerce with mexico began to revive , and the constitutional government has afforded it all the protection in its power .
meanwhile the government of miramon still held sway at the capital and over the surrounding country , and continued its outrages against the few american citizens who still had the courage to remain within its power .
to cap the climax , after the battle of tacubaya , in april , 1859 , general marquez ordered three citizens of the united states , two of them physicians , to be seized in the hospital at that place , taken out and shot , without crime and without trial .
this was done , notwithstanding our unfortunate countrymen were at the moment engaged in the holy cause of affording relief to the soldiers of both parties who had been wounded in the battle , without making any distinction between them .
the time had arrived , in my opinion , when this government was bound to exert its power to avenge and redress the wrongs of our citizens and to afford them protection in mexico .
the interposing obstacle was that the portion of the country under the sway of miramon could not be reached without passing over territory under the jurisdiction of the constitutional government .
under these circumstances i deemed it my duty to recommend to congress in my last annual message the employment of a sufficient military force to penetrate into the interior , where the government of miramon was to be found , with or , if need be , without the consent of the juarez government , though it was not doubted that this consent could be obtained .
never have i had a clearer conviction on any subject than of the justice as well as wisdom of such a policy .
no other alternative was left except the entire abandonment of our fellow - citizens who had gone to mexico under the faith of treaties to the systematic injustice , cruelty , and oppression of miramon 's government .
besides , it is almost certain that the simple authority to employ this force would of itself have accomplished all our objects without striking a single blow .
the constitutional government would then ere this have been established at the city of mexico , and would have been ready and willing to the extent of its ability to do us justice .
in addition -- and i deem this a most important consideration -- european governments would have been deprived of all pretext to interfere in the territorial and domestic concerns of mexico .
we should thus have been relieved from the obligation of resisting , even by force should this become necessary , any attempt by these governments to deprive our neighboring republic of portions of her territory -- a duty from which we could not shrink without abandoning the traditional and established policy of the american people .
i am happy to observe that , firmly relying upon the justice and good faith of these governments , there is no present danger that such a contingency will happen .
having discovered that my recommendations would not be sustained by congress , the next alternative was to accomplish in some degree , if possible , the same objects by treaty stipulations with the constitutional government .
such treaties were accordingly concluded by our late able and excellent minister to mexico , and on the 4th of january last were submitted to the senate for ratification .
as these have not yet received the final action of that body , it would be improper for me to present a detailed statement of their provisions .
still , i may be permitted to express the opinion in advance that they are calculated to promote the agricultural , manufacturing , and commercial interests of the country and to secure our just influence with an adjoining republic as to whose fortunes and fate we can never feel indifferent , whilst at the same time they provide for the payment of a considerable amount toward the satisfaction of the claims of our injured fellow - citizens .
at the period of my inauguration i was confronted in kansas by a revolutionary government existing under what is called the " topeka constitution . "
its avowed object was to subdue the territorial government by force and to inaugurate what was called the " topeka government " in its stead .
to accomplish this object an extensive military organization was formed , and its command intrusted to the most violent revolutionary leaders .
under these circumstances it became my imperative duty to exert the whole constitutional power of the executive to prevent the flames of civil war from again raging in kansas , which in the excited state of the public mind , both north and south , might have extended into the neighboring states .
the hostile parties in kansas had been inflamed against each other by emissaries both from the north and the south to a degree of malignity without parallel in our history .
to prevent actual collision and to assist the civil magistrates in enforcing the laws , a strong detachment of the army was stationed in the territory , ready to aid the marshal and his deputies when lawfully called upon as a posse comitatus in the execution of civil and criminal process .
still , the troubles in kansas could not have been permanently settled without an election by the people .
the ballot box is the surest arbiter of disputes among freemen .
under this conviction every proper effort was employed to induce the hostile parties to vote at the election of delegates to frame a state constitution , and afterwards at the election to decide whether kansas should be a slave or free state .
the insurgent party refused to vote at either , lest this might be considered a recognition on their part of the territorial government established by congress .
a better spirit , however , seemed soon after to prevail , and the two parties met face to face at the third election , held on the first monday of january , 1858 , for members of the legislature and state officers under the lecompton constitution .
the result was the triumph of the antislavery party at the polls .
this decision of the ballot box proved clearly that this party were in the majority , and removed the danger of civil war .
from that time we have heard little or nothing of the topeka government , and all serious danger of revolutionary troubles in kansas was then at an end .
the lecompton constitution , which had been thus recognized at this state election by the votes of both political parties in kansas , was transmitted to me with the request that i should present it to congress .
this i could not have refused to do without violating my clearest and strongest convictions of duty .
the constitution and all the proceedings which preceded and followed its formation were fair and regular on their face .
i then believed , and experience has proved , that the interests of the people of kansas would have been best consulted by its admission as a state into the union , especially as the majority within a brief period could have amended the constitution according to their will and pleasure .
if fraud existed in all or any of these proceedings , it was not for the president but for congress to investigate and determine the question of fraud and what ought to be its consequences .
if at the first two elections the majority refused to vote , it can not be pretended that this refusal to exercise the elective franchise could invalidate an election fairly held under lawful authority , even if they had not subsequently voted at the third election .
it is true that the whole constitution had not been submitted to the people , as i always desired ; but the precedents are numerous of the admission of states into the union without such submission .
it would not comport with my present purpose to review the proceedings of congress upon the lecompton constitution .
it is sufficient to observe that their final action has removed the last vestige of serious revolutionary troubles .
the desperate hand recently assembled under a notorious outlaw in the southern portion of the territory to resist the execution of the laws and to plunder peaceful citizens will , i doubt not be speedily subdued and brought to justice .
had i treated the lecompton constitution as a nullity and refused to transmit it to congress , it is not difficult to imagine , whilst recalling the position of the country at that moment , what would have been the disastrous consequences , both in and out of the territory , from such a dereliction of duty on the part of the executive .
peace has also been restored within the territory of utah , which at the commencement of my administration was in a state of open rebellion .
this was the more dangerous , as the people , animated by a fanatical spirit and intrenched within their distant mountain fastnesses , might have made a long and formidable resistance .
cost what it might , it was necessary to bring them into subjection to the constitution and the laws .
sound policy , therefore , as well as humanity , required that this object should if possible be accomplished without the effusion of blood .
this could only be effected by sending a military force into the territory sufficiently strong to convince the people that resistance would be hopeless , and at the same time to offer them a pardon for past offenses on condition of immediate submission to the government .
this policy was pursued with eminent success , and the only cause for regret is the heavy expenditure required to march a large detachment of the army to that remote region and to furnish it subsistence .
utah is now comparatively peaceful and quiet , and the military force has been withdrawn , except that portion of it necessary to keep the indians in check and to protect the emigrant trains on their way to our pacific possessions .
in my first annual message i promised to employ my best exertions in cooperation with congress to reduce the expenditures of the government within the limits of a wise and judicious economy .
an overflowing treasury had produced habits of prodigality and extravagance which could only be gradually corrected .
the work required both time and patience .
i applied myself diligently to this task from the beginning and was aided by the able and energetic efforts of the heads of the different executive departments .
the result of our labors in this good cause did not appear in the sum total of our expenditures for the first two years , mainly in consequence of the extraordinary expenditure necessarily incurred in the utah expedition and the very large amount of the contingent expenses of congress during this period .
these greatly exceeded the pay and mileage of the members .
for the year ending june 30 , 1858 , whilst the pay and mileage amounted to $ 1,490,214 , the contingent expenses rose to $ 2,093,309.79 ; and for the year ending june 30 , 1859 , whilst the pay and mileage amounted to $ 859,093.66 , the contingent expenses amounted to $ 1,431,565.78 .
i am happy , however , to be able to inform you that during the last fiscal year , ending june 30 , 1860 , the total expenditures of the government in all its branches -- legislative , executive , and judicial -- exclusive of the public debt , were reduced to the sum of $ 55,402,465.46 .
this conclusively appears from the books of the treasury .
in the year ending june 30 , 1858 , the total expenditure , exclusive of the public debt , amounted to $ 71,901,129.77 , and that for the year ending june 30 , 1859 , to $ 66,346,226.13 .
whilst the books of the treasury show an actual expenditure of $ 59,848,474.72 for the year ending june 30 , 1860 , including $ 1,040,667.71 for the contingent expenses of congress , there must be deducted from this amount the sum of $ 4,296,009.26 , with the interest upon it of $ 150,000 , appropriated by the act of february 15 , 1860 , " for the purpose of supplying the deficiency in the revenues and defraying the expenses of the post - office department for the year ending june 30 , 1859 . "
this sum therefore justly chargeable to the year 1859 , must be deducted from the sum of $ 59,848,474.72 in order to ascertain the expenditure for the year ending june 30 , 1860 , which leaves a balance for the expenditures of that year of $ 55,402,465.46 .
the interest on the public debt , including treasury notes , for the same fiscal year , ending june 30 , 1860 , amounted to $ 3,177,314.62 , which , added to the above sum of $ 55,402,465.46 , makes the aggregate of $ 58,579,780.08.it ought in justice to be observed that several of the estimates from the departments for the year ending june 30 , 1860 , were reduced by congress below what was and still is deemed compatible with the public interest .
allowing a liberal margin of $ 2,500,000 for this reduction and for other causes , it may be safely asserted that the sum of $ 61,000,000 , or , at the most , $ 62,000,000 , is amply sufficient to administer the government and to pay the interest on the public debt , unless contingent events should hereafter render extraordinary expenditures necessary .
this result has been attained in a considerable degree by the care exercised by the appropriate departments in entering into public contracts .
i have myself never interfered with the award of any such contract , except in a single case , with the colonization society , deeming it advisable to cast the whole responsibility in each case on the proper head of the department , with the general instruction that these contracts should always be given to the lowest and best bidder .
it has ever been my opinion that public contracts are not a legitimate source of patronage to be conferred upon personal or political favorites , but that in all such cases a public officer is bound to act for the government as a prudent individual would act for himself .
it is with great satisfaction i communicate the fact that since the date of my last annual message not a single slave has been imported into the united states in violation of the laws prohibiting the african slave trade .
this statement is rounded upon a thorough examination and investigation of the subject .
indeed , the spirit which prevailed some time since among a portion of our fellow - citizens in favor of this trade seems to have entirely subsided .
i also congratulate you upon the public sentiment which now exists against the crime of setting on foot military expeditions within the limits of the united states to proceed from thence and make war upon the people of unoffending states with whom we are at peace .
in this respect a happy change has been effected since the commencement of my administration .
it surely ought to be the prayer of every christian and patriot that such expeditions may never again receive countenance in our country or depart from our shores .
it would be a useless repetition to do more than refer with earnest commendation to my former recommendations in favor of the pacific railroad ; of the grant of power to the president to employ the naval force in the vicinity for the protection of the lives and property of our fellow - citizens passing in transit over the different central american routes against sudden and lawless outbreaks and depredations , and also to protect american merchant vessels , their crews and cargoes , against violent and unlawful seizure and confiscation in the ports of mexico and the south american republics when these may be in a disturbed and revolutionary condition .
it is my settled conviction that without such a power we do not afford that protection to those engaged in the commerce of the country which they have a right to demand .
i again recommend to congress the passage of a law , in pursuance of the provisions of the constitution , appointing a day certain previous to the 4th march in each year of an odd number for the election of representatives throughout all the states .
a similar power has already been exercised , with general approbation , in the appointment of the same day throughout the union for holding the election of electors for president and vice - president of the united states .
my attention was earnestly directed to this subject from the fact that the thirty - fifth congress terminated on the 3d march , 1859 , without making the necessary appropriation for the service of the post - office department .
i was then forced to consider the best remedy for this omission , and an immediate call of the present congress was the natural resort .
upon inquiry , however , i ascertained that fifteen out of the thirty - three states composing the confederacy were without representatives , and that consequently these fifteen states would be disfranchised by such a call .
these fifteen states will be in the same condition on the 4th march next .
ten of them can not elect representatives , according to existing state laws , until different periods , extending from the beginning of august next until the months of october and november .
in my last message i gave warning that in a time of sudden and alarming danger the salvation of our institutions might depend upon the power of the president immediately to assemble a full congress to meet the emergency .
it is now quite evident that the financial necessities of the government will require a modification of the tariff during your present session for the purpose of increasing the revenue .
in this aspect , i desire to reiterate the recommendation contained in my last two annual messages in favor of imposing specific instead of ad valorem duties on all imported articles to which these can be properly applied .
from long observation and experience i am convinced that specific duties are necessary , both to protect the revenue and to secure to our manufacturing interests that amount of incidental encouragement which unavoidably results from a revenue tariff .
as an abstract proposition it may be admitted that ad valorem duties would in theory be the most just and equal .
but if the experience of this and of all other commercial nations has demonstrated that such duties can not be assessed and collected without great frauds upon the revenue , then it is the part of wisdom to resort to specific duties .
indeed , from the very nature of an ad valorem duty this must be the result .
under it the inevitable consequence is that foreign goods will be entered at less than their true value .
the treasury will therefore lose the duty on the difference between their real and fictitious value , and to this extent we are defrauded .
the temptations which ad valorem duties present to a dishonest importer are irresistible .
his object is to pass his goods through the custom - house at the very lowest valuation necessary to save them from confiscation .
in this he too often succeeds in spite of the vigilance of the revenue officers .
hence the resort to false invoices , one for the purchaser and another for the custom - house , and to other expedients to defraud the government .
the honest importer produces his invoice to the collector , stating the actual price at which he purchased the articles abroad .
not so the dishonest importer and the agent of the foreign manufacturer .
and here it may be observed that a very large proportion of the manufactures imported from abroad are consigned for sale to commission merchants , who are mere agents employed by the manufacturers .
in such cases no actual sale has been made to fix their value .
the foreign manufacturer , if he be dishonest , prepares an invoice of the goods , not at their actual value , but at the very lowest rate necessary to escape detection .
in this manner the dishonest importer and the foreign manufacturer enjoy a decided advantage over the honest merchant .
they are thus enabled to undersell the fair trader and drive him from the market .
in fact the operation of this system has already driven from the pursuits of honorable commerce many of that class of regular and conscientious merchants whose character throughout the world is the pride of our country .
the remedy for these evils is to be found in specific duties , so far as this may be practicable .
they dispense with any inquiry at the custom - house into the actual cost or value of the article , and it pays the precise amount of duty previously fixed by law .
they present no temptations to the appraisers of foreign goods , who receive but small salaries , and might by undervaluation in a few cases render themselves independent .
besides , specific duties best conform to the requisition in the constitution that " no preference shall be given by any regulation of commerce or revenue to the ports of one state over those of another . "
under our ad valorem system such preferences are to some extent inevitable , and complaints have often been made that the spirit of this provision has [ p.3183 ] been violated by a lower appraisement of the same articles at one port than at another .
an impression strangely enough prevails to some extent that specific duties are necessarily protective duties .
nothing can be more fallacious .
great britain glories in free trade , and yet her whole revenue from imports is at the present moment collected under a system of specific duties .
it is a striking fact in this connection that in the commercial treaty of january 23 , 1860 , between france and england one of the articles provides that the ad valorem duties which it imposes shall be converted into specific duties within six months from its date , and these are to be ascertained by making an average of the prices for six months previous to that time .
the reverse of the propositions would be nearer to the truth , because a much larger amount of revenue would be collected by merely converting the ad valorem duties of a tariff into equivalent specific duties .
to this extent the revenue would be increased , and in the same proportion the specific duty might be diminished .
specific duties would secure to the american manufacturer the incidental protection to which he is fairly entitled under a revenue tariff , and to this surely no person would object .
the framers of the existing tariff have gone further , and in a liberal spirit have discriminated in favor of large and useful branches of our manufactures , not by raising the rate of duty upon the importation of similar articles from abroad , but , what is the same in effect , by admitting articles free of duty which enter into the composition of their fabrics .
under the present system it has been often truly remarked that this incidental protection decreases when the manufacturer needs it most and increases when he needs it least , and constitutes a sliding scale which always operates against him .
the revenues of the country are subject to similar fluctuations .
instead of approaching a steady standard , as would be the case under a system of specific duties , they sink and rise with the sinking and rising prices of articles in foreign countries .
it would not be difficult for congress to arrange a system of specific duties which would afford additional stability both to our revenue and our manufactures and without injury or injustice to any interest of the country .
this might be accomplished by ascertaining the average value of any given article for a series of years at the place of exportation and by simply converting the rate of ad valorem duty upon it which might be deemed necessary for revenue purposes into the form of a specific duty .
such an arrangement could not injure the consumer .
if he should pay a greater amount of duty one year , this would be counterbalanced by a lesser amount the next , and in the end the aggregate would be the same .
i desire to call your immediate attention to the present condition of the treasury , so ably and clearly presented by the secretary in his report to [ p.3184 ] congress , and to recommend that measures be promptly adopted to enable it to discharge its pressing obligations .
the other recommendations of the report are well worthy of your favorable consideration .
i herewith transmit to congress the reports of the secretaries of war , of the navy , of the interior , and of the postmaster - general .
the recommendations and suggestions which they contain are highly valuable and deserve your careful attention .
the report of the postmaster - general details the circumstances under which cornelius vanderbilt , on my request , agreed in the month of july last to carry the ocean mails between our atlantic and pacific coasts .
had he not thus acted this important intercommunication must have been suspended , at least for a season .
the postmaster - general had no power to make him any other compensation than the postages on the mail matter which he might carry .
it was known at the time that these postages would fall far short of an adequate compensation , as well as of the sum which the same service had previously cost the government .
mr. vanderbilt , in a commendable spirit , was willing to rely upon the justice of congress to make up the deficiency , and i therefore recommend that an appropriation may be granted for this purpose .
i should do great injustice to the attorney - general were i to omit the mention of his distinguished services in the measures adopted and prosecuted by him for the defense of the government against numerous and unfounded claims to land in california purporting to have been made by the mexican government previous to the treaty of cession .
the successful opposition to these claims has saved the united states public property worth many millions of dollars and to individuals holding title under them to at least an equal amount .
it has been represented to me from sources which i deem reliable that the inhabitants in several portions of kansas have been reduced nearly to a state of starvation on account of the almost total failure of their crops , whilst the harvests in every other portion of the country have been abundant .
the prospect before them for the approaching winter is well calculated to enlist the sympathies of every heart .
the destitution appears to be so general that it can not be relieved by private contributions , and they are in such indigent circumstances as to be unable to purchase the necessaries of life for themselves .
i refer the subject to congress .
if any constitutional measure for their relief can be devised , i would recommend its adoption .
i cordially commend to your favorable regard the interests of the people of this district .
they are eminently entitled to your consideration , especially since , unlike the people of the states , they can appeal to no government except that of the union .

