well , i think one thing that distinguishes is experience .
i think we 've dramatically changed the world .
i 'll talk about that a little bit later , but the changes are mind - boggling for world peace .
kids go to bed at night without the same fear of nuclear war .
and change for change 's sake is n't enough .
we saw that message in the late seventies when we heard a lot about change .
and what happened ?
that " misery index " went right through the roof .
but my economic program , i think , is the kind of change we want .
and the way we 're going to get it done is we 're going to have a brandnew congress .
a lot of them are thrown out because of all the scandals .
i 'll sit down with them , democrats and republicans alike , and work for my agenda for american renewal which represents real change .
but i 'd say , if you had to separate out , i think it 's experience at this level .
i just thought of another , another big difference here between me -- i do n't believe mr. perot feels this way , but i know governor clinton did , because i want to accurately quote him .
he thinks , i think he said , that the country is coming apart at the seams .
now , i know that the only way he can win is to make everybody believe the economy is worse than it is .
but this country 's not coming apart at the seams , for heaven sakes .
we 're the united states of america .
in spite of the economic problems , we are the most respected economy around the world .
many would trade for it .
we 've been caught up in a global slowdown .
we can do much , much better .
but we ought not to try to convince the american people that america is a country that 's coming apart at the seams .
i would hate to be running for president and think that the only way i could win would be to convince everybody how horrible things are .
yes , there are big problems .
and yes , people are hurting .
but i believe that this agenda for american renewal i have is the answer to do it .
and i believe we can get it done now , whereas we did n't in the past , because you 're going to have a whole brandnew bunch of people in the congress that are going to have to listen to the same american people i 'm listening to .
i think the american people should be the judge of that .
i think character is a very important question .
i said something the other day where i was accused of being like joe mccarthy because i questioned -- put it this way -- i think it 's wrong to demonstrate against your own country or organize demonstrations against your own country in foreign soil .
i just think it 's wrong .
maybe , they say , well , it was a youthful indiscretion .
i was 19 or 20 , flying off an aircraft carrier , and that shaped me to be commander in chief of the armed forces .
and i 'm sorry , but demonstrating -- it 's not a question of patriotism .
it 's a question of character and judgment .
they get on me , bill 's gotten on me about " read my lips . "
when i make a mistake , i 'll admit it .
but he has not admitted the mistake .
and i just find it impossible to understand how an american can demonstrate against his own country in a foreign land , organizing demonstrations against it , when young men are held prisoner in hanoi or kids out of the ghetto were drafted .
some say , well , you 're a little old - fashioned .
maybe i am , but i just do n't think that 's right .
now , whether it 's character or judgment , whatever it is , i have a big difference here on this issue .
and so we 'll just have to see how it plays out .
but i could n't do that .
and i do n't think most americans could do that .
and they all say , well , it was a long time ago .
well , let 's admit it then , say , " i made a terrible mistake . "
how could you be commander in chief of the armed forces and have some kid say , when you have to make a tough decision , as i did in panama or in kuwait , and then have some kid jump up and say , " well , i 'm not going to go .
the commander in chief was organizing demonstrations halfway around the world during another era"?so there are differences .
but that 's about the main area where i think we have a difference .
i do n't know about -- we 'll talk about that a little with ross here in a bit .
i have to correct one thing .
i did n't question the man 's patriotism ; i questioned his judgment and his character .
what he did in moscow , that 's fine .
let him explain it .
he did .
i accept that .
what i do n't accept is demonstrating and organizing demonstrations in a foreign country when your country 's at war .
i 'm sorry , i can not accept that .
this one on taxes spells out the biggest difference between us .
i do not believe we need to go back to the mondale proposals or the dukakis proposals of tax - and - spend .
governor clinton says $ 200,000 , but he also says he wants to raise $ 150 billion .
taxing people over $ 200,000 will not get you $ 150 billion .
and then when you add in his other spending proposals , regrettably , you end up socking it to the working man .
that old adage that they use , " we 're going to soak the rich , we 're going to soak the rich , " it always ends up being the poor cab driver or the working man that ends up paying the bill .
and so i just have a different approach .
i believe the way to get the deficit down is to control the growth of mandatory spending programs and not raise taxes on the american people .
we 've got a big difference there .
well , sander , that 's a good question .
and the answer is : for 40-some years , we kept the peace .
if you look at the cost of not keeping the peace in europe , it would be exorbitant .
we have reduced the number of troops that are deployed and going to be deployed .
i have cut defense spending .
and the reason we could do that is because of our fantastic success in winning the cold war .
we never would have got there if we 'd gone for the nuclear - freeze crowd ; never would have got there if we 'd listened to those that wanted to cut defense spending .
i think it is important that the united states stay in europe and continue to guarantee the peace .
we simply can not pull back .
now , when anybody has a spending program they want to spend money on at home , they say , well , let 's cut money out of the defense department .
i will accept and have accepted the recommendations of two proven leaders , general colin powell and dick , secretary dick cheney .
they feel that the levels we 're operating at and the reductions that i have proposed are proper .
and so i simply do not think we should go back to the isolation days and start blaming foreigners .
we are the sole remaining superpower .
and we should be that .
we have a certain disproportionate responsibility .
but i would ask the american people to understand that if we make imprudent cuts , if we go too far , we risk the peace .
and i do n't want to do that .
i 've seen what it is like to see the burdens of a war , and i do n't want to see us make reckless cuts .
because of our programs , we have been able to significantly cut defense spending .
but let 's not cut into the muscle .
and let 's not cut down our insurance policy , which is participation of american forces in nato , the greatest peacekeeping organization ever made .
today , you 've got problems in europe still bubbling along , even though europe 's going democracy 's route .
but we are there .
and i think this insurance policy is necessary .
i think it goes with world leadership .
and i think the levels we 've come up with are just about right .
the question was on fairness .
i just disagree with 







  well , i assume she was supportive of the decision on mcdonnell douglas .
i assume she was supporting me on the decision to sell those airplanes .
i think it 's a good decision .
i took a little heat for it , but i think it was the correct decision to do .
and we 've worked it out , and indeed , we 're moving forward all around the world in a much more peaceful way .
so that one we came away with which -- in creating jobs for the american people .
i would simply say to her , look , take a look at what the president has proposed on job retraining .
when you cut back on defense spending , some people are going to be thrown out of work .
if you throw another 50,000 kids on the street because of cutting recklessly in troop levels , you 're going to put a lot more out of work .
i would say to them , look at the job retraining programs that we 're proposing .
therein is the best answer to her .
and another one is , stimulate investment and savings .
i mean , we 've got big economic problems , but we are not coming apart at the seams .
we 're ready for a recovery with interest rates down and inflation down , the cruelest tax of all ; caught up in a global slowdown right now , but that will change if you go with the programs i 've talked about and if you help with job retraining and education .
i am a firm believer that our america 2000 education problem is the answer .
a little longer run ; it 's going to take a while to educate , but it is a good program .
so her best hope for short term is job retraining if she was thrown out of work at a defense plant .
but tell her it 's not all that gloomy .
we 're the united states .
we 've faced tough problems before .
look at the " misery index " when the democrats had both the white house and the congress .
it was just right through the roof .
now , we can do better .
and the way to do better is not to tax and spend but to retrain , get that control of the mandatory spending programs .
i am much more optimistic about this country than some .
well , we 've got a plan announced for what we can do for small business .
i 've already put forward things that will get this country working fast , some of which have been echoed here tonight : investment tax allowance , capital gains reduction , more on research and development , a tax credit for first - time homebuyers .
what i 'm going to do is say to jim baker when this campaign is over , " all right , let 's sit down now .
you do in domestic affairs what you 've done in foreign affairs .
be the kind of economic coordinator of all the domestic side of the house , and that includes all the economic side , all the training side , and bring this program together . "
we 're going to have a new congress .
and we 're going to say to them , " you 've listened to the voters the way we have .
nobody wants gridlock anymore .
and so let 's get the program through."and i believe it will work , because , as ross said , we 've got the plans .
the plans are all over washington .
and i have put ours together in something called the agenda for american renewal .
and it makes sense .
it 's sensible .
it creates jobs .
it gets to the base of the kind of jobs we need .
and so i 'll just be asking for support to get that put into effect .
i do n't think the fed ought to be put under the executive branch .
there is separation there .
i think that 's fine .
alan greenspan is respected .
i 've had some arguments with him about the speed in which we might have lowered rates .
but governor clinton , he talks about the reaction to the markets .
there was a momentary fear that he might win , and the markets went " rrrfft " -- down like that --so i do n't -- we can judge on -- the stock market has been strong .
it 's been very strong since i 've been president .
and they recognize we 've got great difficulties .
but they 're also much more optimistic than the pessimists we have up here tonight .
in terms of vetoing tax bills , you 're darn right .
i am going to protect the american taxpayer against the spend - and - tax congress .
and i 'm going to keep on vetoing them because i do n't think we are taxed too little .
i think the government 's spending too much .
so governor clinton can label it tax for the rich or anything he wants .
i 'm going to protect the working man by continuing to veto and to threaten veto until we get this new congress , when then we 're going to move forward on our plan .
i`ve got to protect them .
we still are the envy of the world in terms of our military ; there 's no question about that .
we 're the envy of the world in terms of our economy , in spite of the difficulties we 're having ; there 's no question about that .
our exports are dramatically up .
i might say to mr. perot , i can understand why you might have missed it because there 's so much fascination by trivia , but i worked out a deal with boris yeltsin to eliminate , get rid of entirely , the most destabilizing weapons of all , the ss-18 , the big intercontinental ballistic missile .
i mean , that 's been done .
and thank god it has , because the parents of these young people around here go to bed at night without the same fear of nuclear war .
we 've made dramatic progress .
so we 've got a good military -- the question that says get a new military , get the best in the world -- we 've got it , and they 're keeping the peace .
they 're respected around the world , and we are more respected because of the way we have conducted ourselves .
we did n't listen to the nuclear freeze crowd .
we said , peace through strength .
it worked , and the cold war is over .
america understands that .
but we 're turned so inward we do n't understand the global picture .
we are helping democracy .
ross , the freedom support act is something that i got through the congress , and it 's a very good thing because it does exactly what you say , and i think you agree with that , to help russian democracy .
we 're going to keep on doing that .
well , the administration was the first major country to stand up against the abuse in tiananmen square .
we are the ones that worked out the prison labor deal .
we are the ones that have lowered the barrier to products , the carla hills negotiation .
i am the one that said , let 's keep the mfn because you see china moving toward a free market economy .
to do what the congress and governor clinton are suggesting , you would isolate and ruin hong kong .
they are making some progress , not enough for us .
we were the first ones to put sanctions on .
we still have them on some things .
but governor clinton 's philosophy is isolate them .
he says do n't do it , but the policies he 's expounding of putting conditions on mfn and kind of humiliating them is not the way you make the kind of progress we are getting .
i have stood up with these people , and i understand what you have to do to be strong in this situation .
it 's moving , not as fast as we 'd like .
but you isolate china and turn them inward , and then we 've made a tremendous mistake .
i 'm not going to do it .
i 've had to fight a lot of people that were saying " human rights . "
we are the ones that put the sanctions on and stood for it .
and he can insult general scowcroft if he wants to .
he did n't go over to coddle .
he went over to say -- -- 



  -- -- you must make the very changes they 're making now .
ann , both of them are very complicated situations .
i vowed something , because i learned something from vietnam : i am not going to commit u. s. forces until i know what the mission is , until the military tell me that it can be completed , until i know how they can come out .
we are helping .
american airplanes are helping today on humanitarian relief for sarajevo .
it is america that 's in the lead in helping with humanitarian relief for somalia .
but when you go to put somebody else 's son or daughter into war , i think you 've got to be a little bit careful , and you have to be sure that there 's a military plan that can do this .
you have ancient ethnic rivalries that have cropped up as yugoslavia is dissolved or getting dissolved .
it is n't going to be solved by sending in the 82d airborne , and i 'm not going to do that as commander in chief .
i am going to stand by and use the moral persuasion of the united states to get satisfaction in terms of prison camps , and we 're making some progress there , and in terms of getting humanitarian relief in there .
right now , as you know , the united states took the lead in a no - fly operation up there , no - fly order up in the united nations .
we 're working through the international organizations .
that 's one thing i learned by forging that tremendous and greatly , highly successful coalition against saddam hussein , the dictator : work internationally to do it .
i 'm very concerned about it .
i 'm concerned about ethnic cleansing .
i 'm concerned about attacks on muslims , for example , over there .
but i must stop short of using american force until i know how those young men and women are going to get out of there as well as get in , know what the mission is and define it .
i think i 'm on the right track .
ms. compton .
are you designing a mission that would -- -- 















  well , i would say that one meeting that made a profound impression on me was when the mayors of the big cities , including the mayor of los angeles , a democrat , came to see me , and they unanimously said the decline in urban america stems from the decline in the american family .
so i do think we need to strengthen family .
when barbara holds an aids baby , she 's showing a certain compassion for family .
when she reads to children , the same thing .
i believe that discipline and respect for the law , all of these things , should be taught to children , not in our schools but families have to do that .
i 'm appalled at the high , outrageous numbers of divorces .
it 's happened in families ; it 's happened in ours .
but it 's gotten too much , and i just think that we ought to do everything we can to respect the american family .
it can be a single - parent family .
those mothers need help .
one way to do it is to get these deadbeat fathers to pay their obligations to these mothers .
that will help strengthen the american family .
and there 's a whole bunch of other things that i ca n't click off in this short period of time .
sandy will ask it .
legalization of drugsmr .
vanocur .
mr. president , there 's been a lot of talk about harry truman in this campaign , so much so that i think tomorrow i 'll wake up and see him named as the next commissioner of baseball .
we could use one .
mr. vanocur .
the thing that mr. truman did n't have to deal with is drugs .
americans are increasingly alarmed about drug - related crimes in cities and suburbs , and your administration is not the first to have grappled with this .
are you at all of a mind that maybe it ought to go to another level , if not to what 's advocated by william f. buckley , jr. , and milton friedman , legalization , somewhere between there and where we are now ?
no .
i do n't think that 's the right answer .
i do n't believe legalizing narcotics is the answer .
i just do n't believe that 's the answer .
i do believe that there 's some fairly good news out there .
the use of cocaine , for example , by teenagers is dramatically down .
but we 've got to keep fighting on this war against drugs .
we 're doing a little better in interdiction .
many of the countries that used to say , " well , this is a united states problem .
if you 'd get the demand down , then we would n't have the problem , " are working cooperatively with the dea and other law -- the military .
we 're using the military more now in terms of interdiction .
our funding for recovery is up , recovering the addicts .
where we 're not making the progress , sander , is in -- we 're making it in teenagers .
and thank god , because i thought what ross said was most appropriate about these families and these children .
but where we 're not making it is with the confirmed addicts .
i 'll tell you one place that 's working well , and that is the private sector , jim burke and this task force that he has .
you may know about it .
tell the american people , but this man said , " i 'll get you a million dollars a day in pro bono advertising , " something that 's very hard for the government to do .
he went out and he did it , and people are beginning to educate through this program , teaching these kids you should n't use drugs .
so we 're still in the fight .
but i must tell you , i think legalization of narcotics or something of that nature , in the face of the medical evidence , would be totally counterproductive .
and i oppose it , and i 'm going to stand up and continue to oppose it .
well , i think governor clinton is committed .
i do think it 's fair to note -- he can rebut it -- that arkansas is one of the few states that does n't have any civil rights legislation .
i 've tried to use the white house as a bully pulpit , speaking out against discrimination .
we passed two very forward - looking civil rights bills .
it 's not going to be all done by legislation , but i do think that you need to make an appeal every time you can to eliminate racial divisions and discrimination .
and i 'll keep on doing that and pointing to some legislative accomplishment to back it up .
i have to take 10 seconds here at the end -- the red light is n't on yet -- to say to ross perot , please do n't say to the dea agents on the street that we do n't have the will to fight drugs .
please , i have watched these people .
the same for our local law enforcement people ; we 're backing them in every way we possibly can .
but maybe you meant that some in the country do n't have the will to fight it .
but those that are out there on the front line -- as you know ; you 've been a strong backer of law enforcement ; really , i just want to clear that up -- have the will to fight it .
and frankly , some of them are giving their lives .
coming from the political process .
we have increased funding for aids .
we 've doubled it , on research and on every other aspect of it .
my request for this year was $ 4.9 billion for aids , 10 times as much for aids victim as per cancer victim .
i think that we 're showing the proper compassion and concern .
so i ca n't tell you where it 's coming from , but i am very much concerned about aids , and i believe that we 've got the best researchers in the world out there at nih working the problem .
we 're funding them .
i wish there was more money , but we 're funding them far more than any time in the past .
we 're going to keep on doing that .
i do n't know , i was a little disappointed in magic , because he came to me and i said , " now , if you see something we 're not doing , get ahold of me , call me , let me know . "
he went to one meeting , and then we heard that he was stepping down .
so he 's been replaced by mary fisher , who electrified the republican convention by talking about the compassion and the concern that we feel .
it was a beautiful moment .
and i think she 'll do a first - class job on that commission .
so i think the appeal is , yes , we care .
the other thing is , part of aids , it 's one of the few diseases where behavior matters .
and i once called on somebody , " well , change your behavior .
if the behavior you 're using is prone to cause aids , change the behavior . "
the next thing i know , one of these act - up groups is out saying , " bush ought to change his behavior . "
you ca n't talk about it rationally .
the extremes are hurting the aids cause .
to go into a catholic mass in a beautiful cathedral in new york under the cause of helping in aids and start throwing condoms around in the mass , i 'm sorry , i think it sets back the cause .
we can not move to the extreme .
we 've got to care .
we 've got to continue everything we can at the federal and the local level .
barbara , i think , is doing a superb job in destroying the myth about aids .
all of us are in this fight together .
all of us care .
do not go to the extreme .
-- because the people , not the special interests , put me there .
i will have a unique mandate .
i have said again and again , and this really upsets the establishment in washington , that we 're going to inform the people in detail on the issues through an electronic town hall so that they really know what 's going on .
they will want to do what 's good for our country .
now , all these fellows with thousand - dollar suits and alligator shoes running up and down the halls of congress that make policy now , the lobbyists , the pac guys , the foreign lobbyists , what have you , they 'll be over there in the smithsonian --   -- because we 're going to get rid of them .
the congress will be listening to the people .
and the american people are willing to have fair , shared sacrifice .
they 're not as stupid as washington thinks they are .
the american people are bright , intelligent , caring , loving people who want a great country for their children and grandchildren .
they will make those sacrifices .
so i welcome that challenge .
and just watch , because if the american people send me there , we 'll get it done .
now , everybody will faint in washington .
they 've never seen anything happen in that town .
this is a town where the white house says , " congress did it . "
congress says , " the white house did it . "
and i 'm sitting there and saying , " well , who else could be around ? "
and then when they get off by themselves , they said , " nobody did it . "
and yet , the cash register is empty .
and it used to have our money , the taxpayers ' money , in it , and we did n't get the results .
we 'll get it done .
> 







  well , first place i 'd like to clear up something , because every 4 years the democrats go around and say , " hey , republicans are going to cut social security and medicare . "
they 've started it again .
i am the president that stood up and said , " do n't mess with social security . "
and i 'm not going to , and we have n't .
we are not going to go after the social security recipient .
i have one difference with mr. perot on that because i do n't think we need to touch social security .
what we do need to do , though , is control the growth of these mandatory programs .
and ross properly says , " okay , there 's some pain in that . "
but governor clinton refuses to touch that , simply refuses .
so what we 've got to do is control it , the growth .
let it grow for inflation ; let it grow for the amount of new people added , population .
and then hold the line .
i believe that is the way you get the deficit down , not by the tax - and - spend program that we hear every 4 years , whether it 's mondale , dukakis , whoever else it is .
i just do n't believe we ought to do that .
so hold the line on social security , and put a cap on the growth of the mandatory program .
well , i do n't have time in 30 seconds or one minute to talk about our health care reform plan .
the oregon plan made some good sense , but it 's easy to dismiss the concerns of the disabled .
as president , i have to be sure that those waivers which we 're approving all over the place are covered under the law .
maybe we can work it out .
but the americans for disabilities act , speaking about sound and sensible civil rights legislation , was the foremost piece of legislation passed in modern times .
so we do have something more than a technical problem .
governor clinton clicked off the things : you 've got to take on insurance companies and bureaucracies .
he failed to take on somebody else , the malpractice suit people , those that bring these lawsuits against -- these frivolous trial lawyers ' lawsuits that are running costs of medical care up by $ 25 billion to $ 50 billion .
he refuses to put anything -- controls on these crazy lawsuits .
if you want to help somebody , do n't run the costs up by making doctors have to have five or six tests where one would do for fear of being sued , or have somebody along the highway not stop to pick up a guy and help him because he 's afraid a trial lawyer will come along and sue him .
we 're suing each other too much and caring for each other too little .
well , let me tell you a little what it 's like to be president .
in the oval office , you ca n't predict what kind of crisis is going to come up .
you have to make tough calls .
you ca n't be on one hand this way and one hand another .
you ca n't take different positions on these difficult issues .
then you need a philosophical -- i 'd call it a philosophical underpinning ; mine for foreign affairs is democracy and freedom .
look at the dramatic changes around the world .
the cold war is over .
the soviet union is no more , and we 're working with a democratic country .
poland , hungary , czechoslovakia , the baltics are free .
take a look at the middle east .
we had to stand up against a tyrant .
the united states came together as we have n't in many , many years .
we kicked this man out of kuwait .
in the process , as a result of that will and that decision and that toughness , we now have ancient enemies talking peace in the middle east .
nobody would have dreamed it possible .
i think the biggest dividend of making these tough calls is the fact that we are less afraid of nuclear war .
every parent out there has much less worry that their kids are going to be faced with nuclear holocaust .
all this is good .
on the domestic side , what we must do is have change that empowers people , not change for the sake of change , tax and spend .
we do n't need to do that anymore .
what we need to do is empower people .
we need to invest and save .
we need to do better in education .
we need to do better in job retraining .
we need to expand our exports , and they 're going very , very well indeed .
we need to strengthen the american family .
i hope as president that i 've earned your trust .
i 've admitted it when i make a mistake , but then i go on and help try to solve the problems .
i hope i 've earned your trust , because a lot of being president is about trust and character .
and i ask for your support for 4 more years to finish this job .
thank you very , very much .

mr. president , mr. speaker , members of the united states congress : i return as a former president of the senate and a former member of this great house .
and now , as president , it is my privilege to report to you on the state of the union .
tonight i come not to speak about the state of the government , not to detail every new initiative we plan for the coming year nor to describe every line in the budget .
i 'm here to speak to you and to the american people about the state of the union , about our world -- the changes we 've seen , the challenges we face -- and what that means for america .
there are singular moments in history , dates that divide all that goes before from all that comes after .
and many of us in this chamber have lived much of our lives in a world whose fundamental features were defined in 1945 ; and the events of that year decreed the shape of nations , the pace of progress , freedom or oppression for millions of people around the world .
nineteen forty - five provided the common frame of reference , the compass points of the postwar era we 've relied upon to understand ourselves .
and that was our world , until now .
the events of the year just ended , the revolution of ' 89 , have been a chain reaction , changes so striking that it marks the beginning of a new era in the world 's affairs .
think back -- think back just 12 short months ago to the world we knew as 1989 began .
one year -- one year ago , the people of panama lived in fear , under the thumb of a dictator .
today democracy is restored ; panama is free .
operation just cause has achieved its objective .
the number of military personnel in panama is now very close to what it was before the operation began .
and tonight i am announcing that well before the end of february , the additional numbers of american troops , the brave men and women of our armed forces who made this mission a success , will be back home .
a year ago in poland , lech walesa declared that he was ready to open a dialog with the communist rulers of that country ; and today , with the future of a free poland in their own hands , members of solidarity lead the polish government .
a year ago , freedom 's playwright , vaclav havel , languished as a prisoner in prague .
and today it 's vaclav havel , president of czechoslovakia .
and one year ago , erich honecker of east germany claimed history as his guide , and he predicted the berlin wall would last another hundred years .
and today , less than one year later , it 's the wall that 's history .
remarkable events -- events that fulfill the long - held hopes of the american people ; events that validate the longstanding goals of american policy , a policy based on a single , shining principle : the cause of freedom .
america , not just the nation but an idea , alive in the minds of people everywhere .
as this new world takes shape , america stands at the center of a widening circle of freedom -- today , tomorrow , and into the next century .
our nation is the enduring dream of every immigrant who ever set foot on these shores , and the millions still struggling to be free .
this nation , this idea called america , was and always will be a new world -- our new world .
at a workers ' rally , in a place called branik on the outskirts of prague , the idea called america is alive .
a worker , dressed in grimy overalls , rises to speak at the factory gates .
he begins his speech to his fellow citizens with these words , words of a distant revolution : " we hold these truths to be self - evident , that all men are created equal , that they are endowed by their creator with certain unalienable rights , and that among these are life , liberty and the pursuit of happiness."it 's no secret that here at home freedom 's door opened long ago .
the cornerstones of this free society have already been set in place : democracy , competition , opportunity , private investment , stewardship , and of course leadership .
and our challenge today is to take this democratic system of ours , a system second to none , and make it better : a better america , where there 's a job for everyone who wants one ; where women working outside the home can be confident their children are in safe and loving care and where government works to expand child - care alternatives for parents ; where we reconcile the needs of a clean environment and a strong economy ; where " made in the usa " is recognized around the world as the symbol of quality and progress ; where every one of us enjoys the same opportunities to live , to work , and to contribute to society and where , for the first time , the american mainstream includes all of our disabled citizens ; where everyone has a roof over his head and where the homeless get the help they need to live in dignity ; where our schools challenge and support our kids and our teachers and where all of them make the grade ; where every street , every city , every school , and every child is drug - free ; and finally , where no american is forgotten -- our hearts go out to our hostages who are ceaselessly on our minds and in our efforts .
that 's part of the future we want to see , the future we can make for ourselves , but dreams alone wo n't get us there .
we need to extend our horizon , commit to the long view .
and our mission for the future starts today .
in the tough competitive markets around the world , america faces the great challenges and great opportunities .
and we know that we can succeed in the global economic arena of the nineties , but to meet that challenge , we must make some fundamental changes -- some crucial investment in ourselves .
yes , we are going to invest in america .
this administration is determined to encourage the creation of capital , capital of all kinds : physical capital -- everything from our farms and factories to our workshops and production lines , all that is needed to produce and deliver quality goods and quality services ; intellectual capital -- the source of ideas that spark tomorrow 's products ; and of course our human capital -- the talented work force that we 'll need to compete in the global market .
let me tell you , if we ignore human capital , if we lose the spirit of american ingenuity , the spirit that is the hallmark of the american worker , that would be bad .
the american worker is the most productive worker in the world .
we need to save more .
we need to expand the pool of capital for new investments that need more jobs and more growth .
and that 's the idea behind a new initiative i call the family savings plan , which i will send to congress tomorrow .
we need to cut the tax on capital gains , encourage risktakers , especially those in our small businesses , to take those steps that translate into economic reward , jobs , and a better life for all of us .
we 'll do what it takes to invest in america 's future .
the budget commitment is there .
the money is there .
it 's there for research and development , r and d -- a record high .
it 's there for our housing initiative -- hope -- to help everyone from first - time homebuyers to the homeless .
the money 's there to keep our kids drug - free -- 70 percent more than when i took office in 1989 .
it 's there for space exploration .
and it 's there for education -- another record high .
and one more thing : last fall at the education summit , the governors and i agreed to look for ways to help make sure that our kids are ready to learn the very first day they walk into the classroom .
and i 've made good on that commitment by proposing a record increase in funds -- an extra half - a - billion dollars -- for something near and dear to all of us : head start .
education is the one investment that means more for our future because it means the most for our children .
real improvement in our schools is not simply a matter of spending more : it 's a matter of asking more -- expecting more -- of our schools , our teachers , of our kids , of our parents , and ourselves .
and that 's why tonight i am announcing america 's education goals , goals developed with enormous cooperation from the nation 's governors .
and if i might , i 'd like to say i 'm very pleased that governor gardner   and governor clinton , governor branstad , governor campbell , all of whom were very key in these discussions , these deliberations , are with us here tonight .
by the year 2000 , every child must start school ready to learn .
the united states must increase the high school graduation rate to no less than 90 percent .
and we are going to make sure our schools ' diplomas mean something .
in critical subjects -- at the 4th , 8th , and 12th grades -- we must assess our students ' performance .
by the year 2000 , u. s. students must be first in the world in math and science achievement .
every american adult must be a skilled , literate worker and citizen .
every school must offer the kind of disciplined environment that makes it possible for our kids to learn .
and every school in america must be drug - free .
ambitious aims ?
of course .
easy to do ?
far from it .
but the future 's at stake .
the nation will not accept anything less than excellence in education .
these investments will keep america competitive .
and i know this about the american people : we welcome competition .
we 'll match our ingenuity , our energy , our experience and technology , our spirit and enterprise against anyone .
but let the competition be free , but let it also be fair .
america is ready .
since we really mean it and since we 're serious about being ready to meet that challenge , we 're getting our own house in order .
we have made real progress .
seven years ago , the federal deficit was 6 percent of our gross national product -- 6 percent .
in the new budget i sent up two days ago , the deficit is down to 1 percent of gross national product .
that budget brings federal spending under control .
it meets the gramm - rudman target .
it brings that deficit down further and balances the budget by 1993 with no new taxes .
and let me tell you , there 's still more than enough federal spending .
for most of us , $ 1.2 trillion is still a lot of money .
and once the budget is balanced , we can operate the way every family must when it has bills to pay .
we wo n't leave it to our children and our grandchildren .
once it 's balanced , we will start paying off the national debt .
and there 's something more we owe the generations of the future : stewardship , the safekeeping of america 's precious environmental inheritance .
it 's just one sign of how serious we are .
we will elevate the environmental protection agency to cabinet rank -- not more bureaucracy , not more redtape , but the certainty that here at home , and especially in our dealings with other nations , environmental issues have the status they deserve .
this year 's budget provides over $ 2 billion in new spending to protect our environment , with over $ 1 billion for global change research , and a new initiative i call america the beautiful to expand our national parks and wildlife preserves that improve recreational facilities on public lands , and something else , something that will help keep this country clean from our forestland to the inner cities and keep america beautiful for generations to come : the money to plant a billion trees a year .
and tonight let me say again to all the members of the congress : the american people did not send us here to bicker .
there is work to do , and they sent us here to get it done .
and once again , in the spirit of cooperation , i offer my hand to all of you .
let 's work together to do the will of the people : clean air , child care , the educational excellence act , crime , and drugs .
it 's time to act .
the farm bill , transportation policy , product - liability reform , enterprise zones -- it 's time to act together .
and there 's one thing i hope we will be able to agree on .
it 's about our commitments .
i 'm talking about social security .
to every american out there on social security , to every american supporting that system today , and to everyone counting on it when they retire , we made a promise to you , and we are going to keep it .
we rescued the system in 1983 , and it 's sound again -- bipartisan arrangement .
our budget fully funds today 's benefits , and it assures that future benefits will be funded as well .
the last thing we need to do is mess around with social security .
there 's one more problem we need to address .
we must give careful consideration to the recommendations of the health - care studies underway now .
that 's why tonight i 'm asking dr. sullivan , lou sullivan , secretary of health and human services , to lead a domestic policy council review of recommendations on the quality , accessibility , and cost of our nation 's health - care system .
i am committed to bring the staggering costs of health care under control .
the state of the government does indeed depend on many of us in this very chamber .
but the state of the union depends on all americans .
we must maintain the democratic decency that makes a nation out of millions of individuals .
i 've been appalled at the recent mail bombings across this country .
every one of us must confront and condemn racism , anti - semitism , bigotry , and hate , not next week , not tomorrow , but right now -- every single one of us .
the state of the union depends on whether we help our neighbor -- claim the problems of our community as our own .
we 've got to step forward when there 's trouble , lend a hand , be what i call a point of light to a stranger in need .
we 've got to take the time after a busy day to sit down and read with our kids , help them with their homework , pass along the values we learned as children .
that 's how we sustain the state of the union .
every effort is important .
it all adds up .
it 's doing the things that give democracy meaning .
it all adds up to who we are and who we will be .
let me say that so long as we remember the american idea , so long as we live up to the american ideal , the state of the union will remain sound and strong .
and to those who worry that we 've lost our way -- well , i want you to listen to parts of a letter written by private first class james markwell , a 20-year - old army medic of the 1st battalion , 75th rangers .
it 's dated december 18 , the night before our armed forces went into action in panama .
it 's a letter servicemen write and hope will never be sent .
and sadly , private markwell 's mother did receive this letter .
she passed it along to me out there in cincinnati .
and here is some of what he wrote : " i 've never been afraid of death , but i know he is waiting at the corner .
i 've been trained to kill and to save , and so has everyone else .
i am frightened what lays beyond the fog , and yet do not mourn for me .
revel in the life that i have died to give you .
but most of all , do n't forget the army was my choice .
something that i wanted to do .
remember i joined the army to serve my country and ensure that you are free to do what you want and live your lives freely."let me add that private markwell was among the first to see battle in panama , and one of the first to fall .
but he knew what he believed in .
he carried the idea we call america in his heart .
i began tonight speaking about the changes we 've seen this past year .
there is a new world of challenges and opportunities before us , and there 's a need for leadership that only america can provide .
nearly 40 years ago , in his last address to the congress , president harry truman predicted such a time would come .
he said : " as our world grows stronger , more united , more attractive to men on both sides of the iron curtain , then inevitably there will come a time of change within the communist world . "
today , that change is taking place .
for more than 40 years , america and its allies held communism in check and ensured that democracy would continue to exist .
and today , with communism crumbling , our aim must be to ensure democracy 's advance , to take the lead in forging peace and freedom 's best hope : a great and growing commonwealth of free nations .
and to the congress and to all americans , i say it is time to acclaim a new consensus at home and abroad , a common vision of the peaceful world we want to see .
here in our own hemisphere , it is time for all the peoples of the americas , north and south , to live in freedom .
in the far east and africa , it 's time for the full flowering of free governments and free markets that have served as the engine of progress .
it 's time to offer our hand to the emerging democracies of eastern europe so that continent -- for too long a continent divided -- can see a future whole and free .
it 's time to build on our new relationship with the soviet union , to endorse and encourage a peaceful process of internal change toward democracy and economic opportunity .
we are in a period of great transition , great hope , and yet great uncertainty .
we recognize that the soviet military threat in europe is diminishing , but we see little change in soviet strategic modernization .
therefore , we must sustain our own strategic offense modernization and the strategic defense initiative .
but the time is right to move forward on a conventional arms control agreement to move us to more appropriate levels of military forces in europe , a coherent defense program that ensures the u. s. will continue to be a catalyst for peaceful change in europe .
and i 've consulted with leaders of nato .
in fact , i spoke by phone with president gorbachev just today .
i agree with our european allies that an american military presence in europe is essential and that it should not be tied solely to the soviet military presence in eastern europe .
but our troop levels can still be lower .
and so , tonight i am announcing a major new step for a further reduction in u. s. and soviet manpower in central and eastern europe to 195,000 on each side .
this level reflects the advice of our senior military advisers .
it 's designed to protect american and european interests and sustain nato 's defense strategy .
a swift conclusion to our arms control talks -- conventional , chemical , and strategic -- must now be our goal .
and that time has come .
still , we must recognize an unfortunate fact : in many regions of the world tonight , the reality is conflict , not peace .
enduring animosities and opposing interests remain .
and thus , the cause of peace must be served by an america strong enough and sure enough to defend our interests and our ideals .
it 's this american idea that for the past four decades helped inspire this revolution of ' 89.here at home and in the world , there 's history in the making , history to be made .
six months ago , early in this season of change , i stood at the gates of the gdansk shipyard in poland at the monument to the fallen workers of solidarity .
it 's a monument of simple majesty .
three tall crosses rise up from the stones , and atop each cross , an anchor -- an ancient symbol of hope .
the anchor in our world today is freedom , holding us steady in times of change , a symbol of hope to all the world .
and freedom is at the very heart of the idea that is america .
giving life to that idea depends on every one of us .
our anchor has always been faith and family .
in the last few days of this past momentous year , our family was blessed once more , celebrating the joy of life when a little boy became our 12th grandchild .
when i held the little guy for the first time , the troubles at home and abroad seemed manageable and totally in perspective .
now , i know you 're probably thinking , well , that 's just a grandfather talking .
well , maybe you 're right .
but i 've met a lot of children this past year across this country , as all of you have , everywhere from the far east to eastern europe .
and all kids are unique , and yet all kids are alike -- the budding young environmentalists i met this month who joined me in exploring the florida everglades ; the little leaguers i played catch with in poland , ready to go from warsaw to the world series ; and even the kids who are ill or alone -- and god bless those boarder babies , born addicted to drugs and aids and coping with problems no child should have to face .
but you know , when it comes to hope and the future , every kid is the same -- full of dreams , ready to take on the world -- all special , because they are the very future of freedom .
and to them belongs this new world i 've been speaking about .
and so , tonight i 'm going to ask something of every one of you .
now , let me start with my generation , with the grandparents out there .
you are our living link to the past .
tell your grandchildren the story of struggles waged at home and abroad , of sacrifices freely made for freedom 's sake .
and tell them your own story as well , because every american has a story to tell .
and , parents , your children look to you for direction and guidance .
tell them of faith and family .
tell them we are one nation under god .
teach them that of all the many gifts they can receive liberty is their most precious legacy , and of all the gifts they can give the greatest is helping others .
and to the children and young people out there tonight : with you rests our hope , all that america will mean in the years and decades ahead .
fix your vision on a new century -- your century , on dreams we can not see , on the destiny that is yours and yours alone .
and finally , let all americans -- all of us together here in this chamber , the symbolic center of democracy -- affirm our allegiance to this idea we call america .
and let us remember that the state of the union depends on each and every one of us .
god bless all of you , and may god bless this great nation , the united states of america .

mr. president .
and mr. speaker , thank you , sir , for those very generous words spoken from the heart about the wonderful performance of our military .
members of congress , 5 short weeks ago i came to this house to speak to you about the state of the union .
we met then in time of war .
tonight , we meet in a world blessed by the promise of peace .
from the moment operation desert storm commenced on january 16th until the time the guns fell silent at midnight 1 week ago , this nation has watched its sons and daughters with pride , watched over them with prayer .
as commander in chief , i can report to you our armed forces fought with honor and valor .
and as president , i can report to the nation aggression is defeated .
the war is over .
this is a victory for every country in the coalition , for the united nations .
a victory for unprecedented international cooperation and diplomacy , so well led by our secretary of state , james baker .
it is a victory for the rule of law and for what is right .
desert storm 's success belongs to the team that so ably leads our armed forces : our secretary of defense and our chairman of the joint chiefs , dick cheney and colin powell .
and while you 're standing --   -- this military victory also belongs to the one the british call the " man of the match " -- the tower of calm at the eye of desert storm -- general norman schwarzkopf .
and recognizing this was a coalition effort , let us not forget saudi general khalid , britain 's general de la billiere , or general roquejeoffre of france , and all the others whose leadership played such a vital role .
and most importantly , most importantly of all , all those who served in the field .
i thank the members of this congress -- support here for our troops in battle was overwhelming .
and above all , i thank those whose unfailing love and support sustained our courageous men and women : i thank the american people .
tonight , i come to this house to speak about the world -- the world after war .
the recent challenge could not have been clearer .
saddam hussein was the villain ; kuwait , the victim .
to the aid of this small country came nations from north america and europe , from asia and south america , from africa and the arab world , all united against aggression .
our uncommon coalition must now work in common purpose : to forge a future that should never again be held hostage to the darker side of human nature .
tonight in iraq , saddam walks amidst ruin .
his war machine is crushed .
his ability to threaten mass destruction is itself destroyed .
his people have been lied to , denied the truth .
and when his defeated legions come home , all iraqis will see and feel the havoc he has wrought .
and this i promise you : for all that saddam has done to his own people , to the kuwaitis , and to the entire world , saddam and those around him are accountable .
all of us grieve for the victims of war , for the people of kuwait and the suffering that scars the soul of that proud nation .
we grieve for all our fallen soldiers and their families , for all the innocents caught up in this conflict .
and , yes , we grieve for the people of iraq , a people who have never been our enemy .
my hope is that one day we will once again welcome them as friends into the community of nations .
our commitment to peace in the middle east does not end with the liberation of kuwait .
so , tonight let me outline four key challenges to be met .
first , we must work together to create shared security arrangements in the region .
our friends and allies in the middle east recognize that they will bear the bulk of the responsibility for regional security .
but we want them to know that just as we stood with them to repel aggression , so now america stands ready to work with them to secure the peace .
this does not mean stationing u. s. ground forces in the arabian peninsula , but it does mean american participation in joint exercises involving both air and ground forces .
it means maintaining a capable u. s. naval presence in the region , just as we have for over 40 years .
let it be clear : our vital national interests depend on a stable and secure gulf .
second , we must act to control the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and the missiles used to deliver them .
it would be tragic if the nations of the middle east and persian gulf were now , in the wake of war , to embark on a new arms race .
iraq requires special vigilance .
until iraq convinces the world of its peaceful intentions -- that its leaders will not use new revenues to rearm and rebuild its menacing war machine -- iraq must not have access to the instruments of war .
and third , we must work to create new opportunities for peace and stability in the middle east .
on the night i announced operation desert storm , i expressed my hope that out of the horrors of war might come new momentum for peace .
we 've learned in the modern age geography can not guarantee security , and security does not come from military power alone .
all of us know the depth of bitterness that has made the dispute between israel and its neighbors so painful and intractable .
yet , in the conflict just concluded , israel and many of the arab states have for the first time found themselves confronting the same aggressor .
by now , it should be plain to all parties that peacemaking in the middle east requires compromise .
at the same time , peace brings real benefits to everyone .
we must do all that we can to close the gap between israel and the arab states -- and between israelis and palestinians .
the tactics of terror lead absolutely nowhere .
there can be no substitute for diplomacy .
a comprehensive peace must be grounded in united nations security council resolutions 242 and 338 and the principle of territory for peace .
this principle must be elaborated to provide for israel 's security and recognition and at the same time for legitimate palestinian political rights .
anything else would fail the twin test of fairness and security .
the time has come to put an end to arab - israeli conflict .
the war with iraq is over .
the quest for solutions to the problems in lebanon , in the arab - israeli dispute , and in the gulf must go forward with new vigor and determination .
and i guarantee you : no one will work harder for a stable peace in the region than we will .
fourth , we must foster economic development for the sake of peace and progress .
the persian gulf and middle east form a region rich in natural resources with a wealth of untapped human potential .
resources once squandered on military might must be redirected to more peaceful ends .
we are already addressing the immediate economic consequences of iraq 's aggression .
now , the challenge is to reach higher , to foster economic freedom and prosperity for all the people of the region .
by meeting these four challenges we can build a framework for peace .
i 've asked secretary of state baker to go to the middle east to begin the process .
he will go to listen , to probe , to offer suggestions -- to advance the search for peace and stability .
i 've also asked him to raise the plight of the hostages held in lebanon .
we have not forgotten them , and we will not forget them .
to all the challenges that confront this region of the world there is no single solution , no solely american answer .
but we can make a difference .
america will work tirelessly as a catalyst for positive change .
but we can not lead a new world abroad if , at home , it 's politics as usual on american defense and diplomacy .
it 's time to turn away from the temptation to protect unneeded weapons systems and obsolete bases .
it 's time to put an end to micromanagement of foreign and security assistance programs -- micromanagement that humiliates our friends and allies and hamstrings our diplomacy .
it 's time to rise above the parochial and the pork barrel , to do what is necessary , what 's right , and what will enable this nation to play the leadership role required of us .
the consequences of the conflict in the gulf reach far beyond the confines of the middle east .
twice before in this century , an entire world was convulsed by war .
twice this century , out of the horrors of war hope emerged for enduring peace .
twice before , those hopes proved to be a distant dream , beyond the grasp of man .
until now , the world we 've known has been a world divided -- a world of barbed wire and concrete block , conflict , and cold war .
now , we can see a new world coming into view .
a world in which there is the very real prospect of a new world order .
in the words of winston churchill , a world order in which " the principles of justice and fair play protect the weak against the strong . . . . "
a world where the united nations , freed from cold war stalemate , is poised to fulfill the historic vision of its founders .
a world in which freedom and respect for human rights find a home among all nations .
the gulf war put this new world to its first test .
and my fellow americans , we passed that test .
for the sake of our principles , for the sake of the kuwaiti people , we stood our ground .
because the world would not look the other way , ambassador al - sabah , tonight kuwait is free .
and we 're very happy about that .
tonight , as our troops begin to come home , let us recognize that the hard work of freedom still calls us forward .
we 've learned the hard lessons of history .
the victory over iraq was not waged as " a war to end all wars . "
even the new world order can not guarantee an era of perpetual peace .
but enduring peace must be our mission .
our success in the gulf will shape not only the new world order we seek but our mission here at home .
in the war just ended , there were clear - cut objectives -- timetables -- and , above all , an overriding imperative to achieve results .
we must bring that same sense of self - discipline , that same sense of urgency , to the way we meet challenges here at home .
in my state of the union address and in my budget , i defined a comprehensive agenda to prepare for the next american century .
our first priority is to get this economy rolling again .
the fear and uncertainty caused by the gulf crisis were understandable .
but now that the war is over , oil prices are down , interest rates are down , and confidence is rightly coming back .
americans can move forward to lend , spend , and invest in this , the strongest economy on earth .
we must also enact the legislation that is key to building a better america .
for example , in 1990 , we enacted an historic clean air act .
and now we 've proposed a national energy strategy .
we passed a child - care bill that put power in the hands of parents .
and today , we 're ready to do the same thing with our schools and expand choice in education .
we passed a crime bill that made a useful start in fighting crime and drugs .
this year , we 're sending to congress our comprehensive crime package to finish the job .
we passed the landmark americans with disabilities act .
and now we 've sent forward our civil rights bill .
we also passed the aviation bill .
this year , we 've sent up our new highway bill .
and these are just a few of our pending proposals for reform and renewal .
so , tonight i call on the congress to move forward aggressively on our domestic front .
let 's begin with two initiatives we should be able to agree on quickly : transportation and crime .
and then , let 's build on success with those and enact the rest of our agenda .
if our forces could win the ground war in 100 hours , then surely the congress can pass this legislation in 100 days .
let that be a promise we make tonight to the american people .
when i spoke in this house about the state of our union , i asked all of you : if we can selflessly confront evil for the sake of good in a land so far away , then surely we can make this land all that it should be .
in the time since then , the brave men and women of desert storm accomplished more than even they may realize .
they set out to confront an enemy abroad , and in the process , they transformed a nation at home .
think of the way they went about their mission -- with confidence and quiet pride .
think about their sense of duty , about all they taught us about our values , about ourselves .
we hear so often about our young people in turmoil -- how our children fall short , how our schools fail us , how american products and american workers are second - class .
well , do n't you believe it .
the america we saw in desert storm was first - class talent .
and they did it using america 's state - of - the - art technology .
we saw the excellence embodied in the patriot missile and the patriots who made it work .
and we saw soldiers who know about honor and bravery and duty and country and the world - shaking power of these simple words .
there is something noble and majestic about the pride , about the patriotism that we feel tonight .
so , to everyone here and everyone watching at home , think about the men and women of desert storm .
let us honor them with our gratitude .
let us comfort the families of the fallen and remember each precious life lost .
let us learn from them as well .
let us honor those who have served us by serving others .
let us honor them as individuals -- men and women of every race , all creeds and colors -- by setting the face of this nation against discrimination , bigotry , and hate .
eliminate them .
i 'm sure that many of you saw on the television the unforgettable scene of four terrified iraqi soldiers surrendering .
they emerged from their bunker broken , tears streaming from their eyes , fearing the worst .
and then there was an american soldier .
remember what he said ?
he said : " it 's okay .
you 're all right now .
you 're all right now . "
that scene says a lot about america , a lot about who we are .
americans are a caring people .
we are a good people , a generous people .
let us always be caring and good and generous in all we do .
soon , very soon , our troops will begin the march we 've all been waiting for -- their march home .
and i have directed secretary cheney to begin the immediate return of american combat units from the gulf .
less than 2 hours from now , the first planeload of american soldiers will lift off from saudi arabia , headed for the u. s.a. that plane will carry the men and women of the 24th mechanized infantry division bound for fort stewart , georgia .
this is just the beginning of a steady flow of american troops coming home .
let their return remind us that all those who have gone before are linked with us in the long line of freedom 's march .
americans have always tried to serve , to sacrifice nobly for what we believe to be right .
tonight , i ask every community in this country to make this coming fourth of july a day of special celebration for our returning troops .
they may have missed thanksgiving and christmas , but i can tell you this : for them and for their families , we can make this a holiday they 'll never forget .
in a very real sense , this victory belongs to them -- to the privates and the pilots , to the sergeants and the supply officers , to the men and women in the machines and the men and women who made them work .
it belongs to the regulars , to the reserves , to the national guard .
this victory belongs to the finest fighting force this nation has ever known in its history .
we went halfway around the world to do what is moral and just and right .
we fought hard and , with others , we won the war .
we lifted the yoke of aggression and tyranny from a small country that many americans had never even heard of , and we ask nothing in return .
we 're coming home now -- proud , confident , heads high .
there is much that we must do , at home and abroad .
and we will do it .
we are americans .
may god bless this great nation , the united states of america .
thank you all very , very much .

thank you all very much .
good luck .
please be seated .
thank you , general graves , for that very kind introduction .
barbara and i are just delighted to be here and honored that we could be joined by our able secretary of the army , mike stone ; of course , the man well - known here that heads our army , general sullivan , general gordon sullivan ; and gracie graves , general robert foley , general galloway ; shawn daniel , well - known to everybody here , been our host , in a sense ; and a west point alum who has been at my side for 4 years , over here somewhere , general scowcroft , graduate of this great institution who served his country with such distinction .
may i salute the members of the board of visitors .
i see another i have to single out , general galvin , who served his country with such honor .
and , of course , save the best for last , the corps of cadets , thank you for that welcome .
let me begin with the hard part : it is difficult for a navy person to come up to west point after that game a month ago .
go ahead , rub it in .
but i watched it .
amazing things can happen in sports .
look at the oilers , my other team that took it on the chin the other day .
but i guess the moral of all of this is that losing is never easy .
trust me , i know something about that .
but if you have to lose , that 's the way to do it : fight with all you have .
give it your best shot .
and win or lose , learn from it , and get on with life .
i am about to get on with the rest of my life .
but before i do , i want to share with you at this institution of leadership some of my thinking , both about the world you will soon be called upon to enter and the life that you have chosen .
any president has several functions .
he speaks for and to the nation .
he must faithfully execute the law .
and he must lead .
but no function , none of the president 's hats , in my view , is more important than his role as commander in chief .
for it is as commander in chief that the president confronts and makes decisions that one way or another affects the lives of everyone in this country as well as many others around the world .
i have had many occasions to don this most important of hats .
over the past 4 years , the men and women who proudly and bravely wear the uniforms of the u. s. armed services have been called upon to go in harm 's way and have discharged their duty with honor and professionalism .
i wish i could say that such demands were a thing of the past , that with the end of the cold war the calls upon the united states would diminish .
i can not .
yes , the end of the cold war , we would all concede , is a blessing .
it is a time of great promise .
democratic governments have never been so numerous .
what happened 2 or 3 days ago in moscow would not have been possible in the cold war days .
thanks to historic treaties such as that start ii pact just reached with russia , the likelihood of nuclear holocaust is vastly diminished .
but this does not mean that there is no specter of war , no threats to be reckoned with .
and already , we see disturbing signs of what this new world could become if we are passive and aloof .
we would risk the emergence of a world characterized by violence , characterized by chaos , one in which dictators and tyrants threaten their neighbors , build arsenals brimming with weapons of mass destruction , and ignore the welfare of their own men , women , and children .
and we could see a horrible increase in international terrorism , with american citizens more at risk than ever before .
we can not and we need not allow this to happen .
our objective must be to exploit the unparalleled opportunity presented by the cold war 's end to work toward transforming this new world into a new world order , one of governments that are democratic , tolerant , and economically free at home and committed abroad to settling inevitable differences peacefully , without the threat or use of force .
unfortunately , not everyone subscribes to these principles .
we continue to see leaders bent on denying fundamental human rights and seizing territory regardless of the human cost .
no , an international society , one more attuned to the enduring principles that have made this country a beacon of hope for so many for so long , will not just emerge on its own .
it 's got to be built .
two hundred years ago , another departing president warned of the dangers of what he described as " entangling alliances . "
his was the right course for a new nation at that point in history .
but what was " entangling " in washington 's day is now essential .
this is why , at texas a and m a few weeks ago , i spoke of the folly of isolationism and of the importance , morally , economically , and strategically , of the united states remaining involved in world affairs .
we must engage ourselves if a new world order , one more compatible with our values and congenial to our interest , is to emerge .
but even more , we must lead .
leadership , well , it takes many forms .
it can be political or diplomatic .
it can be economic or military .
it can be moral or spiritual leadership .
leadership can take any one of these forms , or it can be a combination of them .
leadership should not be confused with either unilateralism or universalism .
we need not respond by ourselves to each and every outrage of violence .
the fact that america can act does not mean that it must .
a nation 's sense of idealism need not be at odds with its interests , nor does principle displace prudence .
no , the united states should not seek to be the world 's policeman .
there is no support abroad or at home for us to play this role , nor should there be .
we would exhaust ourselves in the process , wasting precious resources needed to address those problems at home and abroad that we can not afford to ignore .
but in the wake of the cold war , in a world where we are the only remaining superpower , it is the role of the united states to marshal its moral and material resources to promote a democratic peace .
it is our responsibility , it is our opportunity to lead .
there is no one else .
leadership can not be simply asserted or demanded .
it must be demonstrated .
leadership requires formulating worthy goals , persuading others of their virtue , and contributing one 's share of the common effort and then some .
leadership takes time .
it takes patience .
it takes work .
some of this work must take place here at home .
congress does have a constitutional role to play .
leadership therefore also involves working with the congress and the american people to provide the essential domestic underpinning if u. s. military commitments are to be sustainable .
this is what our administration , the bush administration , has tried to do .
when saddam hussein invaded kuwait , it was the united states that galvanized the u. n. security council to act and then mobilized the successful coalition on the battlefield .
the pattern not exactly the same but similar in somalia : first the united states underscored the importance of alleviating the growing tragedy , and then we organized humanitarian efforts designed to bring hope , food , and peace .
at times , real leadership requires a willingness to use military force .
and force can be a useful backdrop to diplomacy , a complement to it , or , if need be , a temporary alternative .
as commander in chief , i have made the difficult choice to use military force .
i determined we could not allow saddam 's forces to ravage kuwait and hold this critical region at gunpoint .
i thought then , and i think now , that using military force to implement the resolutions of the u. n. security council was in the interest of the united states and the world community .
the need to use force arose as well in the wake of the gulf war , when we came to the aid of the peoples of both northern and southern iraq .
and more recently , as i 'm sure you know , i determined that only the use of force could stem this human tragedy of somalia .
the united states should not stand by with so many lives at stake and when a limited deployment of u. s. forces , buttressed by the forces of other countries and acting under the full authority of the united nations , could make an immediate and dramatic difference , and do so without excessive levels of risk and cost .
operations provide comfort and southern watch in iraq and then operation restore hope in somalia all bear witness to the wisdom of selected use of force for selective purposes .
sometimes the decision not to use force , to stay our hand , i can tell you , it 's just as difficult as the decision to send our soldiers into battle .
the former yugoslavia , well , it 's been such a situation .
there are , we all know , important humanitarian and strategic interests at stake there .
but up to now it 's not been clear that the application of limited amounts of force by the united states and its traditional friends and allies would have had the desired effect , given the nature and complexity of that situation .
our assessment of the situation in the former yugoslavia could well change if and as the situation changes .
the stakes could grow ; the conflict could threaten to spread .
indeed , we are constantly reassessing our options and are actively consulting with others about steps that might be taken to contain the fighting , protect the humanitarian effort , and deny serbia the fruits of aggression .
military force is never a tool to be used lightly or universally .
in some circumstances it may be essential , in others counterproductive .
i know that many people would like to find some formula , some easy formula to apply , to tell us with precision when and where to intervene with force .
anyone looking for scientific certitude is in for a disappointment .
in the complex new world we are entering , there can be no single or simple set of fixed rules for using force .
inevitably , the question of military intervention requires judgment .
each and every case is unique .
to adopt rigid criteria would guarantee mistakes involving american interests and american lives .
and it would give would - be troublemakers a blueprint for determining their own actions .
it could signal u. s. friends and allies that our support was not to be counted on .
similarly , we can not always decide in advance which interests will require our using military force to protect them .
the relative importance of an interest is not a guide : military force may not be the best way of safeguarding something vital , while using force might be the best way to protect an interest that qualifies as important but less than vital .
but to warn against a futile quest for a set of hard - and - fast rules to govern the use of military force is not to say there can not be some principles to inform our decisions .
such guidelines can prove useful in sizing and , indeed , shaping our forces and in helping us to think our way through this key question .
using military force makes sense as a policy where the stakes warrant , where and when force can be effective , where no other policies are likely to prove effective , where its application can be limited in scope and time , and where the potential benefits justify the potential costs and sacrifice .
once we are satisfied that force makes sense , we must act with the maximum possible support .
the united states can and should lead , but we will want to act in concert , where possible involving the united nations or other multinational grouping .
the united states can and should contribute to the common undertaking in a manner commensurate with our wealth , with our strength .
but others should also contribute militarily , be it by providing combat or support forces , access to facilities or bases , or overflight rights .
and similarly , others should contribute economically .
it is unreasonable to expect the united states to bear the full financial burden of intervention when other nations have a stake in the outcome .
a desire for international support must not become a prerequisite for acting , though .
sometimes a great power has to act alone .
i made a tough decision -- i might say , on advice of our outstanding military leaders who are so well known to everybody here -- to use military force in panama when american lives and the security of the canal appeared to be threatened by outlaws who stole power in the face of free elections .
and similarly , we moved swiftly to safeguard democracy in the philippines .
but in every case involving the use of force , it will be essential to have a clear and achievable mission , a realistic plan for accomplishing the mission , and criteria no less realistic for withdrawing u. s. forces once the mission is complete .
only if we keep these principles in mind will the potential sacrifice be one that can be explained and justified .
we must never forget that using force is not some political abstraction but a real commitment of our fathers and mothers and sons and daughters , brothers and sisters , friends and neighbors .
you 've got to look at it in human terms .
in order even to have the choice , we must have available adequate military forces tailored for a wide range of contingencies , including peacekeeping .
indeed , leading the effort toward a new world order will require a modern , capable military , in some areas necessitating more rather than less defense spending .
as president , i have said that my ability to deploy force on behalf of u. s. interests abroad was made possible because past presidents , and i would single out in particular my predecessor , ronald reagan , and past secretaries of defense sustained a strong military .
consistent with this sacred trust , i am proud to pass on to my successor , president - elect clinton , a military second to none .
we have the very best .
yet , it is essential to recognize that as important as such factors are , any military is more than simply the sum of its weapons or the state of its technology .
what makes any armed force truly effective is the quality of its leadership , the quality of its training , the quality of its people .
we have succeeded abroad in no small part because of our people in uniform .
the men and women in our armed forces have demonstrated their ability to master the challenges of modern warfare .
and at the same time , and whether on the battlefield of iraq or in some tiny little village in somalia , america 's soldiers have always brought a quality of caring and kindness to their mission .
who will ever forget -- i know i wo n't -- those terrified iraqi soldiers surrendering to american troops ?
and who will forget the way the american soldier held out his arms and said , " it 's okay .
you 're all right now . "
or in somalia , the young marine , eyes filled with tears , holding the fragile arm of an emaciated child .
there can be no doubt about it : the all volunteer force is one of the true success stories of modern day america .
it is instructive to look at just why this is so .
at its heart , a voluntary military is based upon choice -- you all know that -- the decision freely taken by young men and women to join , the decision by more mature men and women to remain .
and the institution of the armed forces has thrived on its commitment to developing and promoting excellence .
it is meritocracy in action .
race , religion , wealth , background count not .
indeed , the military offers many examples for the rest of society , showing what can be done to eradicate the scourge of drugs , to break down the barriers of racial discrimination , to offer equal opportunity to women .
this is not just a result of self - selection .
it also reflects the military 's commitment to education and training .
you know , people speak of defense conversion , the process by which the defense firms retool for civilian tasks .
well , defense conversion within the military has been going on for years .
it is the constant process of training and retraining , which the military does so well , that allows individuals to keep up with the latest technology , take on more challenging assignments , and prepare for life on the outside .
out of this culture of merit and competition have emerged hundreds of thousands of highly skilled men and women brimming with real self - confidence .
what they possess is a special mix of discipline , a willingness to accept direction , and the confidence , a willingness to accept responsibility .
together , discipline and confidence provide the basis for winning , for getting the job done .
there is no higher calling , no more honorable choice than the one that you here today have made .
to join the armed forces is to be prepared to make the ultimate sacrifice for your country and for your fellow man .
what you have done , what you are doing , sends an important message , one that i fear sometimes gets lost amidst today 's often materialist , self - interested culture .
it is important to remember , it is important to demonstrate that there is a higher purpose to life beyond one 's self .
now , i speak of family , of community , of ideals .
i speak of duty , honor , country .
there are many forms of contributing to this country , of public service .
yes , there is government .
there is voluntarism .
i love to talk about the thousand points of light , one american helping another .
the daily tasks that require doing in our classrooms , in our hospitals , our cities , our farms , all can and do represent a form of service .
in whatever form , service benefits our society , and it ennobles the giver .
it is a cherished american concept , one we should continue to practice and pass on to our children .
this was what i wanted to share on this occasion .
you are beginning your service to country , and i am nearing the end of mine .
exactly half a century ago , in june of 1942 , as general graves mentioned , we were at war , and i was graduating from school .
the speaker that day at andover was the then - secretary of war , henry stimson .
and his message was one of public service , but with a twist -- on the importance of finishing one 's schooling before going off to fight for one 's country .
i listened closely to what he had to say , but i did n't take his advice .
and that day was my 18th birthday .
and when the commencement ceremony ended , i went on into boston and enlisted in the navy as a seaman 2d class .
and i never regretted it .
you , too , have signed up .
you , too , will never regret it .
and i salute you for it .
fortunately , because of the sacrifices made in years before and still being made , you should be able to complete this phase of your education .
a half century has passed since i left school to go into the service .
a half century has passed since that day when stimson spoke of the challenge of creating a new world .
you will also be entering a new world , one far better than the one i came to know , a world with the potential to be far better yet .
this is the challenge .
this is the opportunity of your lifetimes .
i envy you for it , and i wish you godspeed .
and while i 'm at it , as your commander in chief , i hereby grant amnesty to the corps of cadets .
thank you all very much .
thank you .
thank you very , very much .
good luck to all of you .
warm up here .
good luck to you guys .
thank you .

kuwait is liberated .
iraq 's army is defeated .
our military objectives are met .
kuwait is once more in the hands of kuwaitis , in control of their own destiny .
we share in their joy , a joy tempered only by our compassion for their ordeal .
tonight the kuwaiti flag once again flies above the capital of a free and sovereign nation .
and the american flag flies above our embassy .
seven months ago , america and the world drew a line in the sand .
we declared that the aggression against kuwait would not stand .
and tonight , america and the world have kept their word .
this is not a time of euphoria , certainly not a time to gloat .
but it is a time of pride : pride in our troops ; pride in the friends who stood with us in the crisis ; pride in our nation and the people whose strength and resolve made victory quick , decisive , and just .
and soon we will open wide our arms to welcome back home to america our magnificent fighting forces .
no one country can claim this victory as its own .
it was not only a victory for kuwait but a victory for all the coalition partners .
this is a victory for the united nations , for all mankind , for the rule of law , and for what is right .
after consulting with secretary of defense cheney , the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff , general powell , and our coalition partners , i am pleased to announce that at midnight tonight eastern standard time , exactly 100 hours since ground operations commenced and 6 weeks since the start of desert storm , all united states and coalition forces will suspend offensive combat operations .
it is up to iraq whether this suspension on the part of the coalition becomes a permanent cease - fire .
coalition political and military terms for a formal cease - fire include the following requirements : iraq must release immediately all coalition prisoners of war , third country nationals , and the remains of all who have fallen .
iraq must release all kuwaiti detainees .
iraq also must inform kuwaiti authorities of the location and nature of all land and sea mines .
iraq must comply fully with all relevant united nations security council resolutions .
this includes a rescinding of iraq 's august decision to annex kuwait and acceptance in principle of iraq 's responsibility to pay compensation for the loss , damage , and injury its aggression has caused .
the coalition calls upon the iraqi government to designate military commanders to meet within 48 hours with their coalition counterparts at a place in the theater of operations to be specified to arrange for military aspects of the cease - fire .
further , i have asked secretary of state baker to request that the united nations security council meet to formulate the necessary arrangements for this war to be ended .
this suspension of offensive combat operations is contingent upon iraq 's not firing upon any coalition forces and not launching scud missiles against any other country .
if iraq violates these terms , coalition forces will be free to resume military operations .
at every opportunity , i have said to the people of iraq that our quarrel was not with them but instead with their leadership and , above all , with saddam hussein .
this remains the case .
you , the people of iraq , are not our enemy .
we do not seek your destruction .
we have treated your pow 's with kindness .
coalition forces fought this war only as a last resort and look forward to the day when iraq is led by people prepared to live in peace with their neighbors .
we must now begin to look beyond victory and war .
we must meet the challenge of securing the peace .
in the future , as before , we will consult with our coalition partners .
we 've already done a good deal of thinking and planning for the postwar period , and secretary baker has already begun to consult with our coalition partners on the region 's challenges .
there can be , and will be , no solely american answer to all these challenges .
but we can assist and support the countries of the region and be a catalyst for peace .
in this spirit , secretary baker will go to the region next week to begin a new round of consultations .
this war is now behind us .
ahead of us is the difficult task of securing a potentially historic peace .
tonight though , let us be proud of what we have accomplished .
let us give thanks to those who risked their lives .
let us never forget those who gave their lives .
may god bless our valiant military forces and their families , and let us all remember them in our prayers .
good night , and may god bless the united states of america .

mr. president and mr. speaker and members of the united states congress , distinguished guests , fellow americans , thank you very much for that warm welcome .
we gather tonight , witness to events in the persian gulf as significant as they are tragic .
in the early morning hours of august 2d , following negotiations and promises by iraq 's dictator saddam hussein not to use force , a powerful iraqi army invaded its trusting and much weaker neighbor , kuwait .
within 3 days , 120,000 iraqi troops with 850 tanks had poured into kuwait and moved south to threaten saudi arabia .
it was then that i decided to act to check that aggression .
at this moment , our brave servicemen and women stand watch in that distant desert and on distant seas , side by side with the forces of more than 20 other nations .
they are some of the finest men and women of the united states of america .
and they 're doing one terrific job .
these valiant americans were ready at a moment 's notice to leave their spouses and their children , to serve on the front line halfway around the world .
they remind us who keeps america strong : they do .
in the trying circumstances of the gulf , the morale of our service men and women is excellent .
in the face of danger , they 're brave , they 're well - trained , and dedicated .
a soldier , private first class wade merritt of knoxville , tennessee , now stationed in saudi arabia , wrote his parents of his worries , his love of family , and his hope for peace .
but wade also wrote , " i am proud of my country and its firm stance against inhumane aggression .
i am proud of my army and its men .
i am proud to serve my country . "
well , let me just say , wade , america is proud of you and is grateful to every soldier , sailor , marine , and airman serving the cause of peace in the persian gulf .
i also want to thank the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff , general powell ; the chiefs here tonight ; our commander in the persian gulf , general schwartzkopf ; and the men and women of the department of defense .
what a magnificent job you all are doing .
and thank you very , very much from a grateful people .
i wish i could say that their work is done .
but we all know it 's not .
so , if there ever was a time to put country before self and patriotism before party , the time is now .
and let me thank all americans , especially those here in this chamber tonight , for your support for our armed forces and for their mission .
that support will be even more important in the days to come .
so , tonight i want to talk to you about what 's at stake -- what we must do together to defend civilized values around the world and maintain our economic strength at home .
our objectives in the persian gulf are clear , our goals defined and familiar : iraq must withdraw from kuwait completely , immediately , and without condition .
kuwait 's legitimate government must be restored .
the security and stability of the persian gulf must be assured .
and american citizens abroad must be protected .
these goals are not ours alone .
they 've been endorsed by the united nations security council five times in as many weeks .
most countries share our concern for principle .
and many have a stake in the stability of the persian gulf .
this is not , as saddam hussein would have it , the united states against iraq .
it is iraq against the world .
as you know , i 've just returned from a very productive meeting with soviet president gorbachev .
and i am pleased that we are working together to build a new relationship .
in helsinki , our joint statement affirmed to the world our shared resolve to counter iraq 's threat to peace .
let me quote : " we are united in the belief that iraq 's aggression must not be tolerated .
no peaceful international order is possible if larger states can devour their smaller neighbors . "
clearly , no longer can a dictator count on east - west confrontation to stymie concerted united nations action against aggression .
a new partnership of nations has begun .
we stand today at a unique and extraordinary moment .
the crisis in the persian gulf , as grave as it is , also offers a rare opportunity to move toward an historic period of cooperation .
out of these troubled times , our fifth objective -- a new world order -- can emerge : a new era -- freer from the threat of terror , stronger in the pursuit of justice , and more secure in the quest for peace .
an era in which the nations of the world , east and west , north and south , can prosper and live in harmony .
a hundred generations have searched for this elusive path to peace , while a thousand wars raged across the span of human endeavor .
today that new world is struggling to be born , a world quite different from the one we 've known .
a world where the rule of law supplants the rule of the jungle .
a world in which nations recognize the shared responsibility for freedom and justice .
a world where the strong respect the rights of the weak .
this is the vision that i shared with president gorbachev in helsinki .
he and other leaders from europe , the gulf , and around the world understand that how we manage this crisis today could shape the future for generations to come .
the test we face is great , and so are the stakes .
this is the first assault on the new world that we seek , the first test of our mettle .
had we not responded to this first provocation with clarity of purpose , if we do not continue to demonstrate our determination , it would be a signal to actual and potential despots around the world .
america and the world must defend common vital interests -- and we will .
america and the world must support the rule of law -- and we will .
america and the world must stand up to aggression -- and we will .
and one thing more : in the pursuit of these goals america will not be intimidated .
vital issues of principle are at stake .
saddam hussein is literally trying to wipe a country off the face of the earth .
we do not exaggerate .
nor do we exaggerate when we say saddam hussein will fail .
vital economic interests are at risk as well .
iraq itself controls some 10 percent of the world 's proven oil reserves .
iraq plus kuwait controls twice that .
an iraq permitted to swallow kuwait would have the economic and military power , as well as the arrogance , to intimidate and coerce its neighbors -- neighbors who control the lion 's share of the world 's remaining oil reserves .
we can not permit a resource so vital to be dominated by one so ruthless .
and we wo n't .
recent events have surely proven that there is no substitute for american leadership .
in the face of tyranny , let no one doubt american credibility and reliability .
let no one doubt our staying power .
we will stand by our friends .
one way or another , the leader of iraq must learn this fundamental truth .
from the outset , acting hand in hand with others , we 've sought to fashion the broadest possible international response to iraq 's aggression .
the level of world cooperation and condemnation of iraq is unprecedented .
armed forces from countries spanning four continents are there at the request of king fahd of saudi arabia to deter and , if need be , to defend against attack .
moslems and non - moslems , arabs and non - arabs , soldiers from many nations stand shoulder to shoulder , resolute against saddam hussein 's ambitions .
we can now point to five united nations security council resolutions that condemn iraq 's aggression .
they call for iraq 's immediate and unconditional withdrawal , the restoration of kuwait 's legitimate government , and categorically reject iraq 's cynical and self - serving attempt to annex kuwait .
finally , the united nations has demanded the release of all foreign nationals held hostage against their will and in contravention of international law .
it is a mockery of human decency to call these people " guests . "
they are hostages , and the whole world knows it .
prime minister margaret thatcher , a dependable ally , said it all : " we do not bargain over hostages .
we will not stoop to the level of using human beings as bargaining chips ever . "
of course , of course , our hearts go out to the hostages and to their families .
but our policy can not change , and it will not change .
america and the world will not be blackmailed by this ruthless policy .
we 're now in sight of a united nations that performs as envisioned by its founders .
we owe much to the outstanding leadership of secretary - general javier perez de cuellar .
the united nations is backing up its words with action .
the security council has imposed mandatory economic sanctions on iraq , designed to force iraq to relinquish the spoils of its illegal conquest .
the security council has also taken the decisive step of authorizing the use of all means necessary to ensure compliance with these sanctions .
together with our friends and allies , ships of the united states navy are today patrolling mideast waters .
they 've already intercepted more than 700 ships to enforce the sanctions .
three regional leaders i spoke with just yesterday told me that these sanctions are working .
iraq is feeling the heat .
we continue to hope that iraq 's leaders will recalculate just what their aggression has cost them .
they are cut off from world trade , unable to sell their oil .
and only a tiny fraction of goods gets through .
the communique with president gorbachev made mention of what happens when the embargo is so effective that children of iraq literally need milk or the sick truly need medicine .
then , under strict international supervision that guarantees the proper destination , then food will be permitted .
at home , the material cost of our leadership can be steep .
that 's why secretary of state baker and treasury secretary brady have met with many world leaders to underscore that the burden of this collective effort must be shared .
we are prepared to do our share and more to help carry that load ; we insist that others do their share as well .
the response of most of our friends and allies has been good .
to help defray costs , the leaders of saudi arabia , kuwait , and the uae -- the united arab emirates -- have pledged to provide our deployed troops with all the food and fuel they need .
generous assistance will also be provided to stalwart front - line nations , such as turkey and egypt .
i am also heartened to report that this international response extends to the neediest victims of this conflict -- those refugees .
for our part , we 've contributed $ 28 million for relief efforts .
this is but a portion of what is needed .
i commend , in particular , saudi arabia , japan , and several european nations who have joined us in this purely humanitarian effort .
there 's an energy - related cost to be borne as well .
oil - producing nations are already replacing lost iraqi and kuwaiti output .
more than half of what was lost has been made up .
and we 're getting superb cooperation .
if producers , including the united states , continue steps to expand oil and gas production , we can stabilize prices and guarantee against hardship .
additionally , we and several of our allies always have the option to extract oil from our strategic petroleum reserves if conditions warrant .
as i 've pointed out before , conservation efforts are essential to keep our energy needs as low as possible .
and we must then take advantage of our energy sources across the board : coal , natural gas , hydro , and nuclear .
our failure to do these things has made us more dependent on foreign oil than ever before .
finally , let no one even contemplate profiteering from this crisis .
we will not have it .
i can not predict just how long it will take to convince iraq to withdraw from kuwait .
sanctions will take time to have their full intended effect .
we will continue to review all options with our allies , but let it be clear : we will not let this aggression stand .
our interest , our involvement in the gulf is not transitory .
it predated saddam hussein 's aggression and will survive it .
long after all our troops come home -- and we all hope it 's soon , very soon -- there will be a lasting role for the united states in assisting the nations of the persian gulf .
our role then : to deter future aggression .
our role is to help our friends in their own self - defense .
and something else : to curb the proliferation of chemical , biological , ballistic missile and , above all , nuclear technologies .
let me also make clear that the united states has no quarrel with the iraqi people .
our quarrel is with iraq 's dictator and with his aggression .
iraq will not be permitted to annex kuwait .
that 's not a threat , that 's not a boast , that 's just the way it 's going to be .
our ability to function effectively as a great power abroad depends on how we conduct ourselves at home .
our economy , our armed forces , our energy dependence , and our cohesion all determine whether we can help our friends and stand up to our foes .
for america to lead , america must remain strong and vital .
our world leadership and domestic strength are mutual and reinforcing ; a woven piece , strongly bound as old glory .
to revitalize our leadership , our leadership capacity , we must address our budget deficit -- not after election day , or next year , but now .
higher oil prices slow our growth , and higher defense costs would only make our fiscal deficit problem worse .
that deficit was already greater than it should have been -- a projected $ 232 billion for the coming year .
it must -- it will -- be reduced .
to my friends in congress , together we must act this very month -- before the next fiscal year begins on october 1st -- to get america 's economic house in order .
the gulf situation helps us realize we are more economically vulnerable than we ever should be .
americans must never again enter any crisis , economic or military , with an excessive dependence on foreign oil and an excessive burden of federal debt .
most americans are sick and tired of endless battles in the congress and between the branches over budget matters .
it is high time we pulled together and get the job done right .
it 's up to us to straighten this out .
this job has four basic parts .
first , the congress should , this month , within a budget agreement , enact growth - oriented tax measures -- to help avoid recession in the short term and to increase savings , investment , productivity , and competitiveness for the longer term .
these measures include extending incentives for research and experimentation ; expanding the use of ira 's for new homeowners ; establishing tax - deferred family savings accounts ; creating incentives for the creation of enterprise zones and initiatives to encourage more domestic drilling ; and , yes , reducing the tax rate on capital gains .
and second , the congress should , this month , enact a prudent multiyear defense program , one that reflects not only the improvement in east - west relations but our broader responsibilities to deal with the continuing risks of outlaw action and regional conflict .
even with our obligations in the gulf , a sound defense budget can have some reduction in real terms ; and we 're prepared to accept that .
but to go beyond such levels , where cutting defense would threaten our vital margin of safety , is something i will never accept .
the world is still dangerous .
and surely , that is now clear .
stability 's not secure .
american interests are far reaching .
interdependence has increased .
the consequences of regional instability can be global .
this is no time to risk america 's capacity to protect her vital interests .
and third , the congress should , this month , enact measures to increase domestic energy production and energy conservation in order to reduce dependence on foreign oil .
these measures should include my proposals to increase incentives for domestic oil and gas exploration , fuel - switching , and to accelerate the development of the alaskan energy resources without damage to wildlife .
as you know , when the oil embargo was imposed in the early 1970 's , the united states imported almost 6 million barrels of oil a day .
this year , before the iraqi invasion , u. s. imports had risen to nearly 8 million barrels per day .
and we 'd moved in the wrong direction .
and now we must act to correct that trend .
and fourth , the congress should , this month , enact a 5-year program to reduce the projected debt and deficits by $ 500 billion -- that 's by half a trillion dollars .
and if , with the congress , we can develop a satisfactory program by the end of the month , we can avoid the ax of sequester -- deep across - the - board cuts that would threaten our military capacity and risk substantial domestic disruption .
i want to be able to tell the american people that we have truly solved the deficit problem .
and for me to do that , a budget agreement must meet these tests : it must include the measures i 've recommended to increase economic growth and reduce dependence on foreign oil .
it must be fair .
all should contribute , but the burden should not be excessive for any one group of programs or people .
it must address the growth of government 's hidden liabilities .
it must reform the budget process and , further , it must be real .
i urge congress to provide a comprehensive 5-year deficit reduction program to me as a complete legislative package , with measures to assure that it can be fully enforced .
america is tired of phony deficit reduction or promise - now , save - later plans .
it is time for a program that is credible and real .
and finally , to the extent that the deficit reduction program includes new revenue measures , it must avoid any measure that would threaten economic growth or turn us back toward the days of punishing income tax rates .
that is one path we should not head down again .
i have been pleased with recent progress , although it has not always seemed so smooth .
but now it 's time to produce .
i hope we can work out a responsible plan .
but with or without agreement from the budget summit , i ask both houses of the congress to allow a straight up - or - down vote on a complete $ 500-billion deficit reduction package not later than september 28 .
if the congress can not get me a budget , then americans will have to face a tough , mandated sequester .
i 'm hopeful , in fact , i 'm confident that the congress will do what it should .
and i can assure you that we in the executive branch will do our part .
in the final analysis , our ability to meet our responsibilities abroad depends upon political will and consensus at home .
this is never easy in democracies , for we govern only with the consent of the governed .
and although free people in a free society are bound to have their differences , americans traditionally come together in times of adversity and challenge .
once again , americans have stepped forward to share a tearful goodbye with their families before leaving for a strange and distant shore .
at this very moment , they serve together with arabs , europeans , asians , and africans in defense of principle and the dream of a new world order .
that 's why they sweat and toil in the sand and the heat and the sun .
if they can come together under such adversity , if old adversaries like the soviet union and the united states can work in common cause , then surely we who are so fortunate to be in this great chamber -- democrats , republicans , liberals , conservatives -- can come together to fulfill our responsibilities here .
thank you .
good night .
and god bless the united states of america .

evan , thank you so much .
and welcome to every one of you , out there in this splendid scene of hope , spread across the south lawn of the white house .
i want to salute the members of the united states congress , the house and the senate who are with us today -- active participants in making this day come true .
this is , indeed , an incredible day -- especially for the thousands of people across the nation who have given so much of their time , their vision , and their courage to see this act become a reality .
you know , i started trying to put together a list of all the people who should be mentioned today .
but when the list started looking a little longer than the senate testimony for the bill , i decided i better give up , or that we 'd never get out of here before sunset .
so , even though so many deserve credit , i will single out but a tiny handful .
and i take those who have guided me personally over the years : of course , my friends evan kemp and justin dart , up here on the platform with me ; and of course -- i hope you 'll forgive me for also saying a special word of thanks to two from the white house , but again , this is personal , so i do n't want to offend those omitted -- two from the white house , boyden gray and bill roper , who labored long and hard .
and i want to thank sandy parrino , of course , for her leadership .
and i again -- it is very risky with all these members of congress here who worked so hard , but i can say on a very personal basis , bob dole has inspired me .
this is an immensely important day , a day that belongs to all of you .
everywhere i look , i see people who have dedicated themselves to making sure that this day would come to pass : my friends from congress , as i say , who worked so diligently with the best interest of all at heart , democrats and republicans ; members of this administration -- and i 'm pleased to see so many top officials and members of my cabinet here today who brought their caring and expertise to this fight ; and then , the organizations -- so many dedicated organizations for people with disabilities , who gave their time and their strength ; and perhaps most of all , everyone out there and others -- across the breadth of this nation are 43 million americans with disabilities .
you have made this happen .
all of you have made this happen .
to all of you , i just want to say your triumph is that your bill will now be law , and that this day belongs to you .
on behalf of our nation , thank you very , very much .
three weeks ago we celebrated our nation 's independence day .
today we 're here to rejoice in and celebrate another " independence day , " one that is long overdue .
with today 's signing of the landmark americans for disabilities act , every man , woman , and child with a disability can now pass through once - closed doors into a bright new era of equality , independence , and freedom .
as i look around at all these joyous faces , i remember clearly how many years of dedicated commitment have gone into making this historic new civil rights act a reality .
it 's been the work of a true coalition , a strong and inspiring coalition of people who have shared both a dream and a passionate determination to make that dream come true .
it 's been a coalition in the finest spirit -- a joining of democrats and republicans , of the legislative and the executive branches , of federal and state agencies , of public officials and private citizens , of people with disabilities and without .
this historic act is the world 's first comprehensive declaration of equality for people with disabilities -- the first .
its passage has made the united states the international leader on this human rights issue .
already , leaders of several other countries , including sweden , japan , the soviet union , and all 12 members of the eec , have announced that they hope to enact now similar legislation .
our success with this act proves that we are keeping faith with the spirit of our courageous forefathers who wrote in the declaration of independence : " we hold these truths to be self - evident , that all men are created equal , that they are endowed by their creator with certain unalienable rights . "
these words have been our guide for more than two centuries as we 've labored to form our more perfect union .
but tragically , for too many americans , the blessings of liberty have been limited or even denied .
the civil rights act of ' 64 took a bold step towards righting that wrong .
but the stark fact remained that people with disabilities were still victims of segregation and discrimination , and this was intolerable .
today 's legislation brings us closer to that day when no americans will ever again be deprived of their basic guarantee of life , liberty , and the pursuit of happiness .
this act is powerful in its simplicity .
it will ensure that people with disabilities are given the basic guarantees for which they have worked so long and so hard : independence , freedom of choice , control of their lives , the opportunity to blend fully and equally into the rich mosaic of the american mainstream .
legally , it will provide our disabled community with a powerful expansion of protections and then basic civil rights .
it will guarantee fair and just access to the fruits of american life which we all must be able to enjoy .
and then , specifically , first the ada ensures that employers covered by the act can not discriminate against qualified individuals with disabilities .
second , the ada ensures access to public accommodations such as restaurants , hotels , shopping centers , and offices .
and third , the ada ensures expanded access to transportation services .
and fourth , the ada ensures equivalent telephone services for people with speech or hearing impediments .
these provisions mean so much to so many .
to one brave girl in particular , they will mean the world .
lisa carl , a young washington state woman with cerebral palsy , who i 'm told is with us today , now will always be admitted to her hometown theater .
lisa , you might not have been welcome at your theater , but i 'll tell you -- welcome to the white house .
we 're glad you 're here .
the ada is a dramatic renewal not only for those with disabilities but for all of us , because along with the precious privilege of being an american comes a sacred duty to ensure that every other american 's rights are also guaranteed .
together , we must remove the physical barriers we have created and the social barriers that we have accepted .
for ours will never be a truly prosperous nation until all within it prosper .
for inspiration , we need look no further than our own neighbors .
with us in that wonderful crowd out there are people representing 18 of the daily points of light that i 've named for their extraordinary involvement with the disabled community .
we applaud you and your shining example .
thank you for your leadership for all that are here today .
now , let me just tell you a wonderful story , a story about children already working in the spirit of the ada -- a story that really touched me .
across the nation , some 10,000 youngsters with disabilities are part of little league 's challenger division .
their teams play just like others , but -- and this is the most remarkable part -- as they play , at their sides are volunteer buddies from conventional little league teams .
all of these players work together .
they team up to wheel around the bases and to field grounders together and , most of all , just to play and become friends .
we must let these children be our guides and inspiration .
i also want to say a special word to our friends in the business community .
you have in your hands the key to the success of this act , for you can unlock a splendid resource of untapped human potential that , when freed , will enrich us all .
i know there have been concerns that the ada may be vague or costly , or may lead endlessly to litigation .
but i want to reassure you right now that my administration and the united states congress have carefully crafted this act .
we 've all been determined to ensure that it gives flexibility , particularly in terms of the timetable of implementation , and we 've been committed to containing the costs that may be incurred .
this act does something important for american business , though -- and remember this : you 've called for new sources of workers .
well , many of our fellow citizens with disabilities are unemployed .
they want to work , and they can work , and this is a tremendous pool of people .
and remember , this is a tremendous pool of people who will bring to jobs diversity , loyalty , proven low turnover rate , and only one request : the chance to prove themselves .
and when you add together federal , state , local , and private funds , it costs almost $ 200 billion annually to support americans with disabilities -- in effect , to keep them dependent .
well , when given the opportunity to be independent , they will move proudly into the economic mainstream of american life , and that 's what this legislation is all about .
our problems are large , but our unified heart is larger .
our challenges are great , but our will is greater .
and in our america , the most generous , optimistic nation on the face of the earth , we must not and will not rest until every man and woman with a dream has the means to achieve it .
and today , america welcomes into the mainstream of life all of our fellow citizens with disabilities .
we embrace you for your abilities and for your disabilities , for our similarities and indeed for our differences , for your past courage and your future dreams .
last year , we celebrated a victory of international freedom .
even the strongest person could n't scale the berlin wall to gain the elusive promise of independence that lay just beyond .
and so , together we rejoiced when that barrier fell .
and now i sign legislation which takes a sledgehammer to another wall , one which has for too many generations separated americans with disabilities from the freedom they could glimpse , but not grasp .
once again , we rejoice as this barrier falls for claiming together we will not accept , we will not excuse , we will not tolerate discrimination in america .
with , again , great thanks to the members of the united states senate , leaders of whom are here today , and those who worked so tirelessly for this legislation on both sides of the aisles .
and to those members of the house of representatives with us here today , democrats and republicans as well , i salute you .
and on your behalf , as well as the behalf of this entire country , i now lift my pen to sign this americans with disabilities act and say : let the shameful wall of exclusion finally come tumbling down .
god bless you all .

thank you all for that welcome back .
thank you very , very much .
good afternoon , everybody , and thank you all .
i knew if i wore this necktie i 'd get a nice welcome .
but anyway -- thank you , dr. mobley , thank you , bill , for your kind introduction .
may i salute congressmen that are with us today , congressman joe barton and congressman jack fields ; and commissioner rick perry and kay bailey hutchison and representative ogden ; my old friend fred mcclure , who served at my side in the white house .
and may i thank chairman ross margraves for the wonderful program that he arranged for me today as i heard about this library .
and i salute the board of regents members that are here ; the members of the library committee ; chancellor richardson , i think i mentioned , but i salute him .
i want to say thanks to my hosts , the memorial student center political forum .
when that forum started , i think congressman bob eckhardt and i were the first two speakers to speak at the political forum .
i 'd hate to tell you how far back that was .
but anyway , i 'm glad to be back here .
and may i send my heartiest thanks to the corps of cadets and the fightin ' texas aggies band over here .
as i told bill mobley and ross earlier , on a personal note , i am looking forward to spending more time here , to actively participating in our presidential library that will be built here , to helping with the school of public service that will be part of that library .
and barbara and i are both looking forward to being part of the a and m family .
thank you very much .
now for the business at hand .
in 36 days , i 'll hand over the stewardship of this great nation , capping a career in public service that began 50 years ago in wartime skies over the pacific .
and our country won that great contest but entered an uneasy peace .
you see , the fires of world war ii cooled into a longer cold war , one that froze the world into two opposing camps : on the one side , america and its allies , and on the other --   -- the forces of freedom thus against an alien ideology that cast its shadow over every american .
three years ago when i was honored to address the graduating class here at texas a and m , i spoke of the need to move beyond containment .
and i said , " we seek the integration of the soviet union into the community of nations .
ultimately , our objective is to welcome the soviet union back into the world order . "
and was this aim too ambitious ?
not for the american people .
today , by the grit of our people and the grace of god , the cold war is over .
freedom has carried the day .
and i leave the white house grateful for what we have achieved together and also exhilarated by the promise of what can come to pass .
this afternoon i would like to just share some of my thoughts on the past few years and on america 's purpose in the world .
my thesis is a simple one .
amid the triumph and the tumult of the recent past , one truth rings out more clearly than ever : america remains today what lincoln said it was more than a century ago , " the last best hope of man on earth . "
this is a fact , a truth made indelible by the struggles and the agonies of the 20th century and in the sacrifice symbolized by each towering oak on simpson drill field here at texas a and m university .
the leadership , the power , and yes , the conscience of the united states of america , all are essential for a peaceful , prosperous international order , just as such an order is essential for us .
history 's lesson is clear : when a war - weary america withdrew from the international stage following world war i , the world spawned militarism , fascism , and aggression unchecked , plunging mankind into another devastating conflict .
but in answering the call to lead after world war ii , we built from the principles of democracy and the rule of law a new community of free nations , a community whose strength , perseverance , patience , and unity of purpose contained soviet totalitarianism and kept the peace .
in the end , soviet communism provided no match for free enterprise beyond its borders or the yearning for liberty within them .
and the american leadership that undermined the confidence and capacity of the communist regimes became a beacon for all the peoples of the world .
steadfast and sure , generations of americans stood in the path of the soviet advance while our adversary probed for weaknesses that were never found .
presidents from both parties led an atlantic alliance held together by the bonds of principle and love of liberty , facing a warsaw pact lashed together by occupation troops and quisling governments and , when all else failed , the use of tanks against its own people .
by the 1980 's , kremlin leaders found that our alliance would not crack when they threatened america 's allies with the infamous ss-20 nuclear missile .
nor did the alliance shrink from the deployment of countervailing missiles to defend against this menace .
in the pacific , too , we built a new alliance with japan , defended korea , and called hundreds of thousands of americans to sacrifice in the jungles of southeast asia .
the american people demonstrated that they would shoulder whatever defense burden , make whatever sacrifice was needed to assure our freedom and protect our allies and interests .
and we made use of this superb technology that our free enterprise system has produced .
and having learned that they could not divide our alliance , the soviets eventually were forced to realize that their command economy simply could not compete .
as the soviet system stalled and crumbled , so too did the ability of its rulers to deny their people the truth , about us and about them .
in the end , soviet communism was destroyed by its own internal contradictions .
new leaders with new vision faced the hard truths that their predecessors had long denied .
glasnost , perestroika : they may have been russian words , but the concepts at their core were universal .
the soviet union did not simply lose the cold war ; the western democracies won it .
i say this not to gloat but to make a key point .
the qualities that enabled us to triumph in that struggle , faith , strength , unity , and above all , american leadership , are those we must call upon now to win the peace .
in recent years , with the soviet empire in its death throes , the potential for crisis and conflict was never greater , the demand for american leadership never more compelling .
as the peoples of eastern europe made their bold move for freedom , we urged them along a peaceful path to liberation .
they turned to us .
they turned to america , and we did not turn away .
and when our german friends took their hammers to tear down that wall , we encouraged a united germany , safely within the nato alliance .
they looked to america , and we did not look away .
and when the people of russia blocked the tanks that tried to roll back the tide of history , america did not walk away .
i can remember speaking to boris yeltsin at that terrible moment of crisis .
at times the static on the telephone made it almost impossible to hear him , but there was no mistaking what he wanted to know .
he asked where the united states of america stood .
and america answered , for all the world to hear , " we stand with you . "
boris yeltsin to this day has n't forgotten .
praising our country on his visit to the white house this june , he said george bush was the first to understand the true scope and meaning of the victory of the russian people on august 19 , 1991 .
he addressed me , but he was talking about our country , the united states of america .
the free peoples of the world watched ; they watched in awe as the soviet union collapsed , but they held their breath at what might take its place , wondering who might control its tens of thousands of nuclear weapons .
only america could manage that danger .
we acted decisively to help the new leaders reduce their arsenals and gain firm control of those that remain .
here , then , is the remarkable fact that history will record , a fact that will be studied for years in the library right here at texas a and m university : the end of a titanic clash of political systems , the collapse of the most heavily armed empire in history , took place without a shot being fired .
that should be a source of pride for every american .
from the days after world war ii , when fragile european democracies were threatened by stalin 's expansionism , to the last days of the cold war , as our foes became fragile democracies themselves , american leadership has been indispensable .
no one person deserves credit for this .
america does .
it has been achieved because of what we as a people stand for and what we are made of .
yes , we answered the call , and we triumphed , but today we are summoned again .
this time we are called not to wage a war , hot or cold , but to win the democratic peace , not for half a world as before but for people the world over .
the end of the cold war , you see , has placed in our hands a unique opportunity to see the principles for which america has stood for two centuries , democracy , free enterprise , and the rule of law , spread more widely than ever before in human history .
for the first time , turning this global vision into a new and better world is , indeed , a realistic possibility .
it is a hope that embodies our country 's tradition of idealism , which has made us unique among nations and uniquely successful .
and our vision is not mere utopianism .
the advance of democratic ideals reflects a hard - nosed sense of our own , of american self - interest .
for certain truths have , indeed , now become evident : governments responsive to the will of the people are not likely to commit aggression .
they are not likely to sponsor terrorism or to threaten humanity with weapons of mass destruction .
likewise , the global spread of free markets , by encouraging trade , investment , and growth , will sustain the expansion of american prosperity .
in short , by helping others , we help ourselves .
some will dismiss this vision as no more than a dream .
i ask them to consider the last 4 years when a dozen dreams were made real : the berlin wall demolished and germany united ; the captive nations set free ; russia democratic ; whole classes of nuclear weapons eliminated , the rest vastly reduced ; many nations united in our historic u. n. coalition to turn back a tyrant in the persian gulf ; israel and its arab neighbors for the first time talking peace , face to face , in a region that has known so much war .
each of these once seemed a dream .
today they 're concrete realities , brought about by a common cause : the patient and judicious application of american leadership , american power , and perhaps most of all , american moral force .
without a doubt , there 's going to be serious obstacles and setbacks ahead .
you know and i know that we face some already .
violence , poverty , ethnic and religious hatreds will be powerful adversaries .
and overcoming them is going to take time , and it 's going to take tenacity , courage , and commitment .
but i am absolutely convinced that they can be overcome .
look to europe , where nations , after centuries of war , transformed themselves into a peaceful , progressive community .
no society , no continent should be disqualified from sharing the ideals of human liberty .
the community of democratic nations is more robust then ever , and it will gain strength as it grows .
by working with our allies , by invigorating our international institutions , america does not have to stand alone .
yet from some quarters we hear voices sounding the retreat .
we 've carried the burden too long , they say , and the disappearance of the soviet challenge means that america can withdraw from international responsibilities .
and then others assert that domestic needs preclude an active foreign policy , that we 've done our part ; now it 's someone else 's turn .
we 're warned against entangling ourselves in the troubles that abound in today 's world , to name only a few : clan warfare , mass starvation in somalia ; savage violence in bosnia ; instability in the former soviet union ; the alarming growth of virulent nationalism .
it 's true , these problems -- some frozen by the cold war , others held in check by communist repression -- seem to have ignited all at once , taxing the world 's ability to respond .
but let 's be clear : the alternative to american leadership is not more security for our citizens but less , not the flourishing of american principles but their isolation in a world actively held hostile to them .
destiny , it has been said , is not a matter of chance ; it 's a matter of choice .
it 's not a thing to be waited for ; it 's a thing to be achieved .
and we can never safely assume that our future will be an improvement over the past .
our choice as a people is simple : we can either shape our times , or we can let the times shape us .
and shape us they will , at a price frightening to contemplate , morally , economically , and strategically .
morally , a failure to respond to massive human catastrophes like that in somalia would scar the soul of our nation .
there can be no single or simple set of guidelines for foreign policy .
we should help .
but we should consider using military force only in those situations where the stakes warrant , where it can be effective and its application limited in scope and time .
as we seek to save lives , we must always be mindful of the lives that we may have to put at risk .
economically , a world of escalating instability and hostile nationalism will disrupt global markets , set off trade wars , set us on a path of economic decline .
american jobs would be lost , our chance to compete would be blocked , and our very well - being would be undermined .
strategically , abandonment of the worldwide democratic revolution could be disastrous for american security .
the alternative to democracy , i think we would all agree , is authoritarianism : regimes that can be repressive , xenophobic , aggressive , and violent .
and in a world where , despite u. s. efforts , weapons of mass destruction are spreading , the collapse of the democratic revolution could pose a direct threat to the safety of every single american .
the new world could , in time , be as menacing as the old .
and let me be blunt : a retreat from american leadership , from american involvement , would be a mistake for which future generations , indeed our own children , would pay dearly .
but we can influence the future .
we can rededicate ourselves to the hard work of freedom .
and this does n't mean running off on reckless , expensive crusades .
it does n't mean bearing the world 's burdens all alone .
but it does mean leadership , economic , political , and yes , military , when our interests and values are at risk and where we can make a difference .
and when we place our young men and women of the military in harm 's way , we must be able to assure them and their families that their mission is defined and that its success can be achieved .
it seems like ages ago that the people of germany tore down that wall .
but it 's been only 3 years , and just over a year since the august coup was defeated by brave russian democrats .
and in this brief time , we 've embarked on a new course through uncharted waters .
the united states and its friends , old and new , have begun to define the post - cold - war reality .
and we are already transforming the old network of alliances , institutions , and regimes to face the future .
and those challenges must be met with collective action , led by the united states , to protect and promote our political , economic , and security values .
our foundation must be the democratic community that won the cold war .
and we 've begun to adapt america 's political , economic , and defense relationships with europe and japan to ensure their vitality and strength in this new era , for these will continue to be essential partners in addressing the next generation of problems and opportunities .
for example , we 've begun to transform the atlantic alliance , that bulwark against the soviet threat , into a partnership with a more united europe , a partnership primed to meet new security challenges in this age of uncertainty .
and a new feature of our alliance , the north atlantic cooperation council , enables nato to reach out to our former adversaries in the warsaw pact .
in the pacific , we 've affirmed the importance of the u. s .- japan security ties to stability in asia .
but we 're also exploring ways to work together as global partners to address common interests in economics , development , and regional problems .
then we 've committed ourselves to expanding the democratic community by supporting political and economic freedom in nascent democracies and market economies .
and we 're sharing this burden with the very nations america helped after world war ii .
look , in central and eastern europe , our enterprise funds and these other programs have helped develop a new political , economic , and civic infrastructure for nations long oppressed by stalin 's legacy .
and now the freedom support act will provide crucial help for reform in the lands of our former enemies .
in latin america , the day of the dictator has given way to the dawn of democracy .
this very day , our vice president is taking part in a ceremony in el salvador that caps the long effort to end the killing and give the people there the opportunity to live in peace .
throughout the region , economic initiatives are helping a new generation of leaders reform their societies .
the brady plan and our enterprise for the americas initiative have opened up extraordinary possibilities for a new relationship with our hemispheric neighbors .
investment , free trade , debt relief , and environmental protection will nurture the homegrown reforms throughout latin america .
we 're strengthening the ability of the democratic community to deal with the political landmines that the cold war has exposed : aggressive nationalism , earlier i mentioned ethnic conflict , civil war , and humanitarian crises .
the united states has led the world in supporting a united nations more capable with dealing with these crises .
all over the world , nicaragua , namibia , angola , cambodia , we 've promoted elections not only as a goal but as a tool , a device for resolving conflicts and establishing political legitimacy .
one of vital interest to every young person : in the area of security and arms control , we 've stepped up patrol against the spread of weapons of mass destruction .
the new chemical weapons convention will ban chemical weapons from the arsenals of all participating states .
we 've strengthened multilateral export controls on nuclear and chemical and biological and missile - related technologies .
and in a mission without precedent , a u. n. inspection team is demolishing iraq 's unconventional weapons capability , and we 're going to support them every inch of the way .
and once implemented , the agreements we 've negotiated will ban new nuclear states on the territory of the former soviet union .
and above all , we 've sought to erase nuclear nightmares from the sleep of future generations .
we underscored one key security principle with a line in the sand : naked aggression against our vital interests will be answered decisively by american resolve , american leadership , and american might .
our victory in the gulf , in the persian gulf , was more than a blow for justice ; it was a reminder to other would - be aggressors that they will pay a price for their outlaw acts .
we 've been committed to building the basis for sustained international economic growth for ourselves and for those nations of what were once the so - called second and third worlds .
the heart of our efforts has been the creation of a stronger and freer international trading market .
our recent breakthrough with the european community clears the way for an early conclusion to the uruguay round of gatt and a major boost to world economic recovery .
this week , mexico , canada , and the united states will sign a landmark agreement establishing the largest free trade zone the world has ever seen .
and our efforts to forge a new mechanism for asia - pacific economic cooperation confirm america 's commitment to remain an economic and security power in asia .
i believe we 've taken important steps toward a world in which democracy is the norm , in which private enterprise , free trade , and prosperity enrich every region , a world in which the rule of law prevails .
we must not stumble as we travel toward a world without the brutal violence of bosnia , the deadly anarchy of somalia , or the squalor that still haunts so much of the globe .
we ca n't rest while a handful of renegade regimes aspire to obtain weapons of mass destruction with which to threaten their neighbors or even america .
there is much to be done before we are within reach of the democratic peace .
but these first steps have taken us in that right direction .
the challenge ahead , then , is as great as the one we faced at the end of the last great war .
but the opportunity is vastly greater .
success will require american vision and resolve , an america secure in its military , moral , and economic strength .
success will require unity of purpose : a commitment on the part of all our people to the proposition that our nation 's destiny lies in the hope of a better world , a new world made better , with our friends and allies , again by american leadership .
history is summoning us once again to lead .
proud of its past , america must once again look forward .
and we must live up to the greatness of our forefathers ' ideals and in doing so secure our grandchildren 's futures .
and that is the cause that much of my public life has been dedicated to serving .
let me just say this --   -- in 36 -- hey listen --   -- come on now , you guys , as barbara bush would say -- .
but in 36 days we will have a new president .
and i am confident , i am very confident that he will do his level - best to serve the cause that i have outlined here today .
and he 's going to have my support --   -- and he will have my support , and i 'll stay out of his way .
and i really mean that .
but it is more important than my support , it is more important that he have your support .
you are our future .
god bless you , and god bless the united states of america .
thank you all .

mr. president , thank you very much .
mr. secretary - general , distinguished delegates to the united nations , it is really a great privilege to greet you today as we begin what marks a new and historic session of the general assembly .
my congratulations to the honorable guido de marco on your election , sir , as president of the general assembly .
and on a personal note , i want to say that , having witnessed the unprecedented unity and cooperation of the past 2 months , that i have never been prouder to have once served within your ranks and never been prouder that the united states is the host country for the united nations .
forty - five years ago , while the fires of an epic war still raged across two oceans and two continents , a small group of men and women began a search for hope amid the ruins .
and they gathered in san francisco , stepping back from the haze and horror , to try to shape a new structure that might support an ancient dream .
intensely idealistic and yet tempered by war , they sought to build a new kind of bridge : a bridge between nations , a bridge that might help carry humankind from its darkest hour to its brightest day .
the founding of the united nations embodied our deepest hopes for a peaceful world , and during the past year , we 've come closer than ever before to realizing those hopes .
we 've seen a century sundered by barbed threats and barbed wire give way to a new era of peace and competition and freedom .
the revolution of ' 89 swept the world almost with a life of its own , carried by a new breeze of freedom .
it transformed the political climate from central europe to central america and touched almost every corner of the globe .
that breeze has been sustained by a now almost universal recognition of a simple , fundamental truth : the human spirit can not be locked up forever .
the truth is , people everywhere are motivated in much the same ways .
and people everywhere want much the same things : the chance to live a life of purpose ; the chance to choose a life in which they and their children can learn and grow healthy , worship freely , and prosper through the work of their hands and their hearts and their minds .
we 're not talking about the power of nations but the power of individuals , the power to choose , the power to risk , the power to succeed .
this is a new and different world .
not since 1945 have we seen the real possibility of using the united nations as it was designed : as a center for international collective security .
the changes in the soviet union have been critical to the emergence of a stronger united nations .
the u. s .- soviet relationship is finally beyond containment and confrontation , and now we seek to fulfill the promise of mutually shared understanding .
the long twilight struggle that for 45 years has divided europe , our two nations , and much of the world has come to an end .
much has changed over the last 2 years .
the soviet union has taken many dramatic and important steps to participate fully in the community of nations .
and when the soviet union agreed with so many of us here in the united nations to condemn the aggression of iraq , there could be no doubt -- no doubt then -- that we had , indeed , put four decades of history behind us .
we are hopeful that the machinery of the united nations will no longer be frozen by the divisions that plagued us during the cold war , that at last -- long last -- we can build new bridges and tear down old walls , that at long last we will be able to build a new world based on an event for which we have all hoped : an end to the cold war .
two days from now , the world will be watching when the cold war is formally buried in berlin .
and in this time of testing , a fundamental question must be asked , a question not for any one nation but for the united nations .
and the question is this : can we work together in a new partnership of nations ?
can the collective strength of the world community , expressed by the united nations , unite to deter and defeat aggression ?
because the cold war 's battle of ideas is not the last epic battle of this century .
two months ago , in the waning weeks of one of history 's most hopeful summers , the vast , still beauty of the peaceful kuwaiti desert was fouled by the stench of diesel and the roar of steel tanks .
once again the sound of distant thunder echoed across a cloudless sky , and once again the world awoke to face the guns of august .
but this time , the world was ready .
the united nations security council 's resolute response to iraq 's unprovoked aggression has been without precedent .
since the invasion on august 2d , the council has passed eight major resolutions setting the terms for a solution to the crisis .
the iraqi regime has yet to face the facts , but as i said last month , the annexation of kuwait will not be permitted to stand .
and this is not simply the view of the united states ; it is the view of every kuwaiti , the arab league , the united nations .
iraq 's leaders should listen : it is iraq against the world .
let me take this opportunity to make the policy of my government clear .
the united states supports the use of sanctions to compel iraq 's leaders to withdraw immediately and without condition from kuwait .
we also support the provision of medicine and food for humanitarian purposes , so long as distribution can be properly monitored .
our quarrel is not with the people of iraq .
we do not wish for them to suffer .
the world 's quarrel is with the dictator who ordered that invasion .
along with others , we have dispatched military forces to the region to enforce sanctions , to deter and , if need be , defend against further aggression .
and we seek no advantage for ourselves , nor do we seek to maintain our military forces in saudi arabia for 1 day longer than is necessary .
u. s. forces were sent at the request of the saudi government , and the american people and this president want every single american soldier brought home as soon as this mission is completed .
let me also emphasize that all of us here at the u. n. hope that military force will never be used .
we seek a peaceful outcome , a diplomatic outcome .
and one more thing : in the aftermath of iraq 's unconditional departure from kuwait , i truly believe there may be opportunities for iraq and kuwait to settle their differences permanently , for the states of the gulf themselves to build new arrangements for stability , and for all the states and the peoples of the region to settle the conflicts that divide the arabs from israel .
but the world 's key task -- now , first and always -- must be to demonstrate that aggression will not be tolerated or rewarded .
through the u. n. security council , iraq has been fairly judged by a jury of its peers , the very nations of the earth .
today the regime stands isolated and out of step with the times , separated from the civilized world not by space but by centuries .
iraq 's unprovoked aggression is a throwback to another era , a dark relic from a dark time .
it has plundered kuwait .
it has terrorized innocent civilians .
it has held even diplomats hostage .
iraq and its leaders must be held liable for these crimes of abuse and destruction .
but this outrageous disregard for basic human rights does not come as a total surprise .
thousands of iraqis have been executed on political and religious grounds , and even more through a genocidal poison gas war waged against iraq 's own kurdish villagers .
as a world community , we must act not only to deter the use of inhumane weapons like mustard and nerve gas but to eliminate the weapons entirely .
and that is why , 1 year ago , i came to the general assembly with new proposals to banish these terrible weapons from the face of the earth .
i promised that the united states would destroy over 98 percent of its stockpile in the first 8 years of a chemical weapons ban treaty , and 100 percent -- all of them -- in 10 years , if all nations with chemical capabilities , chemical weapons , signed the treaty .
we 've stood by those promises .
in june the united states and the soviet union signed a landmark agreement to halt production and to destroy the vast majority of our stockpiles .
today u. s. chemical weapons are being destroyed .
but time is running out .
this is n't merely a bilateral concern .
the gulf crisis proves how important it is to act together , and to act now , to conclude an absolute , worldwide ban on these weapons .
we must also redouble our efforts to stem the spread of nuclear weapons , biological weapons , and the ballistic missiles that can rain destruction upon distant peoples .
the united nations can help bring about a new day , a day when these kinds of terrible weapons and the terrible despots who would use them are both a thing of the past .
it is in our hands to leave these dark machines behind , in the dark ages where they belong , and to press forward to cap a historic movement towards a new world order and a long era of peace .
we have a vision of a new partnership of nations that transcends the cold war : a partnership based on consultation , cooperation , and collective action , especially through international and regional organizations ; a partnership united by principle and the rule of law and supported by an equitable sharing of both cost and commitment ; a partnership whose goals are to increase democracy , increase prosperity , increase the peace , and reduce arms .
and as we look to the future , the calendar offers up a convenient milestone , a signpost , by which to measure our progress as a community of nations .
the year 2000 marks a turning point , beginning not only the turn of the decade , not only the turn of the century , but also the turn of the millennium .
and 10 years from now , as the 55th session of the general assembly begins , you will again find many of us in this hall , hair a bit more gray perhaps , maybe a little less spring in our walk ; but you will not find us with any less hope or idealism or any less confidence in the ultimate triumph of mankind .
i see a world of open borders , open trade and , most importantly , open minds ; a world that celebrates the common heritage that belongs to all the world 's people , taking pride not just in hometown or homeland but in humanity itself .
i see a world touched by a spirit like that of the olympics , based not on competition that 's driven by fear but sought out of joy and exhilaration and a true quest for excellence .
and i see a world where democracy continues to win new friends and convert old foes and where the americas -- north , central , and south -- can provide a model for the future of all humankind : the world 's first completely democratic hemisphere .
and i see a world building on the emerging new model of european unity , not just europe but the whole world whole and free .
this is precisely why the present aggression in the gulf is a menace not only to one region 's security but to the entire world 's vision of our future .
it threatens to turn the dream of a new international order into a grim nightmare of anarchy in which the law of the jungle supplants the law of nations .
and that 's why the united nations reacted with such historic unity and resolve .
and that 's why this challenge is a test that we can not afford to fail .
i am confident we will prevail .
success , too , will have lasting consequences : reinforcing civilized standards of international conduct , setting a new precedent in international cooperation , brightening the prospects for our vision of the future .
there are 10 more years until this century is out , 10 more years to put the struggles of the 20th century permanently behind us , 10 more years to help launch a new partnership of nations .
and throughout those 10 years , and beginning now , the united nations has a new and vital role in building towards that partnership .
last year 's general assembly showed how we can make greater progress toward a more pragmatic and successful united nations .
and for the first time , the u. n. security council is beginning to work as it was designed to work .
and now is the time to set aside old and counterproductive debates and procedures and controversies and resolutions .
it 's time to replace polemic attacks with pragmatic action .
and we 've shown that the u. n. can count on the collective strength of the international community .
we 've shown that the u. n. can rise to the challenge of aggression just as its founders hoped that it would .
and now is the time of testing .
and we must also show that the united nations is the place to build international support and consensus for meeting the other challenges we face .
the world remains a dangerous place ; and our security and well - being often depends , in part , on events occurring far away .
we need serious international cooperative efforts to make headway on the threats to the environment , on terrorism , on managing the debt burden , on fighting the scourge of international drug trafficking , and on refugees , and peacekeeping efforts around the world .
but the world also remains a hopeful place .
calls for democracy and human rights are being reborn everywhere , and these calls are an expression of support for the values enshrined in the united nations charter .
they encourage our hopes for a more stable , more peaceful , more prosperous world .
free elections are the foundation of democratic government and can produce dramatic successes , as we have seen in namibia and nicaragua .
and the time has come to structure the u. n. role in such efforts more formally .
and so , today i propose that the u. n. establish a special coordinator for electoral assistance , to be assisted by a u. n. electoral commission comprised of distinguished experts from around the world .
as with free elections , we also believe that universal u. n. membership for all states is central to the future of this organization and to this new partnership we 've discussed .
in support of this principle and in conjunction with u. n. efforts to reduce regional tensions , the united states fully supports u. n. membership for the republic of korea .
we do so without prejudice to the ultimate objective of reunification of the korean peninsula and without opposition to simultaneous membership for the democratic people 's republic of korea .
building on these and other initiatives , we must join together in a new compact -- all of us -- to bring the united nations into the 21st century , and i call today for a major long - term effort to do so .
we should build on the success -- the admirable success -- of our distinguished secretary - general , my longtime friend and yours , my longtime colleague i might also say , javier perez de cuellar .
we should strive for greater effectiveness and efficiency of the united nations .
the united states is committed to playing its part , helping to maintain global security , promoting democracy and prosperity .
and my administration is fully committed to supporting the united nations and to paying what we are obliged to pay by our commitment to the charter .
international peace and security , and international freedom and prosperity , require no less .
the world must know and understand : from this hour , from this day , from this hall , we step forth with a new sense of purpose , a new sense of possibilities .
we stand together , prepared to swim upstream , to march uphill , to tackle the tough challenges as they come not only as the united nations but as the nations of the world united .
and so , let it be said of the final decade of the 20th century : this was a time when humankind came into its own , when we emerged from the grit and the smoke of the industrial age to bring about a revolution of the spirit and the mind and began a journey into a new day , a new age , and a new partnership of nations .
the u. n. is now fulfilling its promise as the world 's parliament of peace .
and i congratulate you .
i support you .
and i wish you godspeed in the challenges ahead .
thank you very , very much .

my fellow citizens , last night i ordered u. s. military forces to panama .
no president takes such action lightly .
this morning i want to tell you what i did and why i did it .
for nearly 2 years , the united states , nations of latin america and the caribbean have worked together to resolve the crisis in panama .
the goals of the united states have been to safeguard the lives of americans , to defend democracy in panama , to combat drug trafficking , and to protect the integrity of the panama canal treaty .
many attempts have been made to resolve this crisis through diplomacy and negotiations .
all were rejected by the dictator of panama , general manuel noriega , an indicted drug trafficker .
last friday , noriega declared his military dictatorship to be in a state of war with the united states and publicly threatened the lives of americans in panama .
the very next day , forces under his command shot and killed an unarmed american serviceman ; wounded another ; arrested and brutally beat a third american serviceman ; and then brutally interrogated his wife , threatening her with sexual abuse .
that was enough .
general noriega 's reckless threats and attacks upon americans in panama created an imminent danger to the 35,000 american citizens in panama .
as president , i have no higher obligation than to safeguard the lives of american citizens .
and that is why i directed our armed forces to protect the lives of american citizens in panama and to bring general noriega to justice in the united states .
i contacted the bipartisan leadership of congress last night and informed them of this decision , and after taking this action , i also talked with leaders in latin america , the caribbean , and those of other u. s. allies .
at this moment , u. s. forces , including forces deployed from the united states last night , are engaged in action in panama .
the united states intends to withdraw the forces newly deployed to panama as quickly as possible .
our forces have conducted themselves courageously and selflessly .
and as commander in chief , i salute every one of them and thank them on behalf of our country .
tragically , some americans have lost their lives in defense of their fellow citizens , in defense of democracy .
and my heart goes out to their families .
we also regret and mourn the loss of innocent panamanians .
the brave panamanians elected by the people of panama in the elections last may , president guillermo endara and vice presidents calderon and ford , have assumed the rightful leadership of their country .
you remember those horrible pictures of newly elected vice president ford , covered head to toe with blood , beaten mercilessly by so - called " dignity battalions . "
well , the united states today recognizes the democratically elected government of president endara .
i will send our ambassador back to panama immediately .
key military objectives have been achieved .
most organized resistance has been eliminated , but the operation is not over yet : general noriega is in hiding .
and nevertheless , yesterday a dictator ruled panama , and today constitutionally elected leaders govern .
i have today directed the secretary of the treasury and the secretary of state to lift the economic sanctions with respect to the democratically elected government of panama and , in cooperation with that government , to take steps to effect an orderly unblocking of panamanian government assets in the united states .
i 'm fully committed to implement the panama canal treaties and turn over the canal to panama in the year 2000 .
the actions we have taken and the cooperation of a new , democratic government in panama will permit us to honor these commitments .
as soon as the new government recommends a qualified candidate -- panamanian -- to be administrator of the canal , as called for in the treaties , i will submit this nominee to the senate for expedited consideration .
i am committed to strengthening our relationship with the democratic nations in this hemisphere .
i will continue to seek solutions to the problems of this region through dialog and multilateral diplomacy .
i took this action only after reaching the conclusion that every other avenue was closed and the lives of american citizens were in grave danger .
i hope that the people of panama will put this dark chapter of dictatorship behind them and move forward together as citizens of a democratic panama with this government that they themselves have elected .
the united states is eager to work with the panamanian people in partnership and friendship to rebuild their economy .
the panamanian people want democracy , peace , and the chance for a better life in dignity and freedom .
the people of the united states seek only to support them in pursuit of these noble goals .
thank you very much .

in the life of a nation , we 're called upon to define who we are and what we believe .
sometimes these choices are not easy .
but today as president , i ask for your support in a decision i 've made to stand up for what 's right and condemn what 's wrong , all in the cause of peace .
at my direction , elements of the 82d airborne division as well as key units of the united states air force are arriving today to take up defensive positions in saudi arabia .
i took this action to assist the saudi arabian government in the defense of its homeland .
no one commits america 's armed forces to a dangerous mission lightly , but after perhaps unparalleled international consultation and exhausting every alternative , it became necessary to take this action .
let me tell you why .
less than a week ago , in the early morning hours of august 2d , iraqi armed forces , without provocation or warning , invaded a peaceful kuwait .
facing negligible resistance from its much smaller neighbor , iraq 's tanks stormed in blitzkrieg fashion through kuwait in a few short hours .
with more than 100,000 troops , along with tanks , artillery , and surface - to - surface missiles , iraq now occupies kuwait .
this aggression came just hours after saddam hussein specifically assured numerous countries in the area that there would be no invasion .
there is no justification whatsoever for this outrageous and brutal act of aggression .
a puppet regime imposed from the outside is unacceptable .
the acquisition of territory by force is unacceptable .
no one , friend or foe , should doubt our desire for peace ; and no one should underestimate our determination to confront aggression .
four simple principles guide our policy .
first , we seek the immediate , unconditional , and complete withdrawal of all iraqi forces from kuwait .
second , kuwait 's legitimate government must be restored to replace the puppet regime .
and third , my administration , as has been the case with every president from president roosevelt to president reagan , is committed to the security and stability of the persian gulf .
and fourth , i am determined to protect the lives of american citizens abroad .
immediately after the iraqi invasion , i ordered an embargo of all trade with iraq and , together with many other nations , announced sanctions that both freeze all iraqi assets in this country and protected kuwait 's assets .
the stakes are high .
iraq is already a rich and powerful country that possesses the world 's second largest reserves of oil and over a million men under arms .
it 's the fourth largest military in the world .
our country now imports nearly half the oil it consumes and could face a major threat to its economic independence .
much of the world is even more dependent upon imported oil and is even more vulnerable to iraqi threats .
we succeeded in the struggle for freedom in europe because we and our allies remain stalwart .
keeping the peace in the middle east will require no less .
we 're beginning a new era .
this new era can be full of promise , an age of freedom , a time of peace for all peoples .
but if history teaches us anything , it is that we must resist aggression or it will destroy our freedoms .
appeasement does not work .
as was the case in the 1930 's , we see in saddam hussein an aggressive dictator threatening his neighbors .
only 14 days ago , saddam hussein promised his friends he would not invade kuwait .
and 4 days ago , he promised the world he would withdraw .
and twice we have seen what his promises mean : his promises mean nothing .
in the last few days , i 've spoken with political leaders from the middle east , europe , asia , and the americas ; and i 've met with prime minister thatcher , prime minister mulroney , and nato secretary general woerner .
and all agree that iraq can not be allowed to benefit from its invasion of kuwait .
we agree that this is not an american problem or a european problem or a middle east problem : it is the world 's problem .
and that 's why , soon after the iraqi invasion , the united nations security council , without dissent , condemned iraq , calling for the immediate and unconditional withdrawal of its troops from kuwait .
the arab world , through both the arab league and the gulf cooperation council , courageously announced its opposition to iraqi aggression .
japan , the united kingdom , and france , and other governments around the world have imposed severe sanctions .
the soviet union and china ended all arms sales to iraq .
and this past monday , the united nations security council approved for the first time in 23 years mandatory sanctions under chapter vii of the united nations charter .
these sanctions , now enshrined in international law , have the potential to deny iraq the fruits of aggression while sharply limiting its ability to either import or export anything of value , especially oil .
i pledge here today that the united states will do its part to see that these sanctions are effective and to induce iraq to withdraw without delay from kuwait .
but we must recognize that iraq may not stop using force to advance its ambitions .
iraq has massed an enormous war machine on the saudi border capable of initiating hostilities with little or no additional preparation .
given the iraqi government 's history of aggression against its own citizens as well as its neighbors , to assume iraq will not attack again would be unwise and unrealistic .
and therefore , after consulting with king fahd , i sent secretary of defense dick cheney to discuss cooperative measures we could take .
following those meetings , the saudi government requested our help , and i responded to that request by ordering u. s. air and ground forces to deploy to the kingdom of saudi arabia .
let me be clear : the sovereign independence of saudi arabia is of vital interest to the united states .
this decision , which i shared with the congressional leadership , grows out of the longstanding friendship and security relationship between the united states and saudi arabia .
u. s. forces will work together with those of saudi arabia and other nations to preserve the integrity of saudi arabia and to deter further iraqi aggression .
through their presence , as well as through training and exercises , these multinational forces will enhance the overall capability of saudi armed forces to defend the kingdom .
i want to be clear about what we are doing and why .
america does not seek conflict , nor do we seek to chart the destiny of other nations .
but america will stand by her friends .
the mission of our troops is wholly defensive .
hopefully , they will not be needed long .
they will not initiate hostilities , but they will defend themselves , the kingdom of saudi arabia , and other friends in the persian gulf .
we are working around the clock to deter iraqi aggression and to enforce u. n. sanctions .
i 'm continuing my conversations with world leaders .
secretary of defense cheney has just returned from valuable consultations with president mubarak of egypt and king hassan of morocco .
secretary of state baker has consulted with his counterparts in many nations , including the soviet union , and today he heads for europe to consult with president ozal of turkey , a staunch friend of the united states .
and he 'll then consult with the nato foreign ministers .
i will ask oil - producing nations to do what they can to increase production in order to minimize any impact that oil flow reductions will have on the world economy .
and i will explore whether we and our allies should draw down our strategic petroleum reserves .
conservation measures can also help ; americans everywhere must do their part .
and one more thing : i 'm asking the oil companies to do their fair share .
they should show restraint and not abuse today 's uncertainties to raise prices .
standing up for our principles will not come easy .
it may take time and possibly cost a great deal .
but we are asking no more of anyone than of the brave young men and women of our armed forces and their families .
and i ask that in the churches around the country prayers be said for those who are committed to protect and defend america 's interests .
standing up for our principle is an american tradition .
as it has so many times before , it may take time and tremendous effort , but most of all , it will take unity of purpose .
as i 've witnessed throughout my life in both war and peace , america has never wavered when her purpose is driven by principle .
and in this august day , at home and abroad , i know she will do no less .
thank you , and god bless the united states of america .

mr. speaker , mr. president , and distinguished members of the house and senate , honored guests , and fellow citizens : less than 3 weeks ago , i joined you on the west front of this very building and , looking over the monuments to our proud past , offered you my hand in filling the next page of american history with a story of extended prosperity and continued peace .
and tonight i 'm back to offer you my plans as well .
the hand remains extended ; the sleeves are rolled up ; america is waiting ; and now we must produce .
together , we can build a better america .
it is comforting to return to this historic chamber .
here , 22 years ago , i first raised my hand to be sworn into public life .
so , tonight i feel as if i 'm returning home to friends .
and i intend , in the months and years to come , to give you what friends deserve : frankness , respect , and my best judgment about ways to improve america 's future .
in return , i ask for an honest commitment to our common mission of progress .
if we seize the opportunities on the road before us , there 'll be praise enough for all .
the people did n't send us here to bicker , and it 's time to govern .
and many presidents have come to this chamber in times of great crisis : war and depression , loss of national spirit .
and 8 years ago , i sat in that very chair as president reagan spoke of punishing inflation and devastatingly high interest rates and people out of work -- american confidence on the wane .
and our challenge is different .
we 're fortunate -- a much changed landscape lies before us tonight .
so , i do n't propose to reverse direction .
we 're headed the right way , but we can not rest .
we 're a people whose energy and drive have fueled our rise to greatness .
and we 're a forward - looking nation -- generous , yes , but ambitious , not for ourselves but for the world .
complacency is not in our character -- not before , not now , not ever .
and so , tonight we must take a strong america and make it even better .
we must address some very real problems .
we must establish some very clear priorities .
and we must make a very substantial cut in the federal budget deficit .
some people find that agenda impossible , but i 'm presenting to you tonight a realistic plan for tackling it .
my plan has four broad features : attention to urgent priorities , investment in the future , an attack on the deficit , and no new taxes .
this budget represents my best judgment of how we can address our priorities .
there are many areas in which we would all like to spend more than i propose ; i understand that .
but we can not until we get our fiscal house in order .
next year alone , thanks to economic growth , without any change in the law , the federal government will take in over $ 80 billion more than it does this year .
that 's right -- over $ 80 billion in new revenues , with no increases in taxes .
and our job is to allocate those new resources wisely .
we can afford to increase spending by a modest amount , but enough to invest in key priorities and still cut the deficit by almost 40 percent in 1 year .
and that will allow us to meet the targets set forth in the gramm - rudman - hollings law .
but to do that , we must recognize that growth above inflation in federal programs is not preordained , that not all spending initiatives were designed to be immortal .
i make this pledge tonight : my team and i are ready to work with the congress , to form a special leadership group , to negotiate in good faith , to work day and night -- if that 's what it takes -- to meet the budget targets and to produce a budget on time .
we can not settle for business as usual .
government by continuing resolution , or government by crisis , will not do .
and i ask the congress tonight to approve several measures which will make budgeting more sensible .
we could save time and improve efficiency by enacting 2-year budgets .
forty - three governors have the line - item veto .
presidents should have it , too .
and at the very least , when a president proposes to rescind federal spending , the congress should be required to vote on that proposal instead of killing it by inaction .
and i ask the congress to honor the public 's wishes by passing a constitutional amendment to require a balanced budget .
such an amendment , once phased in , will discipline both the congress and the executive branch .
several principles describe the kind of america i hope to build with your help in the years ahead .
we will not have the luxury of taking the easy , spendthrift approach to solving problems because higher spending and higher taxes put economic growth at risk .
economic growth provides jobs and hope .
economic growth enables us to pay for social programs .
economic growth enhances the security of the nation , and low tax rates create economic growth .
i believe in giving americans greater freedom and greater choice .
and i will work for choice for american families , whether in the housing in which they live , the schools to which they send their children , or the child care they select for their young .
you see , i believe that we have an obligation to those in need , but that government should not be the provider of first resort for things that the private sector can produce better .
i believe in a society that is free from discrimination and bigotry of any kind .
and i will work to knock down the barriers left by past discrimination and to build a more tolerant society that will stop such barriers from ever being built again .
i believe that family and faith represent the moral compass of the nation .
and i 'll work to make them strong , for as benjamin franklin said : " if a sparrow can not fall to the ground without his notice , can a great nation rise without his aid ? "
and i believe in giving people the power to make their own lives better through growth and opportunity .
and together , let 's put power in the hands of people .
three weeks ago , we celebrated the bicentennial inaugural , the 200th anniversary of the first presidency .
and if you look back , one thing is so striking about the way the founding fathers looked at america .
they did n't talk about themselves .
they talked about posterity .
they talked about the future .
and we , too , must think in terms bigger than ourselves .
we must take actions today that will ensure a better tomorrow .
we must extend american leadership in technology , increase long - term investment , improve our educational system , and boost productivity .
these are the keys to building a better future , and here are some of my recommendations : 
 i propose almost $ 2.2 billion for the national science foundation to promote basic research and keep us on track to double its budget by 1993 .
i propose to make permanent the tax credit for research and development .
i 've asked vice president quayle to chair a new task force on competitiveness .
and i request funding for nasa   and a strong space program , an increase of almost $ 2.4 billion over the current fiscal year .
we must have a manned space station ; a vigorous , safe space shuttle program ; and more commercial development in space .
the space program should always go " full throttle up . "
and that 's not just our ambition ; it 's our destiny .
i propose that we cut the maximum tax rate on capital gains to increase long - term investment .
history on this is clear -- this will increase revenues , help savings , and create new jobs .
we wo n't be competitive if we leave whole sectors of america behind .
this is the year we should finally enact urban enterprise zones and bring hope to the inner cities .
but the most important competitiveness program of all is one which improves education in america .
when some of our students actually have trouble locating america on a map of the world , it is time for us to map a new approach to education .
we must reward excellence and cut through bureaucracy .
we must help schools that need help the most .
we must give choice to parents , students , teachers , and principals ; and we must hold all concerned accountable .
in education , we can not tolerate mediocrity .
i want to cut that dropout rate and make america a more literate nation , because what it really comes down to is this : the longer our graduation lines are today , the shorter our unemployment lines will be tomorrow .
so , tonight i 'm proposing the following initiatives : the beginning of a $ 500 million program to reward america 's best schools , merit schools ; the creation of special presidential awards for the best teachers in every state , because excellence should be rewarded ; the establishment of a new program of national science scholars , one each year for every member of the house and senate , to give this generation of students a special incentive to excel in science and mathematics ; the expanded use of magnet schools , which give families and students greater choice ; and a new program to encourage alternative certification , which will let talented people from all fields teach in our classrooms .
i 've said i 'd like to be the " education president . "
and tonight , i 'd ask you to join me by becoming the " education congress . "
just last week , as i settled into this new office , i received a letter from a mother in pennsylvania who had been struck by my message in the inaugural address . "
not 12 hours before , " she wrote , " my husband and = i received word that our son was addicted to cocaine .
he had the world at his feet .
bright , gifted , personable -- he could have done anything with his life .
and now he has chosen cocaine . " "
and please , " she wrote , " find a way to curb the supply of cocaine .
get tough with the pushers .
our son needs your help . "
my friends , that voice crying out for help could be the voice of your own neighbor , your own friend , your own son .
over 23 million americans used illegal drugs last year , at a staggering cost to our nation 's well - being .
let this be recorded as the time when america rose up and said no to drugs .
the scourge of drugs must be stopped .
and i am asking tonight for an increase of almost a billion dollars in budget outlays to escalate the war against drugs .
the war must be waged on all fronts .
our new drug czar , bill bennett , and i will be shoulder to shoulder in the executive branch leading the charge .
some money will be used to expand treatment to the poor and to young mothers .
this will offer the helping hand to the many innocent victims of drugs , like the thousands of babies born addicted or with aids because of the mother 's addiction .
some will be used to cut the waiting time for treatment .
some money will be devoted to those urban schools where the emergency is now the worst .
and much of it will be used to protect our borders , with help from the coast guard and the customs service , the departments of state and justice , and , yes , the u. s. military .
i mean to get tough on the drug criminals .
and let me be clear : this president will back up those who put their lives on the line every single day -- our local police officers .
my budget asks for beefed - up prosecution , for a new attack on organized crime , and for enforcement of tough sentences -- and for the worst kingpins , that means the death penalty .
i also want to make sure that when a drug dealer is convicted there 's a cell waiting for him .
and he should not go free because prisons are too full .
and so , let the word go out : if you 're caught and convicted , you will do time .
but for all we do in law enforcement , in interdiction and treatment , we will never win this war on drugs unless we stop the demand for drugs .
so , some of this increase will be used to educate the young about the dangers of drugs .
we must involve the parents .
we must involve the teachers .
we must involve the communities .
and , my friends , we must involve ourselves , each and every one of us in this concern .
one problem related to drug use demands our urgent attention and our continuing compassion , and that is the terrible tragedy of aids .
i 'm asking for $ 1.6 billion for education to prevent the disease and for research to find a cure .
if we 're to protect our future , we need a new attitude about the environment .
we must protect the air we breathe .
i will send to you shortly legislation for a new , more effective clean air act .
it will include a plan to reduce by date certain the emissions which cause acid rain , because the time for study alone has passed , and the time for action is now .
we must make use of clean coal .
my budget contains full funding , on schedule , for the clean coal technology agreement that we 've made with canada .
we 've made that agreement with canada , and we intend to honor that agreement .
we must not neglect our parks .
so , i 'm asking to fund new acquisitions under the land and water conservation fund .
we must protect our oceans .
and i support new penalties against those who would dump medical waste and other trash into our oceans .
the age of the needle on the beaches must end .
and in some cases , the gulfs and oceans off our shores hold the promise of oil and gas reserves which can make our nation more secure and less dependent on foreign oil .
and when those with the most promise can be tapped safely , as with much of the alaska national wildlife refuge , we should proceed .
but we must use caution ; we must respect the environment .
and so , tonight i 'm calling for the indefinite postponement of three lease sales which have raised troubling questions , two off the coast of california and one which could threaten the everglades in florida .
action on these three lease sales will await the conclusion of a special task force set up to measure the potential for environmental damage .
i 'm directing the attorney general and the administrator of the environmental protection agency to use every tool at their disposal to speed and toughen the enforcement of our laws against toxic - waste dumpers .
i want faster cleanups and tougher enforcement of penalties against polluters .
in addition to caring for our future , we must care for those around us .
a decent society shows compassion for the young , the elderly , the vulnerable , and the poor .
our first obligation is to the most vulnerable -- infants , poor mothers , children living in poverty -- and my proposed budget recognizes this .
i ask for full funding of medicaid , an increase of over $ 3 billion , and an expansion of the program to include coverage of pregnant women who are near the poverty line .
i believe we should help working families cope with the burden of child care .
our help should be aimed at those who need it most : low - income families with young children .
i support a new child care tax credit that will aim our efforts at exactly those families , without discriminating against mothers who choose to stay at home .
now , i know there are competing proposals .
but remember this : the overwhelming majority of all preschool child care is now provided by relatives and neighbors and churches and community groups .
families who choose these options should remain eligible for help .
parents should have choice .
and for those children who are unwanted or abused or whose parents are deceased , we should encourage adoption .
i propose to reenact the tax deduction for adoption expenses and to double it to $ 3,000 .
let 's make it easier for these kids to have parents who love them .
we have a moral contract with our senior citizens .
and in this budget , social security is fully funded , including a full cost - of - living adjustment .
we must honor our contract .
we must care about those in the shadow of life , and i , like many americans , am deeply troubled by the plight of the homeless .
the causes of homelessness are many ; the history is long .
but the moral imperative to act is clear .
thanks to the deep well of generosity in this great land , many organizations already contribute , but we in government can not stand on the sidelines .
in my budget , i ask for greater support for emergency food and shelter , for health services and measures to prevent substance abuse , and for clinics for the mentally ill .
and i propose a new initiative involving the full range of government agencies .
we must confront this national shame .
there 's another issue that i 've decided to mention here tonight .
i 've long believed that the people of puerto rico should have the right to determine their own political future .
personally , i strongly favor statehood .
but i urge the congress to take the necessary steps to allow the people to decide in a referendum .
certain problems , the result of decades of unwise practices , threaten the health and security of our people .
left unattended , they will only get worse .
but we can act now to put them behind us .
earlier this week , i announced my support for a plan to restore the financial and moral integrity of our savings system .
i ask congress to enact our reform proposals within 45 days .
we must not let this situation fester .
we owe it to the savers in this country to solve this problem .
certainly , the savings of americans must remain secure .
let me be clear : insured depositors will continue to be fully protected , but any plan to refinance the system must be accompanied by major reform .
our proposals will prevent such a crisis from recurring .
the best answer is to make sure that a mess like this will never happen again .
the majority of thrifts in communities across the nation have been honest .
they 've played a major role in helping families achieve the dream of home ownership .
but make no mistake , those who are corrupt , those who break the law , must be kicked out of the business ; and they should go to jail .
we face a massive task in cleaning up the waste left from decades of environmental neglect at america 's nuclear weapons plants .
clearly , we must modernize these plants and operate them safely .
that 's not at issue ; our national security depends on it .
but beyond that , we must clean up the old mess that 's been left behind .
and i propose in this budget to more than double our current effort to do so .
this will allow us to identify the exact nature of the various problems so we can clean them up , and clean them up we will .
we 've been fortunate during these past 8 years .
america is a stronger nation than it was in 1980 .
morale in our armed forces has been restored ; our resolve has been shown .
our readiness has been improved , and we are at peace .
there can no longer be any doubt that peace has been made more secure through strength .
and when america is stronger , the world is safer .
most people do n't realize that after the successful restoration of our strength , the pentagon budget has actually been reduced in real terms for each of the last 4 years .
we can not tolerate continued real reduction in defense .
in light of the compelling need to reduce the deficit , however , i support a 1-year freeze in the military budget , something i proposed last fall in my flexible freeze plan .
and this freeze will apply for only 1 year , and after that , increases above inflation will be required .
i will not sacrifice american preparedness , and i will not compromise american strength .
i should be clear on the conditions attached to my recommendation for the coming year : the savings must be allocated to those priorities for investing in our future that i 've spoken about tonight .
this defense freeze must be a part of a comprehensive budget agreement which meets the targets spelled out in gramm - rudman - hollings law without raising taxes and which incorporates reforms in the budget process .
i 've directed the national security council to review our national security and defense policies and report back to me within 90 days to ensure that our capabilities and resources meet our commitments and strategies .
i 'm also charging the department of defense with the task of developing a plan to improve the defense procurement process and management of the pentagon , one which will fully implement the packard commission report .
many of these changes can only be made with the participation of the congress , and so , i ask for your help .
we need fewer regulations .
we need less bureaucracy .
we need multiyear procurement and 2-year budgeting .
and frankly -- and do n't take this wrong -- we need less congressional micromanagement of our nation 's military policy .
i detect a slight division on that question , but nevertheless -- .
securing a more peaceful world is perhaps the most important priority i 'd like to address tonight .
you know , we meet at a time of extraordinary hope .
never before in this century have our values of freedom , democracy , and economic opportunity been such a powerful and intellectual force around the globe .
never before has our leadership been so crucial , because while america has its eyes on the future , the world has its eyes on america .
and it 's a time of great change in the world , and especially in the soviet union .
prudence and common sense dictate that we try to understand the full meaning of the change going on there , review our policies , and then proceed with caution .
but i 've personally assured general secretary gorbachev that at the conclusion of such a review we will be ready to move forward .
we will not miss any opportunity to work for peace .
the fundamental facts remain that the soviets retain a very powerful military machine in the service of objectives which are still too often in conflict with ours .
so , let us take the new openness seriously , but let 's also be realistic .
and let 's always be strong .
there are some pressing issues we must address .
i will vigorously pursue the strategic defense initiative .
the spread , and even use , of sophisticated weaponry threatens global security as never before .
chemical weapons must be banned from the face of the earth , never to be used again .
and look , this wo n't be easy .
verification -- extraordinarily difficult , but civilization and human decency demand that we try .
and the spread of nuclear weapons must be stopped .
and i 'll work to strengthen the hand of the international atomic energy agency .
our diplomacy must work every day against the proliferation of nuclear weapons .
and around the globe , we must continue to be freedom 's best friend .
and we must stand firm for self - determination and democracy in central america , including in nicaragua .
it is my strongly held conviction that when people are given the chance they inevitably will choose a free press , freedom of worship , and certifiably free and fair elections .
we must strengthen the alliance of the industrial democracies , as solid a force for peace as the world has ever known .
and this is an alliance forged by the power of our ideals , not the pettiness of our differences .
so , let 's lift our sights to rise above fighting about beef hormones , to building a better future , to move from protectionism to progress .
i 've asked the secretary of state to visit europe next week and to consult with our allies on the wide range of challenges and opportunities we face together , including east - west relations .
and i look forward to meeting with our nato partners in the near future .
and i , too , shall begin a trip shortly to the far reaches of the pacific basin , where the winds of democracy are creating new hope and the power of free markets is unleashing a new force .
when i served as our representative in china 14 or 15 years ago , few would have predicted the scope of the changes we 've witnessed since then .
but in preparing for this trip , i was struck by something i came across from a chinese writer .
he was speaking of his country , decades ago , but his words speak to each of us in america tonight . "
today , " he said , " we 're afraid of the simple words like ' goodness ' and ' mercy ' and ' kindness . ' "
my friends , if we 're to succeed as a nation , we must rediscover those words .
in just 3 days , we mark the birthday of abraham lincoln , the man who saved our union and gave new meaning to the word " opportunity . "
lincoln once said : " i hold that while man exists , it is his duty to improve not only his own condition but to assist in ameliorating that of mankind . "
it is this broader mission to which i call all americans , because the definition of a successful life must include serving others .
and to the young people of america , who sometimes feel left out , i ask you tonight to give us the benefit of your talent and energy through a new program called yes , for youth entering service to america .
to those men and women in business , remember the ultimate end of your work : to make a better product , to create better lives .
i ask you to plan for the longer term and avoid that temptation of quick and easy paper profits .
to the brave men and women who wear the uniform of the united states of america , thank you .
your calling is a high one : to be the defenders of freedom and the guarantors of liberty .
and i want you to know that this nation is grateful for your service .
to the farmers of america , we appreciate the bounty you provide .
we will work with you to open foreign markets to american agricultural products .
and to the parents of america , i ask you to get involved in your child 's schooling .
check on the homework , go to the school , meet the teachers , care about what is happening there .
it 's not only your child 's future on the line , it 's america 's .
to kids in our cities , do n't give up hope .
say no to drugs ; stay in school .
and , yes , " keep hope alive . "
to those 37 million americans with some form of disability , you belong in the economic mainstream .
we need your talents in america 's work force .
disabled americans must become full partners in america 's opportunity society .
to the families of america watching tonight in your living rooms , hold fast to your dreams because ultimately america 's future rests in your hands .
and to my friends in this chamber , i ask your cooperation to keep america growing while cutting the deficit .
that 's only fair to those who now have no vote : the generations to come .
let them look back and say that we had the foresight to understand that a time of peace and prosperity is not the time to rest but a time to press forward , a time to invest in the future .
and let all americans remember that no problem of human making is too great to be overcome by human ingenuity , human energy , and the untiring hope of the human spirit .
i believe this .
i would not have asked to be your president if i did n't .
and tomorrow the debate on the plan i 've put forward begins , and i ask the congress to come forward with your own proposals .
let 's not question each other 's motives .
let 's debate , let 's negotiate ; but let us solve the problem .
recalling anniversaries may not be my specialty in speeches --   -- but tonight is one of some note .
on february 9th , 1941 , just 48 years ago tonight , sir winston churchill took to the airwaves during britain 's hour of peril .
he 'd received from president roosevelt a hand - carried letter quoting longfellow 's famous poem : " sail on , o ship of state !
sail on , o union , strong and great !
humanity with all its fears , with all the hopes of future years , is hanging breathless on thy fate ! "
and churchill responded on this night by radio broadcast to a nation at war , but he directed his words to franklin roosevelt . "
we shall not fail or falter , " he said . "
we shall not weaken or tire .
give us the tools , and we will finish the job . "
tonight , almost half a century later , our peril may be less immediate , but the need for perseverance and clear - sighted fortitude is just as great .
now , as then , there are those who say it ca n't be done .
there are voices who say that america 's best days have passed , that we 're bound by constraints , threatened by problems , surrounded by troubles which limit our ability to hope .
well , tonight i remain full of hope .
we americans have only begun on our mission of goodness and greatness .
and to those timid souls , i repeat the plea : " give us the tools , and we will do the job . "
thank you .
god bless you , and god bless america .

what i heard i liked .
once again , this might be an appropriate time for barbara and me to thank the president and mrs. gorbachev for this fantastic hospitality .
and yes , i could n't agree more about the productive nature of the talks , the enhancement of mutual understanding .
this is not diplomatic language , in my view , this is fact .
you know my views on the start agreement .
indeed , it 's the culmination of a long and historic negotiation .
and i happen to believe that the winners on this are the young people , not just in the soviet union , not just in the united states but all around the world .
and we are taking major steps in transforming our economic relations .
president gorbachev touched on some of this .
but we 're going to send up the trade agreement to the u. s. congress .
we 're going to grant most - favored - nation status now that the technicalities have been worked out .
we have fulfilled thus our malta goal , mr. president , of normalizing our economic relationship .
we agreed here to tackle the next challenge -- president gorbachev talked about that -- furthering economic reform in the u. s.s. r. , and seeking to integrate the soviet economy into the international system .
we 're going forward with space cooperation , cooperation in the environment .
and we have several joint projects in mind there .
building on our historic cooperation during the gulf crisis , we discussed -- the president and i discussed our partnership in resolving longstanding regional problems .
as you mentioned , we 're putting out statements on yugoslavia , central america .
and , indeed , i want to comment now just briefly on the middle east before taking your questions .
we did reaffirm our mutual commitment to promote peace and genuine reconciliation between the arab states , israel , and the palestinians .
and we believe there is an historic opportunity right now to launch a process that can lead to a just and enduring peace and to a comprehensive settlement in the middle east .
we share the strong conviction that this historic opportunity must not be lost .
and while recognizing that peace can not be imposed , it can only result from direct negotiations between the parties , the united states and the soviet union pledge to do their utmost to promote and sustain the peacemaking process .
and to that end , the united states and the soviet union , acting as cosponsors , are going to work to convene an october peace conference designed to launch bilateral and multilateral negotiations .
invitations to the conference will be issued at least 10 days prior to the date the conference is to convene .
and in the interim , secretary baker and foreign minister bessmertnykh will continue to work with the parties to prepare for this conference .
and i am today asking secretary of state jim baker to return to the middle east to obtain israel 's answer to our proposal for peace .
and again , my thanks to you , and i 'd be prepared to take questions along with you , sir .
yugoslavia 





  i would only add , sir , that inasmuch as that was a joint statement , that expresses our continued position as well .
well , i would wait and let secretary baker answer that question after this next meeting .
and if i had to express a degree of optimism or pessimism , i 'd say i 'm a little more optimistic today .
but the visit of jim baker now is for what we said here , to obtain israel 's answer to our proposal for peace .
and if i had the answer in my pocket -- or he did -- i 'd expect that we would say so .
i would only add to that , that though no date is set , it is my view -- and i have n't always held this view -- that a meeting without an agenda is a good idea from time to time between the soviet president and the president of the united states .
and with this -- president gorbachev talked about arms control and regional problems and other problems -- but as this dynamic autonomy begins to move , a chance for a dynamic economy here , there 's going to be much more to talk about on the economic side than we 've ever had before -- cooperation , partnerships , joint ventures .
the whole approach to economics that he has endorsed that is going to benefit , i believe , the soviet union , and i think there 's enormous potential for the united states .
so , it is my view that we 've got plenty to talk about .
and i , for one , would be prepared to , as i 've stated before , to have a meeting where there 's not a crisis out there to be managed ; rather we can be sure that we 're not two ships passing in the night -- the analogy i used , i believe , in malta -- appropriately .
and i look forward to future meetings because you get a lot done where you ca n't put out -- sign a 3-point program or a 20-point protocol .
but a lot is done just by the kinds of conversations we 've had today .
well , i do n't think there 's a connection , but i do regret the violence .
i listened to what president gorbachev said about the discussion .
we clearly favor negotiation -- he knows that -- that would lead to a reduction of cross - border violence from both sides .
and obviously , i 'd like to join in expressing my regrets to those families whose loved ones are lost .
but the president immediately got on this and said they 're conducting an investigation .
i think there 's hope that the investigation will be cooperative between the lithuanian side and byelorussia 's side .
and so , we ca n't prejudge the incident , but i had an opportunity to express my views to president gorbachev on the whole question of the baltic states .
i do n't think it 's fair to link a border incident before you know what happened to that question , however .
soviet economic integration 





  well , let me say that 's a serious objective to start with .
secondly , i believe that active participation in these international financial institutions and the status that was deemed best by the g - 7 is the most important thing that the soviets can do right now .
i have freed up , as you heard today , certain trade benefits or normalizing the trade procedures that , in my view , will help .
and we 've done that since the meeting in london .
but the answer is , full participation -- full benefit of these international institutions require full knowledge and steps towards the privatization and toward convertability , all the things that i believe the soviet union wants .
so , work with the international organizations and then bilaterally do what we 've done and other countries will be doing , too , i 'm sure , to remove the underbrush , remove the barriers to bilateral economic cooperation .
so , quite a bit has happened between us since paris .
and we look forward with our representatives in these international organizations to working very cooperatively with the soviet leaders .
the very fact that -- i would n't suggest that a breakaway republic is going to use a nuclear weapon against the united states , but i would suggest that we have every reason in the world to be concerned about renegades -- not in these areas , perhaps ; i hope not -- getting hold of nuclear weapons .
and that 's one of the reasons i strongly support our gpals program that is being debated in the senate right now .
but in my view , other countries do possess nuclear weapons .
it 's not just the soviet union and the united states .
and i do believe that we are on the right path by the path that president gorbachev has outlined today on following on existing agreements .
so , rather than try to have a ethereal or a utopian answer , let 's follow through practically , as he suggested .
and then as far as the u. s. is concerned , i 'd like us to go forward with a system that puts nobody at threat , nobody at risk .
the only thing at risk is an errant nuclear missile aiming at a country .
and that 's why i support the defensive approach , and that 's why i think one of the lessons out of the iraq war -- and maybe president gorbachev reads this differently -- is that defenses work .
and though we 're talking about a different concept now , an expanded concept , a more high - tech concept , i think a lot of lives were saved by defense .
so , that 's my reply .
what i heard i liked .
once again , this might be an appropriate time for barbara and me to thank the president and mrs. gorbachev for this fantastic hospitality .
and yes , i could n't agree more about the productive nature of the talks , the enhancement of mutual understanding .
this is not diplomatic language , in my view , this is fact .
you know my views on the start agreement .
indeed , it 's the culmination of a long and historic negotiation .
and i happen to believe that the winners on this are the young people , not just in the soviet union , not just in the united states but all around the world .
and we are taking major steps in transforming our economic relations .
president gorbachev touched on some of this .
but we 're going to send up the trade agreement to the u. s. congress .
we 're going to grant most - favored - nation status now that the technicalities have been worked out .
we have fulfilled thus our malta goal , mr. president , of normalizing our economic relationship .
we agreed here to tackle the next challenge -- president gorbachev talked about that -- furthering economic reform in the u. s.s. r. , and seeking to integrate the soviet economy into the international system .
we 're going forward with space cooperation , cooperation in the environment .
and we have several joint projects in mind there .
building on our historic cooperation during the gulf crisis , we discussed -- the president and i discussed our partnership in resolving longstanding regional problems .
as you mentioned , we 're putting out statements on yugoslavia , central america .
and , indeed , i want to comment now just briefly on the middle east before taking your questions .
we did reaffirm our mutual commitment to promote peace and genuine reconciliation between the arab states , israel , and the palestinians .
and we believe there is an historic opportunity right now to launch a process that can lead to a just and enduring peace and to a comprehensive settlement in the middle east .
we share the strong conviction that this historic opportunity must not be lost .
and while recognizing that peace can not be imposed , it can only result from direct negotiations between the parties , the united states and the soviet union pledge to do their utmost to promote and sustain the peacemaking process .
and to that end , the united states and the soviet union , acting as cosponsors , are going to work to convene an october peace conference designed to launch bilateral and multilateral negotiations .
invitations to the conference will be issued at least 10 days prior to the date the conference is to convene .
and in the interim , secretary baker and foreign minister bessmertnykh will continue to work with the parties to prepare for this conference .
and i am today asking secretary of state jim baker to return to the middle east to obtain israel 's answer to our proposal for peace .
and again , my thanks to you , and i 'd be prepared to take questions along with you , sir .
i would only add , sir , that inasmuch as that was a joint statement , that expresses our continued position as well .
well , i would wait and let secretary baker answer that question after this next meeting .
and if i had to express a degree of optimism or pessimism , i 'd say i 'm a little more optimistic today .
but the visit of jim baker now is for what we said here , to obtain israel 's answer to our proposal for peace .
and if i had the answer in my pocket -- or he did -- i 'd expect that we would say so .
i would only add to that , that though no date is set , it is my view -- and i have n't always held this view -- that a meeting without an agenda is a good idea from time to time between the soviet president and the president of the united states .
and with this -- president gorbachev talked about arms control and regional problems and other problems -- but as this dynamic autonomy begins to move , a chance for a dynamic economy here , there 's going to be much more to talk about on the economic side than we 've ever had before -- cooperation , partnerships , joint ventures .
the whole approach to economics that he has endorsed that is going to benefit , i believe , the soviet union , and i think there 's enormous potential for the united states .
so , it is my view that we 've got plenty to talk about .
and i , for one , would be prepared to , as i 've stated before , to have a meeting where there 's not a crisis out there to be managed ; rather we can be sure that we 're not two ships passing in the night -- the analogy i used , i believe , in malta -- appropriately .
and i look forward to future meetings because you get a lot done where you ca n't put out -- sign a 3-point program or a 20-point protocol .
but a lot is done just by the kinds of conversations we 've had today .
well , i do n't think there 's a connection , but i do regret the violence .
i listened to what president gorbachev said about the discussion .
we clearly favor negotiation -- he knows that -- that would lead to a reduction of cross - border violence from both sides .
and obviously , i 'd like to join in expressing my regrets to those families whose loved ones are lost .
but the president immediately got on this and said they 're conducting an investigation .
i think there 's hope that the investigation will be cooperative between the lithuanian side and byelorussia 's side .
and so , we ca n't prejudge the incident , but i had an opportunity to express my views to president gorbachev on the whole question of the baltic states .
i do n't think it 's fair to link a border incident before you know what happened to that question , however .
well , let me say that 's a serious objective to start with .
secondly , i believe that active participation in these international financial institutions and the status that was deemed best by the g - 7 is the most important thing that the soviets can do right now .
i have freed up , as you heard today , certain trade benefits or normalizing the trade procedures that , in my view , will help .
and we 've done that since the meeting in london .
but the answer is , full participation -- full benefit of these international institutions require full knowledge and steps towards the privatization and toward convertability , all the things that i believe the soviet union wants .
so , work with the international organizations and then bilaterally do what we 've done and other countries will be doing , too , i 'm sure , to remove the underbrush , remove the barriers to bilateral economic cooperation .
so , quite a bit has happened between us since paris .
and we look forward with our representatives in these international organizations to working very cooperatively with the soviet leaders .
the very fact that -- i would n't suggest that a breakaway republic is going to use a nuclear weapon against the united states , but i would suggest that we have every reason in the world to be concerned about renegades -- not in these areas , perhaps ; i hope not -- getting hold of nuclear weapons .
and that 's one of the reasons i strongly support our gpals program that is being debated in the senate right now .
but in my view , other countries do possess nuclear weapons .
it 's not just the soviet union and the united states .
and i do believe that we are on the right path by the path that president gorbachev has outlined today on following on existing agreements .
so , rather than try to have a ethereal or a utopian answer , let 's follow through practically , as he suggested .
and then as far as the u. s. is concerned , i 'd like us to go forward with a system that puts nobody at threat , nobody at risk .
the only thing at risk is an errant nuclear missile aiming at a country .
and that 's why i support the defensive approach , and that 's why i think one of the lessons out of the iraq war -- and maybe president gorbachev reads this differently -- is that defenses work .
and though we 're talking about a different concept now , an expanded concept , a more high - tech concept , i think a lot of lives were saved by defense .
so , that 's my reply .

i have many friends to thank tonight .
i thank the voters who supported me .
i thank the gallant men who entered the contest for the presidency this year , and who have honored me with their support .
and , for their kind and stirring words , i thank governor tom kean of new jersey - senator phil gramm of texas - president gerald ford - and my friend , president ronald reagan .
i accept your nomination for president .
i mean to run hard , to fight hard , to stand on the issues - and i mean to win .
there are a lot of great stories in politics about the underdog winning - and this is going to be one of them .
and we 're going to win with the help of senator dan quayle of indiana - a young leader who has become a forceful voice in preparing america 's workers for the labor force of the future .
born in the middle of the century , in the middle of america , and holding the promise of the future - i 'm proud to have dan quayle at my side .
many of you have asked , " when will this campaign really begin ? "
i have come to this hall to tell you , and to tell america : tonight is the night .
for seven and a half years i have helped a president conduct the most difficult job on earth .
ronald reagan asked for , and received , my candor .
he never asked for , but he did receive , my loyalty .
those of you who saw the president 's speech this week , and listened to the simple truth of his words , will understand my loyalty all these years .
but now you must see me for what i am : the republican candidate for president of the united states .
and now i turn to the american people to share my hopes and intentions , and why - and where - i wish to lead .
and so tonight is for big things .
but i 'll try to be fair to the other side .
i 'll try to hold my charisma in check .
i reject the temptation to engage in personal references .
my approach this evening is , as sergeant joe friday used to say , " just the facts , ma'm."after all , the facts are on our side .
i seek the presidency for a single purpose , a purpose that has motivated millions of americans across the years and the ocean voyages .
i seek the presidency to build a better america .
it is that simple - and that big .
i am a man who sees life in terms of missions - missions defined and missions completed .
when i was a torpedo bomber pilot they defined the mission for us .
before we took off we all understood that no matter what , you try to reach the target .
there have been other missions for me - congress , china , the cia .
but i am here tonight - and i am your candidate - because the most important work of my life is to complete the mission we started in 1980 .
how do we complete it ?
we build it .
the stakes are high this year and the choice is crucial , for the differences between the two candidates are as deep and wide as they have ever been in our long history .
not only two very different men , but two very different ideas of the future will be voted on this election day .
what it all comes down to is this : my opponent 's view of the world sees a long slow decline for our country , an inevitable fall mandated by impersonal historical forces .
but america is not a decline .
america is a rising nation .
he sees america as another pleasant country on the un roll call , somewhere between albania and zimbabwe .
i see america as the leader - a unique nation with a special role in the world .
this has been called the american century , because in it we were the dominant force for good in the world .
we saved europe , cured polio , we went to the moon , and lit the world with our culture .
now we are on the verge of a new century , and what country 's name will it bear ?
i say it will be another american century .
our work is not done - our force is not spent .
there are those who say there is n't much of a difference this year .
but america , do n't let 'em fool ya .
two parties this year ask for your support .
both will speak of growth and peace .
but only one has proved it can deliver .
two parties this year ask for your trust , but only one has earned it .
eight years ago i stood here with ronald reagan and we promised , together , to break with the past and return america to her greatness .
eight years later look at what the american people have produced : the highest level of economic growth in our entire history - and the lowest level of world tensions in more than fifty years .
some say this is n't an election about ideology , it 's an election about competence .
well , it 's nice of them to want to play on our field .
but this election is n't only about competence , for competence is a narrow ideal .
competence makes the trains run on time but does n't know where they 're going .
competence is the creed of the technocrat who makes sure the gears mesh but does n't for a second understand the magic of the machine .
the truth is , this election is about the beliefs we share , the values we honor , the principles we hold dear .
but since someone brought up competence . ...
consider the size of our triumph : a record high percentage of americans with jobs , a record high rate of new businesses - a record high rate of real personal income .
these are the facts .
and one way you know our opponents know the facts is that to attack the record they have to misrepresent it .
they call it a swiss cheese economy .
well , that 's the way it may look to the three blind mice .
but when they were in charge it was all holes and no cheese .
inflation was 12 percent when we came in .
we got it down to four .
interest rates were more than 21 .
we cut them in half .
unemployment was up and climbing , now it 's the lowest in 14 years .
my friends , eight years ago this economy was flat on its back - intensive care .
we came in and gave it emergency treatment : got the temperature down by lowering regulation , got the blood pressure down when we lowered taxes .
pretty soon the patient was up , back on his feet , and stronger than ever .
and now who do we hear knocking on the door but the doctors who made him sick .
and they 're telling us to put them in charge of the case again .
my friends , they 're lucky we do n't hit them with a malpractice suit!we've created 17 million new jobs in the past five years - more than twice as many as europe and japan combined .
and they 're good jobs .
the majority of them created in the past six years paid an average of more than $ 22,000 a year .
someone better take a message to michael : tell him we 've been creating good jobs at good wages .
the fact is , they talk - we deliver .
they promise - we perform .
there are millions of young americans in their 20 's who barely remember the days of gas lines and unemployment lines .
now they 're marrying and starting careers .
to those young people i say , " you have the opportunity you deserve - and i 'm not going to let them take it away from you."there are millions of older americans who were brutalized by inflation .
we arrested it - and we 're not going to let it out on furlough .
we 're going to keep the social security trust fund sound , and out of reach of the big spenders .
to america 's elderly i say , " once again you have the security that is your right - and i 'm not going to let them take it away from you."i know the liberal democrats are worried about the economy .
they 're worried it 's going to remain strong .
and they 're right , it is .
with the right leadership .
but let 's be frank .
things are n't perfect in this country .
there are people who have n't tasted the fruits of the expansion .
i 've talked to farmers about the bills they ca n't pay .
i 've been to the factories that feel the strain of change .
i 've seen the urban children who play amidst the shattered glass and shattered lives .
and there are the homeless .
and you know , it does n't do any good to debate endlessly which policy mistake of the ' 70 's is responsible .
they 're there .
we have to help them .
but what we must remember if we are to be responsible - and compassionate - is that economic growth is the key to our endeavors .
i want growth that stays , that broadens , and that touches , finally , all americans , form the hollows of kentucky to the sunlit streets of denver , from the suburbs of chicago to the broad avenues of new york , from the oil fields of oklahoma to the farms of the great plains .
can we do it ?
of course we can .
we know how .
we 've done it .
if we continue to grow at our current rate , we will be able to produce 30 million jobs in the next eight years .
we will do it - by maintaining our commitment to free and fair trade , by keeping government spending down , and by keeping taxes down .
our economic life is not the only test of our success , overwhelms all the others , and that is the issue of peace .
one issue look at the world on this bright august night .
the spirit of democracy is sweeping the pacific rim .
china feels the winds of change .
new democracies assert themselves in south america .
one by one the unfree places fall , not to the force of arms but to the force of an idea : freedom works .
we have a new relationship with the soviet union .
the inf treaty - the beginning of the soviet withdrawal from afghanistan - the beginning of the end of the soviet proxy war in angola , and with it the independence of namibia .
iran and iraq move toward peace .
it is a watershed .
it is no accident .
it happened when we acted on the ancient knowledge that strength and clarity lead to peace - weakness and ambivalence lead to war .
weakness and ambivalence lead to war .
weakness tempts aggressors .
strength stops them .
i will not allow this country to be made weak again .
the tremors in the soviet world continue .
the hard earth there has not yet settled .
perhaps what is happening will change our world forever .
perhaps what is happening will change our world forever .
perhaps not .
a prudent skepticism is in order .
and so is hope .
either way , we 're in an unprecedented position to change the nature of our relationship .
not by preemptive concession - but by keeping our strength .
not by yielding up defense systems with nothing won in return - but by hard cool engagement in the tug and pull of diplomacy .
my life has been lived in the shadow of war - i almost lost my life in one .
i hate war .
i love peace .
we have peace .
and i am not going to let anyone take it away from us .
our economy is strong but not invulnerable , and the peace is broad but can be broken .
and now we must decide .
we will surely have change this year , but will it be change that moves us forward ?
or change that risks retreat?in 1940 , when i was barely more than a boy , franklin roosevelt said we should n't change horses in midstream .
my friends , these days the world moves even more quickly , and now , after two great terms , a switch will be made .
but when you have to change horses in midstream , does n't it make sense to switch to the one who 's going the same way?an election that is about ideas and values is also about philosophy .
and i have one .
at the bright center is the individual .
and radiating out from him or her is the family , the essential unit of closeness and of love .
for it is the family that communicates to our children - to the 21st century - our culture , our religious faith , our traditions and history .
from the individual to the family to the community , and on out to the town , to the church and school , and , still echoing out , to the county , the state , the nation - each doing only what it does well , and no more .
and i believe that power must always be kept close to the individual - close to the hands that raise the family and run the home .
i am guided by certain traditions .
one is that there is a god and he is good , and his love , while free , has a self imposed cost : we must be good to one another .
i believe in another tradition that is , by now , embedded in the national soul .
it is that learning is good in and of itself .
the mothers of the jewish ghettos of the east would pour honey on a book so the children would learn that learning is sweet .
and the parents who settled hungry kansas would take their children in from the fields when a teacher came .
that is our history .
and there is another tradition .
and that is the idea of community - a beautiful word with a big meaning .
though liberal democrats have an odd view of it .
they see " community " as a limited cluster of interest groups , locked in odd conformity .
in this view , the country waits passive while washington sets the rules .
but that 's not what community means - not to me .
for we are a nation of communities , of thousands and tens of thousands of ethnic , religious , social , business , labor union , neighborhood , regional and other organizations , all of them varied , voluntary and unique .
this is america : the knights of columbus , the grange , hadassah , the disabled american veterans , the order of ahepa , the business and professional women of america , the union hall , the bible study group , lulac , " holy name " - a brilliant diversity spread like stars , like a thousand points of light in a broad and peaceful sky .
does government have a place ?
yes .
government is part of the nation of communities - not the whole , just a part .
i do not hate government .
a government that remembers that the people are its master is a good and needed thing .
i respect old fashioned common sense , and have no great love for the imaginings of social planners .
i like what 's been tested and found to be true .
for instance : should public school teachers be required to lead our children in the pledge of allegiance ?
my opponent says no - but i say yes .
should society be allowed to impose the death penalty on those who commit crimes of extraordinary cruelty and violence ?
my opponent says no - but i say yes .
should our children have the right to say a voluntary prayer , or even observe a moment of silence in the schools ?
my opponent says no - but i say yes .
should free men and women have the right to own a gun to protect their home ?
my opponent says no - but i say yes .
is it right to believe in the sanctity of life and protect the lives of innocent children ?
my opponent says no - but i say yes .
we must change from abortion - to adoption .
i have an adopted granddaughter .
the day of her christening we wept with joy .
i thank god her parents chose life .
i 'm the one who believes it is a scandal to give a weekend furlough to a hardened first degree killer who has n't even served enough time to be eligible for parole .
i 'm the one who says a drug dealer who is responsible for the death of a policeman should be subject to capital punishment .
i 'm the one who wo n't raise taxes .
my opponent now says he 'll raise them as a last resort , or a third resort .
when a politician talks like that , you know that 's one resort he 'll be checking into .
my opponent wo n't rule out raising taxes .
but i will .
the congress will push me to raise taxes , and i 'll say no , and they 'll push , and i 'll say no , and they 'll push again , and i 'll say to them , " read my lips : no new taxes."let me tell you more about the mission .
on jobs , my mission is : 30 in 8.thirty million jobs in the next eight years .
every one of our children deserves a first rate school .
the liberal democrats want power in the hands of the federal government .
i want power in the hands of parents .
i will increase the power of parents .
i will encourage merit schools .
i will give more kids a head start .
and i 'll make it easier to save for college .
i want a drug free america - and this will not be easy to achieve .
but i want to enlist the help of some people who are rarely included .
tonight i challenge the young people of our country to shut down the drug dealers around the world .
unite with us , work with us . "
zero tolerance " is n't just a policy , it 's an attitude .
tell them what you think of people who underwrite the dealers who put poison in our society .
and while you 're doing that , my administration will be telling the dealers : whatever we have to do we 'll do , but your day is over , you 're history .
i am going to do whatever it takes to make sure the disabled are included in the mainstream .
for too long they 've been left out .
but they 're not going to be left out anymore .
i am going to stop ocean dumping .
our beaches should not be garbage dumps and our harbors should not be cesspools .
i am going to have the fbi trace the medical wastes and we are going to punish the people who dump those infected needles into our oceans , lakes and rivers .
and we must clean the air .
we must reduce the harm done by acid rain .
i will put incentives back into the domestic energy industry , for i know from personal experience there is no security for the united states in further dependence on foreign oil .
in foreign affairs i will continue our policy of peace through strength .
i will move toward further cuts in the strategic and conventional arsenals of both the united states and the soviet union .
i will modernize and preserve our technological edge .
i will ban chemical and biological weapons from the face of the earth .
and i intend to speak for freedom , stand for freedom , and be a patient friend to anyone , east or west , who will fight for freedom .
it seems to me the presidency provides an incomparable opportunity for " gentle persuasion."i hope to stand for a new harmony , a greater tolerance .
we 've come far , but i think we need a new harmony among the races in our country .
we 're on a journey to a new century , and we 've got to leave the tired old baggage of bigotry behind .
some people who are enjoying our prosperity have forgotten what it 's for .
but they diminish our triumph when they act as if wealth is an end in itself .
there are those who have dropped their standards along the way , as if ethics were too heavy and slowed their rise to the top .
there 's graft in city hall , the greed on wall street ; there 's influence peddling in washington , and the small corruptions of everyday ambition .
but you see , i believe public service is honorable .
and every time i hear someone has breached the public trust it breaks my heart .
i wonder sometimes if we have forgotten who we are .
but we 're the people who sundered a nation rather than allow a sin called slavery - we 're the people who rose from the ghettos and the deserts .
we were n't saints - but we lived by standards .
we celebrated the individual - but we were n't self -centered .
we were practical - but we did n't live only for material things .
we believed in getting ahead - but blind ambition was n't our way .
the fact is prosperity has a purpose .
it is to allow us to pursue " the better angels , " to give us time to think and grow .
prosperity with a purpose means taking your idealism and making it concrete by certain acts of goodness .
it means helping a child from an unhappy home learn how to read - and i thank my wife barbara for all her work in literacy .
it means teaching troubled children through your presence that there 's such a thing as reliable love .
some would say it 's soft and insufficiently tough to care about these things .
but where is it written that we must act as if we do not care , as if we are not moved?well i am moved .
i want a kinder , gentler nation .
two men this year ask for your support .
and you must know us .
as for me , i have held high office and done the work of democracy day by day .
my parents were prosperous ; their children were lucky .
but there were lessons we had to learn about life .
john kennedy discovered poverty when he campaigned in west virginia ; there were children there who had no milk .
young teddy roosevelt met the new america when he roamed the immigrant streets of new york .
and i learned a few things about life in a place called texas .
we moved to west texas 40 years ago .
the war was over , and we wanted to get out and make it on our own .
those were exciting days .
lived in a little shotgun house , one room for the three of us .
worked in the oil business , started my own .
in time we had six children .
moved from the shotgun to a duplex apartment to a house .
lived the dream - high school football on friday night , little league , neighborhood barbecue .
people do n't see their experience as symbolic of an era - but of course we were .
so was everyone else who was taking a chance and pushing into unknown territory with kids and a dog and a car .
but the big thing i learned is the satisfaction of creating jobs , which meant creating opportunity , which meant happy families , who in turn could do more to help others and enhance their own lives .
i learned that the good done by a single good job can be felt in ways you ca n't imagine .
i may not be the most eloquent , but i learned early that eloquence wo n't draw oil from the ground .
i may sometimes be a little awkward , but there 's nothing self - conscious in my love of country .
i am a quiet man - but i hear the quiet people others do n't .
the ones who raise the family , pay the taxes , meet the mortgage .
i hear them and i am moved , and their concerns are mine .
a president must be many things .
he must be a shrewd protector of america 's interests ; and he must be an idealist who leads those who move for a freer and more democratic planet .
he must see to it that government intrudes as little as possible in the lives of the people ; and yet remember that it is the nation 's character .
and he must be able to define - and lead - a mission .
for seven and a half years i have worked with a president - and i have seen what crosses that big desk .
i have seen the unexpected crisis that arrive in a cable in a young aide 's hand .
and i have seen problems that simmer on for decades and suddenly demand resolution .
i have seen modest decisions made with anguish , and crucial decisions made with dispatch .
and so i know that what it all comes down to , this election - what it all comes down to , after all the shouting and the cheers - is the man at the desk .
my friends , i am that man .
i say it without boast or bravado , i 've fought for my country , i 've served , i 've built - and i will go from the hills to the hollows , from the cities to the suburbs to the loneliest town on the quietest street to take our message of hope and growth for every american to every american .
i will keep america moving forward , always forward - for a better america , for an endless enduring dream and a thousand points of light .
that is my mission .
and i will complete it .
thank you .
god bless you .

thank you , governor .
thank you all very much for that welcome .
good luck , good luck to you .
thank you , ladies and gentlemen , thank you all .
chairman mckenzie and dr. adkisson and dr. mobley , thank you for having me here .
and to the singing cadets , thank you for that very special treat .
and to my secretary of commerce , bob mosbacher , i 'm delighted that he 's with me today .
i want to pay my special respects to our governor , bill clements ; to your congressman from this district , joe barton ; and then , of course , to senator phil gramm .
he said he taught economics here and in congress .
it 's hard to be humble .
but nevertheless --   -- the point is the guy 's telling the truth , and we are grateful to him every day for his leadership up there in washington , as we are for joe barton as well .
so , we 've got a good combination -- phil gramm in the senate and today joe barton in the united states congress -- a wonderful combination , with these aggie values in the forefront .
i was brought here today by an aggie , and i brought him here to this marvelous ceremony with me .
he was mentioned by congressman barton , but i would like to ask the pilot of air force one , lieutenant colonel dan barr , to stand up so you can see another aggie all suited up , up there .
and you met my day - to - day inside aggie , fred mcclure .
we work every minute of the day on matters affecting the legislative interests of this country , but i wo n't reintroduce fred .
but i am delighted to be back among my fellow texans and friends .
and for those of you who are democrats , there is no truth to the rumor that phil gramm and i are ready to take our elephant walk .
my sincerest congratulations go to every graduate and to your parents .
in this ceremony , we celebrate nothing less than the commencement of the rest , and the best , of your life .
and when you look back at your days at texas a and m , you will have a lot to be proud of : a university that is first in baseball and first in service to our nation .
many are the heroes whose names are called at muster .
many are those you remember in silver taps .
we are reminded that no generation can escape history .
parents , we share a fervent desire for our children and their children to know a better world , a safer world .
and students , your parents and grandparents have lived through a world war and helped america to rebuild the world .
they witnessed the drama of postwar nations divided by soviet subversion and force , but sustained by an allied response most vividly seen in the berlin airlift .
and today i would like to use this joyous and solemn occasion to speak to you and to the rest of the country about our relations with the soviet union .
it is fitting that these remarks be made here at texas a and m university .
wise men -- truman and eisenhower , vandenberg and rayburn , marshall , acheson , and kennan -- crafted the strategy of containment .
they believed that the soviet union , denied the easy course of expansion , would turn inward and address the contradictions of its inefficient , repressive , and inhumane system .
and they were right -- the soviet union is now publicly facing this hard reality .
containment worked .
containment worked because our democratic principles and institutions and values are sound and always have been .
it worked because our alliances were , and are , strong and because the superiority of free societies and free markets over stagnant socialism is undeniable .
we are approaching the conclusion of an historic postwar struggle between two visions : one of tyranny and conflict and one of democracy and freedom .
the review of u. s .- soviet relations that my administration has just completed outlines a new path toward resolving this struggle .
our goal is bold , more ambitious than any of my predecessors could have thought possible .
our review indicates that 40 years of perseverance have brought us a precious opportunity , and now it is time to move beyond containment to a new policy for the 1990s -- one that recognizes the full scope of change taking place around the world and in the soviet union itself .
in sum , the united states now has as its goal much more than simply containing soviet expansionism .
we seek the integration of the soviet union into the community of nations .
and as the soviet union itself moves toward greater openness and democratization , as they meet the challenge of responsible international behavior , we will match their steps with steps of our own .
ultimately , our objective is to welcome the soviet union back into the world order .
the soviet union says that it seeks to make peace with the world and criticizes its own postwar policies .
these are words that we can only applaud , but a new relationship can not simply be declared by moscow or bestowed by others ; it must be earned .
it must be earned because promises are never enough .
the soviet union has promised a more cooperative relationship before , only to reverse course and return to militarism .
soviet foreign policy has been almost seasonal : warmth before cold , thaw before freeze .
we seek a friendship that knows no season of suspicion , no chill of distrust .
we hope perestroika is pointing the soviet union to a break with the cycles of the past -- a definitive break .
who would have thought that we would see the deliberations of the central committee on the front page of pravda or dissident andrei sakharov seated near the councils of power ?
who would have imagined a soviet leader who canvasses the sidewalks of moscow and also washington , d. c. ?
these are hopeful , indeed , remarkable signs .
and let no one doubt our sincere desire to see perestroika , this reform , continue and succeed .
but the national security of america and our allies is not predicated on hope .
it must be based on deeds , and we look for enduring , ingrained economic and political change .
while we hope to move beyond containment , we are only at the beginning of our new path .
many dangers and uncertainties are ahead .
we must not forget that the soviet union has acquired awesome military capabilities .
that was a fact of life for my predecessors , and that 's always been a fact of life for our allies .
and that is a fact of life for me today as president of the united states .
as we seek peace , we must also remain strong .
the purpose of our military might is not to pressure a weak soviet economy or to seek military superiority .
it is to deter war .
it is to defend ourselves and our allies and to do something more : to convince the soviet union that there can be no reward in pursuing expansionism , to convince the soviet union that reward lies in the pursuit of peace .
western policies must encourage the evolution of the soviet union toward an open society .
this task will test our strength .
it will tax our patience , and it will require a sweeping vision .
let me share with you my vision : i see a western hemisphere of democratic , prosperous nations , no longer threatened by a cuba or a nicaragua armed by moscow .
i see a soviet union as it pulls away from ties to terrorist nations like libya that threaten the legitimate security of their neighbors .
i see a soviet union which respects china 's integrity and returns the northern territories to japan , a prelude to the day when all the great nations of asia will live in harmony .
but the fulfillment of this vision requires the soviet union to take positive steps , including : first , reduce soviet forces .
although some small steps have already been taken , the warsaw pact still possesses more than 30,000 tanks , more than twice as much artillery , and hundreds of thousands more troops in europe than nato .
they should cut their forces to less threatening levels , in proportion to their legitimate security needs .
second , adhere to the soviet obligation , promised in the final days of world war ii , to support self - determination for all the nations of eastern europe and central europe .
and this requires specific abandonment of the brezhnev doctrine .
one day it should be possible to drive from moscow to munich without seeing a single guard tower or a strand of barbed wire .
in short , tear down the iron curtain .
and third , work with the west in positive , practical -- not merely rhetorical -- steps toward diplomatic solution to these regional disputes around the world .
i welcome the soviet withdrawal from afghanistan , and the angola agreement .
but there is much more to be done around the world .
we 're ready .
let 's roll up our sleeves and get to work .
and fourth , achieve a lasting political pluralism and respect for human rights .
dramatic events have already occurred in moscow .
we are impressed by limited , but freely contested elections .
we are impressed by a greater toleration of dissent .
we are impressed by a new frankness about the stalin era .
mr. gorbachev , do n't stop now!and fifth , join with us in addressing pressing global problems , including the international drug menace and dangers to the environment .
we can build a better world for our children .
as the soviet union moves toward arms reduction and reform , it will find willing partners in the west .
we seek verifiable , stabilizing arms control and arms reduction agreements with the soviet union and its allies .
however , arms control is not an end in itself but a means of contributing to the security of america and the peace of the world .
i directed secretary   baker to propose to the soviets that we resume negotiations on strategic forces in june and , as you know , the soviet union has agreed .
our basic approach is clear .
in the strategic arms reductions talks , we wish to reduce the risk of nuclear war .
and in the companion defense and space talks , our objective will be to preserve our options to deploy advanced defenses when they 're ready .
in nuclear testing , we will continue to seek the necessary verification improvements in existing treaties to permit them to be brought into force .
and we 're going to continue to seek a verifiable global ban on chemical weapons .
we support nato efforts to reduce the soviet offensive threat in the negotiations on conventional forces in europe .
and as i 've said , fundamental to all of these objectives is simple openness .
make no mistake , a new breeze is blowing across the steppes and the cities of the soviet union .
why not , then , let this spirit of openness grow , let more barriers come down .
open emigration , open debate , open airwaves -- let openness come to mean the publication and sale of banned books and newspapers in the soviet union .
let the 19,000 soviet jews who emigrated last year be followed by any number who wish to emigrate this year .
and when people apply for exit visas , let there be no harassment against them .
let openness come to mean nothing less than the free exchange of people and books and ideas between east and west .
and let it come to mean one thing more .
thirty - four years ago , president eisenhower met in geneva with soviet leaders who , after the death of stalin , promised a new approach toward the west .
he proposed a plan called open skies , which would allow unarmed aircraft from the united states and the soviet union to fly over the territory of the other country .
this would open up military activities to regular scrutiny and , as president eisenhower put it , " convince the world that we are lessening danger and relaxing tension . "
president eisenhower 's suggestion tested the soviet readiness to open their society , and the kremlin failed that test .
now , let us again explore that proposal , but on a broader , more intrusive and radical basis -- one which i hope would include allies on both sides .
we suggest that those countries that wish to examine this proposal meet soon to work out the necessary operational details , separately from other arms control negotiations .
such surveillance flights , complementing satellites , would provide regular scrutiny for both sides .
such unprecedented territorial access would show the world the true meaning of the concept of openness .
the very soviet willingness to embrace such a concept would reveal their commitment to change .
where there is cooperation , there can be a broader economic relationship ; but economic relations have been stifled by soviet internal policies .
they 've been injured by moscow 's practice of using the cloak of commerce to steal technology from the west .
ending discriminatory treatment of u. s. firms would be a helpful step .
trade and financial transactions should take place on a normal commercial basis .
and should the soviet union codify its emigration laws in accord with international standards and implement its new laws faithfully , i am prepared to work with congress for a temporary waiver of the jackson - vanik amendment , opening the way to extending most favored nation trade status to the soviet union .
after that last weighty point , i can just imagine what you were thinking : it had to happen .
your last day in college had to end with yet another political science lecture .
in all seriousness , the policy i have just described has everything to do with you .
today you graduate .
you 're going to start careers and families , and you will become the leaders of america in the next century .
and what kind of world will you know ?
perhaps the world order of the future will truly be a family of nations .
it 's a sad truth that nothing forces us to recognize our common humanity more swiftly than a natural disaster .
i 'm thinking , of course , of soviet armenia just a few months ago , a tragedy without blame , warlike devastation without war .
our son took our 12-year - old grandson to yerevan .
at the end of the day of comforting the injured and consoling the bereaved , the father and son went to church , sat down together in the midst of the ruins , and wept .
how can our two countries magnify this simple expression of caring ?
how can we convey the good will of our people?forty - three years ago , a young lieutenant by the name of albert kotzebue , the class of 1945 at texas a and m , was the first american soldier to shake hands with the soviets at the bank of the elbe river .
once again , we are ready to extend our hand .
once again , we are ready for a hand in return .
and once again , it is a time for peace .
thank you for inviting me to texas a and m. i wish you the very best in years to come .
god bless you all .
thank you very much .

tonight i want to talk to you about a problem that has lingered and dogged and vexed this country for far too long : the federal budget deficit .
thomas paine said many years ago , " these are the times that try men 's souls . "
as we speak , our nation is standing together against saddam hussein 's aggression .
but here at home there 's another threat , a cancer gnawing away at our nation 's health .
that cancer is the budget deficit .
year after year , it mortgages the future of our children .
no family , no nation can continue to do business the way the federal government has been operating and survive .
when you get a bill , that bill must be paid .
and when you write a check , you 're supposed to have money in the bank .
but if you do n't obey these simple rules of common sense , there 's a price to pay .
but for too long , the nation 's business in washington has been conducted as if these basic rules did not apply .
well , these rules do apply .
and if we fail to act , next year alone we will face a federal budget deficit of more than $ 300 billion , a deficit that could weaken our economy further and cost us thousands of precious jobs .
if what goes up must come down , then the way down could be very hard .
but it does n't have to be that way .
we can do something .
in fact , we have started to do something .
but we must act this week , when congress will hold the first of two crucial up - or - down votes .
these votes will be on a deficit reduction agreement worked out between the administration and the bipartisan leaders of congress .
this budget agreement is the result of 8 months of blood , sweat , and fears -- fears of the economic chaos that would follow if we fail to reduce the deficit .
of course , i can not claim it 's the best deficit reduction plan possible .
it 's not .
any one of us alone might have written a better plan .
but it is the best agreement that can be legislated now .
it is the biggest deficit reduction agreement ever -- half a trillion dollars .
it 's the toughest deficit reduction package ever , with new enforcement rules to make sure that what we fix now stays fixed .
and it has the largest spending savings ever -- more than $ 300 billion .
for the first time , a republican president and leaders of a democratic congress have agreed to real cuts that will be enforced by law , not promises -- no smoke , no mirrors , no magic act , but real and lasting spending cuts .
this agreement will also raise revenue .
i 'm not , and i know you 're not , a fan of tax increases .
but if there have to be tax measures , they should allow the economy to grow , they should not turn us back to higher income tax rates , and they should be fair .
everyone who can should contribute something , and no one should have to contribute beyond their fair share .
our bipartisan agreement meets these tests .
and through specific new incentives , it will help create more jobs .
it 's a little - known fact , but america 's best job creators and greatest innovators tend to be our smaller companies .
so , our budget plan will give small and medium - size companies a needed shot in the arm .
just as important , i am convinced that this agreement will help lower interest rates .
and lower interest rates mean savings for consumers , lower mortgage payments for new homeowners , and more investment to produce more jobs .
and that 's what this agreement will do .
now , let me tell you what this agreement will not do .
it will not raise income tax rates , personal or corporate .
it will not mess with social security in any way .
it will not put america 's national security at risk .
and most of all , it will not let our economy slip out of control .
clearly , each and every one of us can find fault with something in this agreement .
in fact , that is a burden that any truly fair solution must carry .
any workable solution must be judged as a whole , not piece by piece .
those who dislike one part or another may pick our agreement apart .
but if they do , believe me , the political reality is , no one can put a better one back together again .
everyone will bear a small burden .
but if we succeed , every american will have a large burden lifted .
if we fail to enact this agreement , our economy will falter , markets may tumble , and recession will follow .
in just a moment , the democratic majority leader , senator mitchell , will offer what is known as the democratic response , often a rebuttal .
but not tonight .
tonight the democratic and republican leadership and i all speak with one voice in support of this agreement .
tonight we ask you to help us move this agreement forward .
the congressional leadership and i both have a job to do in getting it enacted .
and tonight i ask for your help .
first , i ask you to understand how important -- and for some , how difficult -- this vote is for your congressmen and senators .
many worry about your reaction to one part or another .
but i know you know the importance of the whole .
and so , second , i ask you to take this initiative : tell your congressmen and senators you support this deficit reduction agreement .
if they are republicans , urge them to stand with the president .
urge them to do what the bipartisan leadership has done : come together in the spirit of compromise to solve this national problem .
if they 're democrats , urge them to stand with their congressional leaders .
ask them to fight for the future of your kids by supporting this budget agreement .
now is the time for you , the american people , to have a real impact .
your senators and congressmen need to know that you want this deficit brought down , that the time for politics and posturing is over , and the time to come together is now .
this deficit reduction agreement is tough , and so are the times .
the agreement is fair , and so is the american spirit .
the agreement is bipartisan , and so is the vote .
the agreement is real , and so is this crisis .
this is the first time in my presidency that i 've made an appeal like this to you , the american people .
with your help , we can at last put this budget crisis behind us and face the other challenges that lie ahead .
if we do , the long - term result will be a healthier nation and something more : we will have once again put ourselves on the path of economic growth , and we will have demonstrated that no challenge is greater than the determination of the american people .
thank you .
god bless you , and good night .

i think we 've seen a deterioration of values .
i think for a while as a nation we condoned those things we should have condemned .
for a while , as i recall , it even seems to me that there was talk of legalizing or decriminalizing marijuana and other drugs , and i think that 's all wrong .
so we 've seen a deterioration in values , and one of the things that i think we should do about it in terms of cause is to instill values into the young people in our schools .
we got away , we got into this feeling that value - free education was the thing .
and i do n't believe that at all i do believe there are fundamental rights and wrongs as far as use .
and , of course , as far as the how we make it better , yes , we can do better on interdiction .
but we 've got to do a lot better on education , and we have to do , be tougher on those who commit crimes .
we 've got to get after the users more .
we have to change this whole culture .
you know , i saw a movie , crocodile dundee .
and i saw the cocaine scene treated with humor , as though this was a humorous little incident .
and it 's bad .
everybody ought to be in this thing .
entertainment industry , people involved in the schools , education .
and it is n't a republican or a democrat or a liberal problem .
but we have got to instill values in these young people .
and i have put forward a many - point drug program that includes what i would do as president of the united states ; in terms of doing better on interdiction ; and in terms of better in the neighborhoods .
but i think we 're all in this together , and my plea to the american people is values in the schools .
well , the other day my opponent was given a briefing by the cia .
i asked for and received the same briefing .
i am very careful in public life about dealing with classified information .
and what i 'm about to say is unclassified .
seven administrations were dealing with mr. noriega .
it was the reagan - bush administration that brought this man to justice .
and as the governor of massachusetts knows , there was no evidence that governor -- that mr. noriega was involved in drugs , no hard evidence until we indicted him .
and so i think it 's about time we get this noriega matter in perspective .
panama is a friendly country .
i went down there and talked to the president of panama about cleaning up their money laundering , and mr. noriega was there , but there was no evidence at that time , and when the evidence was there , we indicted him .
and we want to bring him to justice .
and so call off all those pickets out there that are trying to tear down seven different administrations .
is this the time to unleash our one - liners ?
that answer was about as clear as boston harbor .
let me help the governor .
there are so many things there , i do n't quite know where to begin .
when you cut capital gains , you put people to work .
john kennedy proposed cutting capital gains .
paul tsongas , a liberal senator from massachusetts said the dumbest thing i did was to oppose the capital gains cut .
it 's not going to cost the government money .
it 's going to increase revenues to the federal government , and it 's going to create jobs .
so that 's one of the things that i think makes a big difference between us .
massachusetts does n't have an enormous defense budget , but nevertheless , the governor raised taxes five different times .
that happens to be a fact .
and so let 's kind of stay on the issue , and i have made a specific proposal for what i call a flexible freeze .
and it permits -- economists on the east coast and west think it 's good -- it permits the president to sort out the priorities , and we continue to grow because i will not raise taxes .
i think it 's the republican party and my concern to bring it down .
and presidential leadership that i want to provide in this area will bring it down , but we 've got to get the democrats -- congress under control .
they do all the spending , they appropriate every dime and tell us how to spend every dime .
i 'd like to ask the governor to join in getting for the president what 43 governors have , the line - item veto .
he has to operate in massachusetts under a balanced budget proviso .
i would like a balanced budget amendment .
but the dynamics of the economy -- we cut the taxes and revenues are up by 25 percent in three years .
so the problem is -- it 's not that the working is being taxed too little or the person working out -- the woman working in some factory being taxed too little .
it is that we are continuing to spend too much .
so , my formula says grow at the rate of inflation .
permit the president to set the priorities on where we do the spending .
and remember the federal deficit has come down $ 70 billion in one year , in 1987.and if we -- and the -- actually this year congress is doing a little better in controlling the growth of spending .
spending was only up something like 4 percent .
so , it is n't that we 're taking too little -- from taxpayer -- we 're spending too much still .
and the formula i 've given you works , we 've put it through a good economic model , we 've got good economists on the west coast , michael boskin and marty feldstein up there who 's a very respected economist in the -- massachusetts .
and they agree , that if we can do what i 've said , we can get it down without going and socking the american taxpayer once again .
capital gains , one more point on that , please let 's learn from history .
a capital gains differential will increase jobs , increase risk taking , increase revenues to the federal government .
one thing i will not do is sock every business in the country and , thus , throw some people out of work .
i want to keep this economic recovery going .
more americans at work today than any time in history , a greater percentage of the work force .
what i will do is permit people to buy into medicaid .
i believe that 's the answer .
i am proud to have been part of an administration that past the first catastrophic health bill .
and in that there are some medicaid provisions that will be very helpful to the very kind of people we 're talking about here .
but we 've got to keep going forward without killing off the engine and throwing people out of work .
so , the answer lies , it seems to me , in full enforcement of the catastrophic program .
it lies to me in flexibility in medicaid so people at the lowest end can buy in there and get their needs covered and then it also -- i do not want to see us mandate across the board that every company has to do this , because i really think that marginal operators are going to go say , " we ca n't make it . "
and i think then you 're going to see that people are put out of work .
all these programs -- and this cost on his -- is -- was -- i saw an estimate , i 'd love to know what he thinks , $ 35 -- $ 40 billion -- and it seems to me that somebody pays that .
there is n't any such thing as something free out there .
it either gets passed along as increased prices or it gets passed along by people being put out of work so the business can continue to compete .
so , i think we ought to do it in the medicaid system .
i think we ought to do it by full enforcement of the catastrophic health insurance .
i think we ought to do it by everybody doing what they can do out of conscience .
it 's a terrible problems in terms of flexibility on private insurance .
but i just do n't want to mandate it and risk putting this -- setting the recovery back .
you do n't like the answer , but it 's an answer .
well , we 're on the right track .
the nih is doing a good job in research .
the surgeon general is doing a good job in encouraging the proper kind of education .
i notice that the governor did not mention any testing .
but we got to have a knowledge base .
testing should be confidential , but we have to have a knowledge .
we ca n't simply stick our heads in the sands in terms of testing .
i 'm chairman of the president 's task force on regulatory relief and we are working with the fda and they have sped up bringing drugs to market that can help .
and you got to be careful here , because there 's a safety factor , but i think these things -- and then also i am one who believes we 've got to go the extra mile in clean -- being sure that that blood supply is pure .
we can not have a lack of confidence in the blood supply when it comes to operations and surgery and things of this nature .
so , research , speeding the drugs to market , testing , blood supply are very important elements of this .
well , i do n't question his passion .
i question -- and i do n't question his concern about the war in vietnam .
he introduced or supported legislation back then that suggested that kids of massachusetts should be exempt from going overseas in that war .
now , that 's a certain passion that in my view it 's misguided passion .
he -- we have a big difference on issues .
you see , last year in the primary , he expressed his passion .
he said , " i am a strong liberal democrat " -- august , ' 87 .
then he said , " i am a card - carrying member of the aclu . "
that was what he said .
he is out there on out of the mainstream .
he is very passionate .
my argument with the governor is , do we want this country to go that far left .
and i wish we had time to let me explain .
but i salute him for his passion .
we just have a big difference on where this country should be led , and in what direction it ought to go .
nothing 's wrong with it .
but just take a look at the positions of the aclu .
but , peter , please understand , the liberals do not like me talking about liberal they do n't like it when i say that he says he 's a card carrying member .
now , if that quote was wrong , he can repudiate it , right here .
i 've seen it authoritatively written twice , and if i 've done him an injustice , and he did n't say it , i 'm very , very sorry .
but i do n't agree with a lot of -- most of the positions of the aclu .
i simply do n't want to see the ratings on movies .
i do n't want my 10-year - old grandchild to go into an x - rated movie .
i like those ratings systems .
i do n't think they 're right to try to take the tax exemption away from the catholic church .
i do n't want to see the kiddie pornographic laws repealed ; i do n't want to see " under god " come out from our currency .
now , these are all positions of the aclu .
and i do n't agree with them .
he has every right to exercise his passion , as what he said , a strong , progressive liberal .
i do n't agree with that .
i come from a different point .
and i think i 'm more in touch with the mainstream of america .
they raised the same thing with me on the pledge of allegiance .
you see , i 'd have found a way to sign that bill .
governor thompson of illinois did .
i 'm not questioning his patriotism .
he goes out and says the man is questioning my patriotism .
and then all the liberal columnists join in .
i am not .
i am questioning his judgment on these matters , or where he 's coming from he has every right to do it .
but i believe that 's not what the american people want , and when he said , when he said at the convention , ideology does n't matter , just competence , he was moving away from his own record , from what his passion has been over the years .
and that 's all i 'm trying to do , is put it in focus .
and i hope people do n't think that i 'm questioning his patriotism when i say he used his words to describe his participation in that organization .
i want to see the mckinney act fully funded .
i believe that that would help in terms of shelter .
i want to see -- when i talked at our convention about a thousand points of light , i was talking about the enormous numbers of shelters and organizations that help .
the governor 's wife has been very active in the homeless .
my campaign chairman , secretary jim baker 's wife .
this is n't government .
these are people that care , that are trying to give of themselves .
the government has a role .
it is to fully fund the mckinney act .
there are certain army bases that the act calls for that can be used in certain cases to shelter people when it 's rough .
and so i think that we 're on the right track .
i do n't see this , incidentally , as a democrat or a republican or a liberal or conservative idea .
i see an involvement by a thousand points of light .
i see the funding that is required , and i hope the congress will fully fund this bill .
they gave it a great deal of conscience and a great deal of work .
and we 're on the track on this one .
but -- and i , look , mental -- that was a little overstated it .
i 'd say around 30 percent .
and i think maybe we could look back over our shoulders and wonder whether it was right to let all those mental patients out .
maybe we need to do a better job in mental clinics to help them .
because there is a major problem there .
a lot of them are mentally sick .
and we 've got to attend to them .
but fully , my short range answer is fully fund that mckinney act .
i think the governor is blurring housing and the homeless .
let 's talk about housing , which the question was .
when you talk to those bankers , did they discuss where interest rates were when your party controlled the white house ?
ten days before i took the oath of office as president they were 21 1/2 percent .
now , how does that grab you for increasing housing?housing is up .
we are serving a million more families now .
but we 're not going to do it in that old democratic , liberal way of trying to build more bricks and mortars .
go out and take a look at st. louis at some of that effort .
it is wrong .
i favor home ownership .
i want to see more vouchers .
i want to see control of some of these projects , and i want to keep the interest rates down .
they 're half , now of what they were when we came into office , and with my policy of getting this deficit under control , they 'll be a lot less .
but if we spend and spend and spend , that is going to wrap up the housing market , and we 'll go right back to the days of the misery index and malaise that president reagan and i have overcome -- thank god for the united states on that one .
well , the massachusetts furlough program was unique .
it was the only one in the nation that furloughed murderers who had not served enough time to be eligible for parole .
the federal program does n't do that .
no other state programs do that .
and i favor the death penalty .
i know it 's tough and honest people can disagree .
but when a narcotics wrapped up guy goes in and murders a police officer , i think they ought to pay with their life .
and i do believe it would be inhibiting .
and so i am not going to furlough men like willie horton , and i would meet with their , the victims of his last escapade , the rape and the brutalization of the family down there in maryland .
maryland would not extradite willie horton , the man who was furloughed , the murderer , because they did n't want him to be furloughed again .
and so we have a fundamental difference on this one .
and i think most people know my position on the sanctity of life .
i favor adoption .
i do not favor abortion .
i have n't sorted out the penalties .
but i do know , i do know that i oppose abortion .
and i favor adoption .
and if we can get this law changed , everybody should make the extraordinary effort to take these kids that are unwanted and sometimes aborted , take the -- let them come to birth , and then put them in a family where they will be loved .
and you see , yes , my position has evolved .
and it 's continuing to evolve , and it 's evolving in favor of life .
and i have had a couple of exceptions that i support -- rape , incest and the life of the mother .
sometimes people feel a little uncomfortable talking about this , but it 's much clearer for me now .
as i 've seen abortions sometimes used as a birth control device , for heavens sakes .
see the millions of these killings accumulate , and this is one where you can have an honest difference of opinion .
we certainly do .
but no , i 'm for the sanctity of life , and once that illegality is established , then we can come to grips with the penalty side , and of course there 's got to be some penalties to enforce the law , whatever they may be .
i just -- 







  one of the reasons , and i first would like to know which programs you 're talking about , and then we could talk on the merits of the programs .
but , you see , my fundamental philosophy is give local and state government as much control as possible .
that might be the explanation , if you tell me the program .
i do strongly support the wic program .
i think it is good .
i think part of the answer to this haunting of these children that are out there and suffering lies in extension of medicaid , to challenge the states , and maybe we 're going to have to enforce more on the states in terms of medicaid taking care of these .
but , peter , so much of it is , gets into a whole other phase of things .
the neighborhood , the kind of environment people are growing up in , and that leads me to the programs i 'm talking about in terms of education .
i think that part of it is the crime - infested neighborhoods , and that 's why i 'm a strong believer in trying to control crimes in the neighborhood , why i was so pleased to be endorsed by the policemen on the beat , the boston police department the other day .
i think they understand my commitment to helping them in the neighborhoods .
and so it 's a combination of these things .
but do not erode out of the system the thousand points of light .
the people that are out there trying to help these kids , the programs like cities and schools , the work that barbara bush is doing so people can learn to read in this country and then go on and break this cycle of poverty .
i 'm for head start and moving that up .
and i 've already made a proposal -- and yes , it will cost some money .
but i favor that .
so these are the combination of things i want , and the fact that i do n't think the federal government can endorse a $ 35 billion program does not mean i have less compassion than the person who endorses such a program .
what troubles me is that when i talk of the voluntary sector and a thousand points of light and a thousand different ways to help on these problems , the man has just said he does n't understand what i 'm talking about .
this is the problem i have with the big spending liberals .
they think the only way to do it is for the federal government to do it all .
the fact happens to be that education spending is up by the federal government ; it is up .
it is not down .
but here 's the point he misses .
the federal government spends 7 percent of the total on education , and the rest of the state governments and local governments and the thousand points of lightened i 'm talking about private schools and private church schools and things of this nature -- are putting up 93 percent .
but the federal spending for education is up , and i want to be the education president , because i want to see us do better .
we 're putting more money per child into education , and we are not performing as we should .
we 've gotten away fro values and the fundamentals .
and i would like to urge the school superintendents and the others around the country to stand up now and keep us moving forward on a path towards real excellence .
and we can do it .
but it&sup1;s not going to be dedicated by some federal bureaucracy in washington , d. c. 









  well , i thought the question was about defense .
the governor was for a nuclear freeze that would have locked in a thousand soviet intermediate nuclear force weapons and zero for the west .
and because we did n't listen to the freeze advocates , and strengthen the defense of this country , we now have the first arms control agreement in the nuclear age .
now , we 're sitting down and talking to the soviets about strategic arms , and he wants to do away with the midgetman and the mx , the modernization or our nuclear capability .
that is not the way you deal with the soviets .
i 've met mr. gorbachev .
met mr. shevardnadze and talked substance with him the other day .
these people are tough .
but now we have a chance .
i few have experience and now how to handle it , but please do not go back to the days when the military was as weak as they could be , when the morale was down , and when we were the laughing stock around the world .
and now we are back , because we have strengthened the defenses of this country , and believe me , i do n't want to see us return to those days .
as to ferdinand marcos , he is n't there any more .
it was under our administration that mrs. aquino came in .
but i 'll tell you what i was thinking of .
i flew a combat mission , my last one was over manila .
and he was down there fighting against imperialism .
and he had just -- 



  and he just lifted martial law .
and he just called for new elections .
and all of those things happened because the philippines do crave democracy .
and out he goes .
i do n't think it 's a question of eliminating .
i can tell him some i 'm against .
a-6f , for example .
divad .
and i can go on and on .
minuteman iii , penetration systems .
i mean , there 's plenty of them that i oppose , but what i am not going to do , when we are negotiating with the soviet union , sitting down talking to mr. gorbachev about how we achieve a 50 percent reduction in our strategic weapons , i 'm not going to give away a couple of aces i that very tough card game .
i 'm simply not going to do that .
and under me , when i lead this country , the secretary of defense is going to have to make the choices , between how we keep , how we protect the survivability of our nuclear deployment on the midgetman missile , or on the minuteman , whatever it is .
we 're going to have to -- the mx .
we 're going to have to do that .
it 's christmas .
would n't it be nice to be perfect ?
would n't it be nice to be the ice man so you never make a mistake ?
these are the -- my answer is do not make these unilateral cuts , and everybody now realizes that peace through strength works , and so this is where i have a big difference .
of course we 're going to have to make some determination on this , and we 're going to have to make it on the convention forces .
but now we 've got a very good concept called competitive strategies .
we will do what we do best .
it 's a strategy that we 've been working on for a couple of years .
it is going to take us to much better advantage in conventional forces .
but look , let me sum it up .
i want to be the president that gets conventional forces balance .
i want to be the one to banish chemical and biological weapons from the face of the earth .
but you have to have a little bit of experience to know where to start .
and i think i 've had that .
what i think we ought to do is take a look at perestroika and glasnost , welcome them , but keep our eyes open .
be cautious .
because the soviet change is not fully established yet .
yes , i think it 's fine to do business with them .
and , so , i 'm encouraged with what i see when i talk to mr. -- what i hear when i talk to mr. gorbachev and mr. shevardnadze , but can they pull it off .
and when they have a -- they a -- deals that are good for us , as china started to do -- the changes in china since barbara and i lived there is absolutely amazing , in terms of incentive , in partnership and things of this nature .
and now the soviet union seems to be walking down that same path .
we should encourage that .
we ought to say this is good .
but where i differ with my opponent is i am not going to make unilateral cuts in our strategic defend systems or support some freeze when they have superiority .
i 'm not going to do that , because i think the jury is still out on the soviet experiment .
and the interesting place -- one of the things that fascinates me about this perestroika and glasnost is wheats going to happen in eastern europe .
you see the turmoil in poland today .
and i think we have enormous opportunity for trade .
i do n't want to go back to the carter grain embargo on the soviets .
we are once again reliable suppliers and i would never use food as a political tool like our predecessors did .
but this is an exciting time .
but all i 'm suggesting is let 's not be na&iuml;ve in dealing with the soviets and make a lot of unilateral cuts hoping against hope that they will match our bid .
look at the inf treaty .
and if we have n't learned from the negotiating history on that , we 'll never learn .
the freeze people were wrong .
the reagan - bush administration was right .
i 'm not reconsidering my position .
two questions : how do you deter nuclear attack without modernizing our nuclear forces when the soviets are modernizing and how come you spend -- willing to spend a dime on something that you consider a fantasy and a fraud .
those are two hypo - rhetorical questions .
he is the man on conventional forces that wants to eliminate two carrier battle groups .
the armed forces , the conventional forces of the united states have never been more ready .
every single one of the joint chiefs will testify to the fact that readiness is in an historic high .
and secondly , in terms of the cutting of the coast guard , the democratic controlled congress , so please help us with that , who cut $ 70 million from the coast guard out of the interdiction effort on narcotics .
he 's got to get this thing more clear .
why do you spend a billion dollars on something you think is a fantasy and a fraud ?
i will fully research it , go forward as fast as we can .
we 've set up the levels of funding and when it is deployable , i will deploy it .
that is my position on sdi and it 's never wavered a bit .
i wrote the anti - terrorist report for this government .
it is the best anti - terrorist report written .
yes , we should n't trade arms for hostages .
but we have made vast improvements in our anti - terrorism .
now , it 's fine to say that sometimes you have to hit base camps , but when the president saw this state sponsored -- fingerprints of muammar khadaffi on the loss of american life , he hit libya .
and my opponent was unwilling to support that action .
and since that action , terrorist action against the united states citizens have gone down .
and i have long ago said i supported the president on this other matter .
and i 've said mistakes were made .
clearly nobody 's going to think the president started out thinking he was going to trade arms for hostages .
that is a very serious charge against the president .
the matter has been thoroughly looked into .
but the point is sometimes the action has to be taken by the federal government and when we took action , it had a favorable response .
you 're judged by the whole record .
you 're judged by the entire record .
are we closer to peace ?
are we doing better in anti - terrorism ?
should we have listened to my opponent who wanted to send the un into the persian gulf or in spite of the mistakes of the past , are we doing better there ?
how is our credibility with the gcc countries on the western side of the gulf .
is iran talking to iraq about peace ?
you judge on the record .
are the soviets coming out of afghanistan ?
how does it look in a program he called or some one of these marvelous boston adjective up there and -- about angola -- now , we have a chance -- several bostonians do n't like it , but the rest of the country will understand .
now we have a chance .
now we have a chance .
and , so , i think that i 'd leave it right there and say that you judge on the whole record .
and let me say this -- all he can talk about -- he goes around ranting about noriega .
now , i 've told you what the intelligence briefing he received said about that .
he can talk about iran - contra and also -- i 'll make a deal with you , i will take the blame for those two incidents if you give me half the credit for all the good things that have happened in world peace since ronald reagan and i took over from the carter administration .
i still have a couple of minutes left .
and there is a difference principle -- 



  it 's only on yellow here .
wait a minute .
jim -- 



  i said i was n't perfect .
where was i ?
i finished .
i see a young man that was elected to the senate twice , to the house of representatives twice .
i see a man who is young and i am putting my confidence in a whole generation of people that are in their 30s and 40s .
i see a man that took the leadership in the job training partnership act and that retrains people in this highly competitive changing society we 're in , so if a person loses his hob he is retrained for a benefit -- for a -- work that will be productive and he wo n't have to go on one of these many programs that the liberal -- talking about .
i see a young man who is a knowledgeable -- in defense and there are three people on our ticket that are knowledgeable -- in the whole -- in the race -- knowledgeable in defense and dan quayle is one of them and i am one of them .
and i believe that he will be outstanding .
and he took a tremendous pounding and everybody now knows that he took a very unfair pounding .
and i 'd like each person to say did i jump to conclusions running down rumors that were so outrageous and so brutal .
and he 's kept his head up .
and he will do very very well .
and he has my full confidence and he 'll have the confidence of people that are in their 30s and 40s and more .
so , judge the man on his record not on the -- lot of rumors and innuendo and trying to fool around with his name .
my opponent says j. danforth quayle .
do you know who j. danforth was , he was a man who gave his life in world war ii , so ridiculing a person 's name is a little beneath this process .
and he 'll do very well when we get into the debates .
just the facts .
no , i think the debate ought to be between you and lloyd .
well , i -- we obviously have a difference .
i believe it does meet the test .
we 'll have an opportunity to see the two of them in action in a friendly forum , wonderful friendly fashion like this .
i had hoped this had been a little friendlier evening .
i wanted to hitchhike a ride home in his tank with him .
but now we 've got the lines too carefully drawn here .
but you talk about judgment .
i mean , what kind of judgment -- i mean , jumping all over the president on his decision on one area of farm policy .
what kind of judgment sense has your chief education adviser now in jail in massachusetts ?
i mean , there 's -- i do n't think this is a fair argument .
but nevertheless , i support my nominee for vice president and he 'll do an outstanding job .
i oppose supply management and production controls .
i support the farm bill , the 1985 farm bill and spending is moving in the right direction .
i want to expand our markets abroad and that 's why i 've called for that first economic summit to be on agriculture .
i will not go back to the way the democrats did it and used food as a political weapon and throw a grain embargo on the farmers in this country .
i want to see rural redevelopment and i have been out front in favor of alternate sources of energy and one of them is gasohol and comes from using your corn and i think we can do better in terms of biodegradable for a lot of product , so i 'm optimistic about the agricultural economy .
in terms of the third world , i support the baker plan .
i want to see market economies spring up all around the world and to the degree they do , we are succeeding .
and i do n't want to see the banks let off the hook .
i would oppose that , but i think were on the right track in agriculture and i am very very encouraged .
but let 's not go back to that -- what they call supply management and production control , that 'll simply price us out of the international market .
let 's try to expand our markets abroad .
i talked in new orleans about a gentler and kinder nation and i have made specific proposals on education and the environment and on ethics and energy and how we do better in battling crime in our country .
but there are two main focal points of this election .
opportunity and peace .
i want to keep this expansion going .
yes , we want change but we are the change .
i am the change .
i do n't want to go back to malaise and misery index .
and , so , opportunity .
keep america at work .
the best poverty program is a job with dignity in the private sector .
and in terms of peace , we are on the right track .
we 've achieved an arms control agreement that our critics thought was never possible and i want to build on it .
i want to see us finalize that start agreement and i want it to be the one to finally lead the world to banishing chemical and biological weapons .
i want to see asymmetrical reductions in conventional forces .
and then it gets down to a question of values .
we 've had a chance to spell out our differences on the pledge of allegiance here tonight and on tough sentencing of drug king pins and this kind of thing .
and i do favor the death penalty .
and we 've got a wide array of differences on those .
but in the final analysis -- in the final analysis , the person goes into that voting booth , they 're going to say , " who has the values i believe in ?
who has the experience that we trust ?
who has the integrity and stability to get the job done ? "
my fellow americans , i am that man and i ask for your support .
thank you very much .

thank you all very much .
thank you , thank you very much .
and i am proud to receive and i am honored to accept your nomination for president of the united states .
may i thank my dear friend and our great leader , bob dole , for that wonderful introduction .
let me say this : this nomination 's not for me alone .
it is for the ideas , principles , and values that we stand for .
my job has been made easier by a leader who 's taken a lot of unfair criticism with grace and humor , the vice president of the united states , dan quayle .
and i am very grateful to him .
i want to talk tonight about the sharp choice that i intend to offer americans this fall , a choice between different agendas , different directions , and yes , a choice about the character of the man you want to lead this nation .
i know that americans have many questions about our economy , about our country 's future , even questions about me .
i 'll answer them tonight .
first , i feel great .
and i am heartened by the polls , the ones that say that i look better in my jogging shorts than the governor of arkansas .
four years ago , i spoke about missions for my life and for our country .
i spoke of one urgent mission , defending our security and promoting the american ideal abroad .
just pause for a moment to reflect on what we 've done .
germany is united , and a slab of the berlin wall sits right outside this astrodome .
arabs and israelis now sit face to face and talk peace , and every hostage held in lebanon is free .
the conflict in el salvador is over , and free elections brought democracy to nicaragua .
black and white south africans cheered each other at the olympics .
the soviet union can only be found in history books .
the captive nations of eastern europe and the baltics are captive no more .
and today on the rural streets of poland , merchants sell cans of air labeled `` the last breath of communism.''if i had stood before you 4 years ago and described this as the world we would help to build , you would have said , `` george bush , you must have been smoking something , and you must have inhaled.''this convention is the first at which an american president can say the cold war is over , and freedom finished first .
audience members .
u. s.a. !
u. s.a. !
u. s.a.!the president .
we have a lot to be proud of , a lot .
some want to rewrite history , want to skip over the struggle , claim the outcome was inevitable .
and while the u. s. postwar strategy was largely bipartisan , the fact remains that the liberal mcgovern wing of the other party , including my opponent , consistently made the wrong choices .
in the seventies , they wanted a hollow army .
we wanted a strong fighting force .
in the eighties -- and you remember this one -- in the eighties , they wanted a nuclear freeze , and we insisted on peace through strength .
from angola to central america , they said , `` let 's negotiate , deliberate , procrastinate . ''
we said , `` just stand up for freedom . ''
now the cold war is over , and they claim , `` hey , we were with you all the way.''audience members .
boo - o - o!the president .
you know , their behavior reminds me of the old con man 's advice to the new kid .
he said , `` son , if you 're being run out of town , just get out in front and make it look like a parade.''well , make no mistake : the demise of communism was n't a sure thing .
it took the strong leadership of presidents from both parties , including republicans like richard nixon and gerald ford and ronald reagan .
without their vision and the support of the american people , the soviet union would be a strong superpower today , and we 'd be facing a nuclear threat tonight .
my opponents say i spend too much time on foreign policy , as if it did n't matter that schoolchildren once hid under their desks in drills to prepare for nuclear war .
i saw the chance to rid our children 's dreams of the nuclear nightmare , and i did .
over the past 4 years , more people have breathed the fresh air of freedom than in all of human history .
i saw a chance to help , and i did .
these were the two defining opportunities not of a year , not of a decade , but of an entire span of human history .
i seized those opportunities for our kids and our grandkids , and i make no apologies for that .
now , the soviet bear may be gone , but there are still wolves in the woods .
we saw that when saddam hussein invaded kuwait .
the mideast might have become a nuclear powder keg , our energy supplies held hostage .
so we did what was right and what was necessary .
we destroyed a threat , freed a people , and locked a tyrant in the prison of his own country .
what about the leader of the arkansas national guard , the man who hopes to be commander in chief ?
well , i bit the bullet , and he bit his nails .
listen to this now .
two days after congress followed my lead , my opponent said this , and i quote directly : `` i guess i would have voted with the majority if it was a close vote .
but i agree with the arguments the minority made . ''
now , sounds to me like his policy can be summed up by a road sign he 's probably seen on his bus tour , `` slippery when wet.''look , this is serious business .
think about the impact of our foreign policy failures the last time the democrats controlled both ends of pennsylvania avenue : gas lines , grain embargoes , american hostages blindfolded .
there will be more foreign policy challenges like kuwait in the next 4 years , terrorists and aggressors to stand up to , dangerous weapons to be controlled and destroyed .
freedom 's fight is not finished .
i look forward to being the first president to visit a free , democratic cuba .
who will lead the world in the face of these challenges ?
not my opponent .
in his acceptance speech he devoted just 65 seconds to telling us about the world .
then he said that america was , and i quote again -- i want to be fair and factual -- i quote , being `` ridiculed '' everywhere .
well , tell that to the people around the world , for whom america is still a dream .
tell that to leaders around the world , from whom america commands respect .
ridiculed ?
tell that to the men and women of desert storm .
audience members .
u. s.a. !
u. s.a. !
u. s.a.!the president .
let me just make an aside comment here because of what you 've been reading in the paper .
this is a political year , but there 's a lot of danger in the world .
you can be sure i will never let politics interfere with a foreign policy decision .
forget the election ; i will do right , what is right for the national security of the united states of america , and that is a pledge from my heart .
fifty years ago this summer , i was 18 years of age .
i see some young people in the audience tonight , and i remember how i felt in those days .
i believed deeply in this country , and we were faced with a world war .
so i made a decision to go off and fight a battle much different from political battles .
i was scared , but i was willing .
i was young , but i was ready .
i had barely lived when i began to watch men die .
i began to see the special place of america in the world .
i began to see , even then , that the world would become a much smaller place , and faraway places could become more and more like america .
fifty years later , after change of almost biblical proportions , we know that when freedom grows , america grows .
just as a strong america means a safer world , we have learned that a safer world means a stronger america .
this election is about change .
but that 's not unusual , because the american revolution is never ending .
today , the pace of change is accelerating .
we face new opportunities and new challenges .
the question is : who do you trust to make change work for you?audience members .
george bush !
george bush !
george bush!the president .
my opponent says america is a nation in decline .
of our economy , he says we are somewhere on the list beneath germany , heading south toward sri lanka .
well , do n't let anyone tell you that america is second - rate , especially somebody running for president .
maybe he has n't heard that we are still the world 's largest economy .
no other nation sells more outside its borders .
the germans , the british , the japanese ca n't touch the productivity of you , the american worker and the american farmer .
my opponent wo n't mention that .
he wo n't remind you that interest rates are the lowest they 've been in 20 years , and millions of americans have refinanced their homes .
you just wo n't hear that inflation , the thief of the middle class , has been locked in a maximum security prison .
you do n't hear much about this good news because the media also tends to focus only on the bad .
when the berlin wall fell , i half expected to see a headline , `` wall falls , three border guards lose jobs . ''
and underneath , it probably says , `` clinton blames bush . ''
you do n't hear a lot about progress in america .
so let me tell you about some good things we 've done together .
just two weeks ago , all three nations of north america agreed to trade freely from manitoba to mexico .
this will bring good jobs to main street , u. s.a. we passed the americans with disabilities act , bringing 43 million people into the economic mainstream .
i must say , it 's about time .
our children will breathe easier because of our new clean air pact .
we are rebuilding our roads , providing jobs for more than half a million americans .
we passed a child care law , and we took a stand for family values by saying that when it comes to raising children , government does n't know best ; parents know best .
i have fought against prejudice and anti - semitism all my life .
i am proud that we strengthened our civil rights laws , and we did it without resorting to quotas .
one more thing of vital importance to all : today , cocaine use has fallen by 60 percent among young people .
to the teenagers , the parents , and the volunteers who are helping us battle the scourge of drugs in america , we say , thank you ; thank you from the bottom of our hearts .
do i want to do more ?
you bet .
nothing hurts me more than to meet with soldiers home from the persian gulf who ca n't find a job or workers who have a job but worry that the next day will bring a pink slip .
and what about parents who scrape and struggle to send their kids to college , only to find them back living at home because they ca n't get work .
the world is in transition , and we are feeling that transition in our homes .
the defining challenge of the nineties is to win the economic competition , to win the peace .
we must be a military superpower , an economic superpower , and an export superpower .
in this election , you 'll hear two versions of how to do this .
theirs is to look inward and protect what we already have .
ours is to look forward , to open new markets , prepare our people to compete , to restore our social fabric , to save and invest so we can win .
we believe that now that the world looks more like america , it 's time for america to look more like herself .
and so we offer a philosophy that puts faith in the individual , not the bureaucracy ; a philosophy that empowers people to do their best , so america can be at its best .
in a world that is safer and freer , this is how we will build an america that is stronger , safer , and more secure .
we start with a simple fact : government is too big and spends too much .
i have asked congress to put a lid on mandatory spending , except social security .
i 've proposed doing away with over 200 programs and 4,000 wasteful projects and to freeze all other spending .
the gridlock democrat congress said no .
audience members .
boo - o - o!the president .
so , beginning tonight , i will enforce the spending freeze on my own .
if congress sends me a bill spending more than i asked for in my budget , i will veto it fast , veto it fast , faster than copies of millie 's book sold .
now , congress wo n't cut spending , but refuses to give the president the power to eliminate pork - barrel projects that waste your money .
forty - three governors have that power .
so i ask you , the american people : give me a congress that will give me the line - item veto .
let me tell you about a recent battle fought with the congress , a battle in which i was aided by bob michel and his troops , and bob dole and his .
this spring , i worked day and night to get two - thirds of the house members to approve a balanced budget amendment to the constitution .
we almost had it , but we lost by just nine votes .
now , listen how .
just before the vote , the liberal leaders of the congress convinced 12 members who cosponsored the bill to switch sides and vote no .
keep in mind , they voted against a bill they had already put their names on .
something fishy is going on .
and look at my opponent on this issue .
look at my opponent .
he says he 's for balanced budgets .
but he came out against the amendment .
he 's like that on a lot of issues , first on one side , then the other .
he 's been spotted in more places than elvis presley .
after all these years , congress has become pretty creative at finding ways to waste your money .
so we need to be just as creative at finding ways to stop them .
i have a brandnew idea .
taxpayers should be given the right to check a box on their tax returns so that up to 10 percent of their payments can go for one purpose alone : to reduce the national debt .
but we also need to make sure that congress does n't just turn around and borrow more money to spend more money .
so i will require that for every tax dollar set aside to cut the debt , the ceilings on spending will be cut by an equal amount .
that way , we will cut both debt and spending and take a whack out of the budget deficit .
my feelings about big government come from my experience ; i spent half my adult life in the private sector .
my opponent has a different experience ; he 's been in government nearly all his life .
his passion to expand government knows no bounds .
he 's already proposed , and listen to this carefully , he has already proposed $ 220 billion in new spending , along with the biggest tax increase in history , $ 150 billion .
and that 's just to start .
audience members .
boo - o - o!the president .
he says he wants to tax the rich .
but folks , he defines rich as anyone who has a job .
you 've heard of the separations of powers .
well , my opponent practices a different theory : the power of separations .
government has the power to separate you from your wallet .
now let me say this : when it comes to taxes , i 've learned the hard way .
there 's an old saying , `` good judgment comes from experience , and experience comes from bad judgment . ''
two years ago , i made a bad call on the democrats tax increase .
i underestimated congress ' addiction to taxes .
with my back against the wall , i agreed to a hard bargain : one tax increase one time in return for the toughest spending limits ever .
well , it was a mistake to go along with the democratic tax increase , and i admit it .
but here 's the question for the american people .
who do you trust in this election ?
the candidate who 's raised taxes one time and regrets it , or the other candidate who raised taxes and fees 128 times and enjoyed it every time?audience members .
viva bush !
viva bush !
viva bush!the president .
thank you very much .
audience members .
hit 'em again !
hit 'em again , harder , harder !
hit 'em again !
hit 'em again , harder , harder!the president .
when the new congress convenes next january , i will propose to further reduce taxes across the board , provided we pay for these cuts with specific spending reductions that i consider appropriate , so that we do not increase the deficit .
i will also continue to fight to increase the personal exemption and to create jobs by winning a cut in capital gains taxes .
that will especially help small businesses .
you know , they create -- small businesses -- they create two - thirds of the new jobs in america .
but my opponent 's plan for small business is clear , present , and dangerous .
beside new income taxes , his plan will lead to a new payroll tax to pay for a government takeover of health care and another new tax to pay for training .
that is just the beginning .
if he gets his way , hardware stores across america will have a new sign up , `` closed for despair . ''
i guess you 'd say his plan really is `` elvis economics . ''
america will be checking into the `` heartbreak hotel.''i believe that small business needs relief from taxation , regulation , and litigation .
and thus , i will extend for one year the freeze on paperwork and unnecessary federal regulation that i imposed last winter .
there is no reason that federal regulations should live longer than my friend george burns .
i will issue an order to get rid of any rule whose time has come and gone .
i see something happening in our towns and in our neighborhoods .
sharp lawyers are running wild .
doctors are afraid to practice medicine , and some moms and pops wo n't even coach little league any more .
we must sue each other less and care for each other more .
i am fighting to reform our legal system , to put an end to crazy lawsuits .
if that means climbing into the ring with the trial lawyers , well , let me just say , round one starts tonight .
after all , my opponent 's campaign is being backed by practically every trial lawyer who ever wore a tasselled loafer .
he 's not in the ring with them ; he 's in the tank .
there are other things we need to do to get our economy up to speed , prepare our kids for the next century .
we must have new incentives for research and new training for workers .
small businesses need capital and credit , and defense workers need new jobs .
i have a plan to provide affordable health care for every american , controlling costs by cutting paperwork and lawsuits and expanding coverage to the poorest of the poor .
we do not need my opponent 's plan for a massive government takeover of health care , which would ration care and deny you the right to choose a doctor .
who wants health care with a system with the efficiency of the house post office and the compassion of the kgb?what about our schools ?
what about our schools ?
my opponent and i both want to change the way our kids learn .
he wants to change our schools a little bit , and i want to change them a lot .
take the issue of whether parents should be able to choose the best school for their kids .
my opponent says that 's okay , as long as the school is run by government .
and i say every parent and child should have a real choice of schools , public , private , or religious .
so we have a clear choice to fix our problems .
do we turn to the tattered blanket of bureaucracy that other nations are tossing away ?
or do we give our people the freedom and incentives to build security for themselves?here 's what i 'm fighting for : open markets for american products ; lower government spending ; tax relief ; opportunities for small business ; legal and health reform ; job training ; and new schools built on competition , ready for the 21st century .
now , okay , why are these proposals not in effect today ?
only one reason : the gridlock democratic congress .
audience members .
clean your house !
clean your house !
clean your house!the president .
a very good idea , a very good idea .
now , i know americans are tired of the blame game , tired of people in washington acting like they 're candidates for the next episode of `` american gladiators . ''
i do n't like it , either .
neither should you .
but the truth is the truth .
our policies have not failed .
they have n't even been tried .
americans want jobs , and on january 28th , i put before congress a plan to create jobs .
if it 'd been passed back then , 500,000 more americans would be at work right now .
but in a nation that demands action , congress has become the master of inaction .
it was n't always this way .
i heard president ford tonight .
i served in congress 22 years ago , under him .
and back then , we cooperated .
we did n't get personal .
we put the people above everything else .
heck , we did n't even own blow dryers back in those days .
at my first inauguration , i said that people did n't send us to bicker .
i extended my hand , and i think the american people know this , i extended my hand to the congressional leaders , the democratic leaders , and they bit it .
the house leadership has not changed in 38 years .
it is a body caught in a hopelessly tangled web of pac 's , perks , privileges , partnership , and paralysis .
every day , congress puts politics ahead of principle and above progress .
now , let me give you just one example : february 20th , 1991 .
it was at the height of the gulf war .
on that very same day , i asked american pilots to risk their lives to fly missions over baghdad .
i also wanted to strengthen our economic security for the future .
so that very same day , i introduced a new domestic energy strategy which would cut our dependence on foreign oil by 7 million barrels a day .
how many days did it take to win the gulf war ?
forty - three .
how many did it take congress to pass a national energy strategy ?
five hundred and thirty - two , and still counting .
i have ridden stationary bikes that can move faster than the united states house of representatives and the united states senate , controlled by the democrat leadership .
audience members .
hit 'em again !
hit 'em again , harder , harder !
hit 'em again !
hit 'em again , harder , harder!the president .
okay .
all right .
you wait .
i 'm fixing to .
where does my opponent stand with congress ?
well , up in new york at their convention , they kept the congressional leaders away from the podium , hid them away .
they did n't want america to hear from the people who really make the decisions .
they hid them for a very good reason , because the american people would recognize a dangerous combination : a rubber - check congress and a rubber - stamp president .
governor clinton and congress know that you 've caught on to their lingo .
they know when they say `` spending , '' you say `` uh - oh . ''
so now they have a new word , `` investment . ''
they want to `` invest '' $ 220 billion more of your money , but i want you to keep it .
governor clinton and congress want to put through the largest tax increase in history , but i will not let that happen .
governor clinton and congress do n't want kids to have the option of praying in school , but i do .
clinton and congress do n't want to close legal loopholes and keep criminals behind bars , but i will .
clinton and congress will stock the judiciary with liberal judges who write laws they ca n't get approved by the voters .
governor clinton even says that mario cuomo belongs on the supreme court .
wait a minute , though .
no , wait .
maybe not a bad idea .
if you believe in judicial restraint , you probably ought to be happy .
after all , the good governor of new york ca n't make up his mind between chocolate and vanilla at baskin robbins .
he 's there , we wo n't have another court decision for 35 years , and maybe that 's all right , too .
are my opponent and congress really in cahoots ?
look at one important question : should we limit the terms of congress?audience members .
yes .
the president .
governor clinton says no .
congress says no .
i say yes .
we tried this -- look , we tried this once before , combining the democratic governor of a small southern state with a very liberal vice president and a democratic congress .
america does not need carter ii .
we do not want to take america back to those days of malaise .
but americans want to know : where 's proof that we will have better days in washington?i'll give you 150 reasons .
that 's how many members of congress are expected to leave washington this year .
some are tainted by scandal ; the voters have bounced them the way they bounced their own checks .
but others are good members , republican and democrat , and they agree with me .
the place just does n't work anymore .
one hundred - fifty new members , from both parties , will be coming to washington this fall .
every one will have a fresh view of america 's future .
i pledge today to the american people , immediately after this election , i will meet with every one of these members , before they get attacked by the pac 's , overwhelmed by their staffs , and cornered by some camera crew .
i will lay out my case for change , change that matters , real change that makes a difference , change that is right for america .
you see , there is a yearning in america , a feeling that maybe it 's time to get back to our roots .
sure we must change , but some values are timeless .
i believe in families that stick together , fathers who stick around .
i happen to believe very deeply in the worth of each individual human being , born or unborn .
i believe in teaching our kids the difference between what 's wrong and what 's right , teaching them respect for hard work and to love their neighbors .
i believe that america will always have a special place in god 's heart , as long as he has a special place in ours .
maybe that 's why i 've always believed that patriotism is not just another point of view .
there are times in every young person 's life when god introduces you to yourself .
i remember such a time .
it was back many years ago , when i stood watch at 4 a. m. up on the bridge of a submarine , the united states finback , u. s.s. finback .
and i would stand there and look out on the blackness of the sky , broken only by the sparkling stars above .
and i would think about friends i lost , a country i loved , and about a girl named barbara .
i remember those nights as clearly as any in my life .
you know , you can see things from up there that other people do n't see .
you can see storm clouds rise and then disappear , the first hint of the sun over the horizon , and the first outline of the shore far away .
now , i know that americans are uneasy today .
there is anxious talk around our kitchen tables .
but from where i stand , i see not america 's sunset but a sunrise .
the world changes for which we 've sacrificed for a generation have finally come to pass , and with them a rare and unprecedented opportunity to pass the sweet cup of prosperity around our american table .
are we up to it ?
i know we are .
as i travel our land , i meet veterans who once worked the turrets of a tank and can now master the keyboards of high - tech economy .
i see teachers blessed with the incredible american capacity for innovation who are teaching our children a new way to learn for a new century .
i meet parents , some working two jobs with hectic schedules , who still find new ways to teach old values to steady their kids in a turbulent world .
i take heart from what is happening in america , not from those who profess a new passion for government but from those with an old and enduring faith in the human potential , those who understand that the genius of america is our capacity for rebirth and renewal .
america is the land where the sun is always peeking over the horizon .
tonight i appeal to that unyielding , undying , undeniable american spirit .
i ask you to consider , now that the entire world is moving our way , why would we want to go back their way ?
i ask not just for your support for my agenda but for your commitment to renew and rebuild our nation by shaking up the one institution that has withstood change for over four decades .
join me in rolling away the roadblock at the other end of pennsylvania avenue , so that in the next 4 years , we will match our accomplishments outside by building a stronger , safer , more secure america inside .
forty - four years ago in another age of uncertainty a different president embarked on a similar mission .
his name was harry s truman .
as he stood before his party to accept their nomination , harry truman knew the freedom i know this evening , the freedom to talk about what 's right for america , and let the chips fall where they may .
harry truman said this : this is more than a political call to arms .
give me your help , not to win votes alone , but to win this new crusade and keep america safe and secure for its own people .
well , tonight i say to you : join me in our new crusade , to reap the rewards of our global victory , to win the peace , so that we may make america safer and stronger for all our people .
may god bless you , and may god bless the united states of america .
thank you very much .

mr. president and mr. speaker and members of the united states congress : 
 i come to this house of the people to speak to you and all americans , certain that we stand at a defining hour .
halfway around the world , we are engaged in a great struggle in the skies and on the seas and sands .
we know why we 're there : we are americans , part of something larger than ourselves .
for two centuries , we 've done the hard work of freedom .
and tonight , we lead the world in facing down a threat to decency and humanity .
what is at stake is more than one small country ; it is a big idea : a new world order , where diverse nations are drawn together in common cause to achieve the universal aspirations of mankind -- peace and security , freedom , and the rule of law .
such is a world worthy of our struggle and worthy of our children 's future .
the community of nations has resolutely gathered to condemn and repel lawless aggression .
saddam hussein 's unprovoked invasion -- his ruthless , systematic rape of a peaceful neighbor -- violated everything the community of nations holds dear .
the world has said this aggression would not stand , and it will not stand .
together , we have resisted the trap of appeasement , cynicism , and isolation that gives temptation to tyrants .
the world has answered saddam 's invasion with 12 united nations resolutions , starting with a demand for iraq 's immediate and unconditional withdrawal , and backed up by forces from 28 countries of six continents .
with few exceptions , the world now stands as one .
the end of the cold war has been a victory for all humanity .
a year and a half ago , in germany , i said that our goal was a europe whole and free .
tonight , germany is united .
europe has become whole and free , and america 's leadership was instrumental in making it possible .
our relationship to the soviet union is important , not only to us but to the world .
that relationship has helped to shape these and other historic changes .
but like many other nations , we have been deeply concerned by the violence in the baltics , and we have communicated that concern to the soviet leadership .
the principle that has guided us is simple : our objective is to help the baltic peoples achieve their aspirations , not to punish the soviet union .
in our recent discussions with the soviet leadership we have been given representations which , if fulfilled , would result in the withdrawal of some soviet forces , a reopening of dialog with the republics , and a move away from violence .
we will watch carefully as the situation develops .
and we will maintain our contact with the soviet leadership to encourage continued commitment to democratization and reform .
if it is possible , i want to continue to build a lasting basis for u. s .- soviet cooperation -- for a more peaceful future for all mankind .
the triumph of democratic ideas in eastern europe and latin america and the continuing struggle for freedom elsewhere all around the world all confirm the wisdom of our nation 's founders .
tonight , we work to achieve another victory , a victory over tyranny and savage aggression .
we in this union enter the last decade of the 20th century thankful for our blessings , steadfast in our purpose , aware of our difficulties , and responsive to our duties at home and around the world .
for two centuries , america has served the world as an inspiring example of freedom and democracy .
for generations , america has led the struggle to preserve and extend the blessings of liberty .
and today , in a rapidly changing world , american leadership is indispensable .
americans know that leadership brings burdens and sacrifices .
but we also know why the hopes of humanity turn to us .
we are americans ; we have a unique responsibility to do the hard work of freedom .
and when we do , freedom works .
the conviction and courage we see in the persian gulf today is simply the american character in action .
the indomitable spirit that is contributing to this victory for world peace and justice is the same spirit that gives us the power and the potential to meet our toughest challenges at home .
we are resolute and resourceful .
if we can selflessly confront the evil for the sake of good in a land so far away , then surely we can make this land all that it should be .
if anyone tells you that america 's best days are behind her , they 're looking the wrong way .
tonight i come before this house and the american people with an appeal for renewal .
this is not merely a call for new government initiatives ; it is a call for new initiatives in government , in our communities , and from every american to prepare for the next american century .
america has always led by example .
so , who among us will set the example ?
which of our citizens will lead us in this next american century ?
everyone who steps forward today -- to get one addict off drugs , to convince one troubled teenager not to give up on life , to comfort one aids patient , to help one hungry child .
we have within our reach the promise of a renewed america .
we can find meaning and reward by serving some higher purpose than ourselves , a shining purpose , the illumination of a thousand points of light .
and it is expressed by all who know the irresistible force of a child 's hand , of a friend who stands by you and stays there , a volunteer 's generous gesture , an idea that is simply right .
the problems before us may be different , but the key to solving them remains the same .
it is the individual -- the individual who steps forward .
and the state of our union is the union of each of us , one to the other -- the sum of our friendships , marriages , families , and communities .
we all have something to give .
so , if you know how to read , find someone who ca n't .
if you 've got a hammer , find a nail .
if you 're not hungry , not lonely , not in trouble , seek out someone who is .
join the community of conscience .
do the hard work of freedom .
and that will define the state of our union .
since the birth of our nation , " we the people " has been the source of our strength .
what government can do alone is limited , but the potential of the american people knows no limits .
we are a nation of rock - solid realism and clear - eyed idealism .
we are americans .
we are the nation that believes in the future .
we are the nation that can shape the future .
and we 've begun to do just that , by strengthening the power and choice of individuals and families .
together , these last two years , we 've put dollars for child care directly in the hands of parents instead of bureaucracies ; unshackled the potential of americans with disabilities ; applied the creativity of the marketplace in the service of the environment , for clean air ; and made home ownership possible for more americans .
the strength of a democracy is not in bureaucracy .
it is in the people and their communities .
in everything we do , let us unleash the potential of our most precious resource -- our citizens , our citizens themselves .
we must return to families , communities , counties , cities , states , and institutions of every kind the power to chart their own destiny and the freedom and opportunity provided by strong economic growth .
and that 's what america is all about .
i know that tonight , in some regions of our country , people are in genuine economic distress .
and i hear them .
earlier this month , kathy blackwell , of massachusetts , wrote me about what can happen when the economy slows down , saying , " my heart is aching , and i think that you should know your people out here are hurting badly."i understand , and i 'm not unrealistic about the future .
but there are reasons to be optimistic about our economy .
first , we do n't have to fight double - digit inflation .
second , most industries wo n't have to make big cuts in production because they do n't have big inventories piled up .
and third , our exports are running solid and strong .
in fact , american businesses are exporting at a record rate .
so , let 's put these times in perspective .
together , since 1981 , we 've created almost 20 million jobs , cut inflation in half , and cut interest rates in half .
and yes , the largest peacetime economic expansion in history has been temporarily interrupted .
but our economy is still over twice as large as our closest competitor .
we will get this recession behind us and return to growth soon .
we will get on our way to a new record of expansion and achieve the competitive strength that will carry us into the next american century .
we should focus our efforts today on encouraging economic growth , investing in the future , and giving power and opportunity to the individual .
we must begin with control of federal spending .
that 's why i 'm submitting a budget that holds the growth in spending to less than the rate of inflation .
and that 's why , amid all the sound and fury of last year 's budget debate , we put into law new , enforceable spending caps , so that future spending debates will mean a battle of ideas , not a bidding war .
though controversial , the budget agreement finally put the federal government on a pay - as - you - go plan and cut the growth of debt by nearly $ 500 billion .
and that frees funds for saving and job - creating investment .
now , let 's do more .
my budget again includes tax - free family savings accounts ; penalty - free withdrawals from iras for first - time home buyers ; and to increase jobs and growth , a reduced tax for long - term capital gains .
i know there are differences among us --   -- about the impact and the effects of a capital gains incentive .
so tonight , i 'm asking the congressional leaders and the federal reserve to cooperate with us in a study , led by chairman alan greenspan , to sort out our technical differences so that we can avoid a return to unproductive partisan bickering .
but just as our efforts will bring economic growth now and in the future , they must also be matched by long - term investments for the next american century .
that requires a forward - looking plan of action , and that 's exactly what we will be sending to the congress .
we 've prepared a detailed series of proposals that include : a budget that promotes investment in america 's future -- in children , education , infrastructure , space , and high technology ; legislation to achieve excellence in education , building on the partnership forged with the 50 governors at the education summit , enabling parents to choose their children 's schools and helping to make america number one in math and science ; a blueprint for a new national highway system , a critical investment in our transportation infrastructure ; a research and development agenda that includes record levels of federal investment , and a permanent tax credit to strengthen private r and d and to create jobs ; a comprehensive national energy strategy that calls for energy conservation and efficiency , increased development , and greater use of alternative fuels ; a banking reform plan to bring america 's financial system into the 21st century so that our banks remain safe and secure and can continue to make job - creating loans for our factories , our businesses , and home buyers .
you know , i do think there has been too much pessimism .
sound banks should be making sound loans now , and interest rates should be lower , now .
in addition to these proposals , we must recognize that our economic strength depends on being competitive in world markets .
we must continue to expand american exports .
a successful uruguay round of world trade negotiations will create more real jobs and more real growth for all nations .
you and i know that if the playing field is level , america 's workers and farmers can out - work , out - produce anyone , anytime , anywhere .
and with a mexican free trade agreement and our enterprise for the americas initiative , we can help our partners strengthen their economies and move toward a free trade zone throughout this entire hemisphere .
the budget also includes a plan of action right here at home to put more power and opportunity in the hands of the individual .
and that means new incentives to create jobs in our inner cities by encouraging investment through enterprise zones .
it also means tenant control and ownership of public housing .
freedom and the power to choose should not be the privilege of wealth .
they are the birthright of every american .
civil rights are also crucial to protecting equal opportunity .
every one of us has a responsibility to speak out against racism , bigotry , and hate .
we will continue our vigorous enforcement of existing statutes , and i will once again press the congress to strengthen the laws against employment discrimination without resorting to the use of unfair preferences .
we 're determined to protect another fundamental civil right : freedom from crime and the fear that stalks our cities .
the attorney general will soon convene a crime summit of our nation 's law enforcement officials .
and to help us support them , we need tough crime control legislation , and we need it now .
and as we fight crime , we will fully implement our national strategy for combating drug abuse .
recent data show that we are making progress , but much remains to be done .
we will not rest until the day of the dealer is over , forever .
good health care is every american 's right and every american 's responsibility .
and so , we are proposing an aggressive program of new prevention initiatives -- for infants , for children , for adults , and for the elderly -- to promote a healthier america and to help keep costs from spiraling .
it 's time to give people more choice in government by reviving the ideal of the citizen politician who comes not to stay but to serve .
and one of the reasons that there is so much support across this country for term limitations is that the american people are increasingly concerned about big - money influence in politics .
so , we must look beyond the next election to the next generation .
and the time has come to put the national interest above the special interest and to totally eliminate political action committees .
and that would truly put more competition in elections and more power in the hands of individuals .
and where power can not be put directly in the hands of the individual , it should be moved closer to the people , away from washington .
the federal government too often treats government programs as if they are of washington , by washington , and for washington .
once established , federal programs seem to become immortal .
it 's time for a more dynamic program life cycle .
some programs should increase .
some should decrease .
some should be terminated .
and some should be consolidated and turned over to the states .
my budget includes a list of programs for potential turnover totaling more than $ 20 billion .
working with congress and the governors , i propose we select at least $ 15 billion in such programs and turn them over to the states in a single consolidated grant , fully funded , for flexible management by the states .
the value , the value of this turnover approach is straightforward .
it allows the federal government to reduce overhead .
it allows states to manage more flexibly and more efficiently .
it moves power and decisionmaking closer to the people .
and it reinforces a theme of this administration : appreciation and encouragement of the innovative powers of states as laboratories .
this nation was founded by leaders who understood that power belongs in the hands of people .
and they planned for the future .
and so must we , here and all around the world .
as americans , we know that there are times when we must step forward and accept our responsibility to lead the world away from the dark chaos of dictators , toward the brighter promise of a better day .
almost 50 years ago we began a long struggle against aggressive totalitarianism .
now we face another defining hour for america and the world .
there is no one more devoted , more committed to the hard work of freedom than every soldier and sailor , every marine , airman , and coastguardsman , every man and woman now serving in the persian gulf .
oh , how they deserve --   -- and what a fitting tribute to them .
you see -- what a wonderful , fitting tribute to them .
each of them has volunteered , volunteered to provide for this nation 's defense , and now they bravely struggle to earn for america , for the world , and for future generations a just and lasting peace .
our commitment to them must be equal to their commitment to their country .
they are truly america 's finest .
the war in the gulf is not a war we wanted .
we worked hard to avoid war .
for more than five months we -- along with the arab league , the european community , the united nations -- tried every diplomatic avenue .
u. n. secretary - general perez de cuellar ; presidents gorbachev , mitterrand , ozal , mubarak , and bendjedid ; kings fahd and hassan ; prime ministers major and andreotti -- just to name a few -- all worked for a solution .
but time and again , saddam hussein flatly rejected the path of diplomacy and peace .
the world well knows how this conflict began and when : it began on august 2nd , when saddam invaded and sacked a small , defenseless neighbor .
and i am certain of how it will end .
so that peace can prevail , we will prevail .
thank you .
tonight i am pleased to report that we are on course .
iraq 's capacity to sustain war is being destroyed .
our investment , our training , our planning -- all are paying off .
time will not be saddam 's salvation .
our purpose in the persian gulf remains constant : to drive iraq out of kuwait , to restore kuwait 's legitimate government , and to ensure the stability and security of this critical region .
let me make clear what i mean by the region 's stability and security .
we do not seek the destruction of iraq , its culture , or its people .
rather , we seek an iraq that uses its great resources not to destroy , not to serve the ambitions of a tyrant , but to build a better life for itself and its neighbors .
we seek a persian gulf where conflict is no longer the rule , where the strong are neither tempted nor able to intimidate the weak .
most americans know instinctively why we are in the gulf .
they know we had to stop saddam now , not later .
they know that this brutal dictator will do anything , will use any weapon , will commit any outrage , no matter how many innocents suffer .
they know we must make sure that control of the world 's oil resources does not fall into his hands , only to finance further aggression .
they know that we need to build a new , enduring peace , based not on arms races and confrontation but on shared principles and the rule of law .
and we all realize that our responsibility to be the catalyst for peace in the region does not end with the successful conclusion of this war .
democracy brings the undeniable value of thoughtful dissent , and we 've heard some dissenting voices here at home -- some , a handful , reckless ; most responsible .
but the fact that all voices have the right to speak out is one of the reasons we 've been united in purpose and principle for 200 years .
our progress in this great struggle is the result of years of vigilance and a steadfast commitment to a strong defense .
now , with remarkable technological advances like the patriot missile , we can defend against ballistic missile attacks aimed at innocent civilians .
looking forward , i have directed that the sdi program be refocused on providing protection from limited ballistic missile strikes , whatever their source .
let us pursue an sdi program that can deal with any future threat to the united states , to our forces overseas , and to our friends and allies .
the quality of american technology , thanks to the american worker , has enabled us to successfully deal with difficult military conditions and help minimize precious loss of life .
we have given our men and women the very best .
and they deserve it .
we all have a special place in our hearts for the families of our men and women serving in the gulf .
they are represented here tonight by mrs. norman schwarzkopf .
we are all very grateful to general schwarzkopf and to all those serving with him .
and i might also recognize one who came with mrs. schwarzkopf : alma powell , the wife of the distinguished chairman of the joint chiefs .
and to the families , let me say our forces in the gulf will not stay there one day longer than is necessary to complete their mission .
the courage and success of the raf pilots , of the kuwaiti , saudi , french , the canadians , the italians , the pilots of qatar and bahrain -- all are proof that for the first time since world war ii , the international community is united .
the leadership of the united nations , once only a hoped - for ideal , is now confirming its founders ' vision .
i am heartened that we are not being asked to bear alone the financial burdens of this struggle .
last year , our friends and allies provided the bulk of the economic costs of desert shield .
and now , having received commitments of over $ 40 billion for the first three months of 1991 , i am confident they will do no less as we move through desert storm .
but the world has to wonder what the dictator of iraq is thinking .
if he thinks that by targeting innocent civilians in israel and saudi arabia , that he will gain advantage , he is dead wrong .
if he thinks that he will advance his cause through tragic and despicable environmental terrorism , he is dead wrong .
and if he thinks that by abusing the coalition prisoners of war he will benefit , he is dead wrong .
we will succeed in the gulf .
and when we do , the world community will have sent an enduring warning to any dictator or despot , present or future , who contemplates outlaw aggression .
the world can , therefore , seize this opportunity to fulfill the long - held promise of a new world order , where brutality will go unrewarded and aggression will meet collective resistance .
yes , the united states bears a major share of leadership in this effort .
among the nations of the world , only the united states of america has both the moral standing and the means to back it up .
we 're the only nation on this earth that could assemble the forces of peace .
this is the burden of leadership and the strength that has made america the beacon of freedom in a searching world .
this nation has never found glory in war .
our people have never wanted to abandon the blessings of home and work for distant lands and deadly conflict .
if we fight in anger , it is only because we have to fight at all .
and all of us yearn for a world where we will never have to fight again .
each of us will measure within ourselves the value of this great struggle .
any cost in lives -- any cost -- is beyond our power to measure .
but the cost of closing our eyes to aggression is beyond mankind 's power to imagine .
this we do know : our cause is just ; our cause is moral ; our cause is right .
let future generations understand the burden and the blessings of freedom .
let them say we stood where duty required us to stand .
let them know that , together , we affirmed america and the world as a community of conscience .
the winds of change are with us now .
the forces of freedom are together , united .
we move toward the next century more confident than ever that we have the will at home and abroad to do what must be done -- the hard work of freedom .
may god bless the united states of america .
thank you very , very much .

i want to talk to you today about the tragedy in somalia and about a mission that can ease suffering and save lives .
every american has seen the shocking images from somalia .
the scope of suffering there is hard to imagine .
already , over a quarter - million people , as many people as live in buffalo , new york , have died in the somali famine .
in the months ahead 5 times that number , 1 1/2 million people , could starve to death .
for many months now , the united states has been actively engaged in the massive international relief effort to ease somalia 's suffering .
all told , america has sent somalia 200,000 tons of food , more than half the world total .
this summer , the distribution system broke down .
truck convoys from somalia 's ports were blocked .
sufficient food failed to reach the starving in the interior of somalia .
so in august , we took additional action .
in concert with the united nations , we sent in the u. s. air force to help fly food to the towns .
to date , american pilots have flown over 1,400 flights , delivering over 17,000 tons of food aid .
and when the u. n. authorized 3,500 u. n. guards to protect the relief operation , we flew in the first of them , 500 soldiers from pakistan .
but in the months since then , the security situation has grown worse .
the u. n. has been prevented from deploying its initial commitment of troops .
in many cases , food from relief flights is being looted upon landing ; food convoys have been hijacked ; aid workers assaulted ; ships with food have been subject to artillery attacks that prevented them from docking .
there is no government in somalia .
law and order have broken down .
anarchy prevails .
one image tells the story .
imagine 7,000 tons of food aid literally bursting out of a warehouse on a dock in mogadishu , while somalis starve less than a kilometer away because relief workers can not run the gauntlet of armed gangs roving the city .
confronted with these conditions , relief groups called for outside troops to provide security so they could feed people .
it 's now clear that military support is necessary to ensure the safe delivery of the food somalis need to survive .
it was this situation which led us to tell the united nations that the united states would be willing to provide more help to enable relief to be delivered .
last night the united nations security council , by unanimous vote and after the tireless efforts of secretary - general boutros - ghali , welcomed the united states offer to lead a coalition to get the food through .
after consulting with my advisers , with world leaders , and the congressional leadership , i have today told secretary - general boutros - ghali that america will answer the call .
i have given the order to secretary cheney to move a substantial american force into somalia .
as i speak , a marine amphibious ready group , which we maintain at sea , is offshore mogadishu .
these troops will be joined by elements of the 1st marine expeditionary force , based out of camp pendleton , california , and by the army 's 10th mountain division out of fort drum , new york .
these and other american forces will assist in operation restore hope .
they are america 's finest .
they will perform this mission with courage and compassion , and they will succeed .
the people of somalia , especially the children of somalia , need our help .
we 're able to ease their suffering .
we must help them live .
we must give them hope .
america must act .
in taking this action , i want to emphasize that i understand the united states alone can not right the world 's wrongs .
but we also know that some crises in the world can not be resolved without american involvement , that american action is often necessary as a catalyst for broader involvement of the community of nations .
only the united states has the global reach to place a large security force on the ground in such a distant place quickly and efficiently and thus save thousands of innocents from death .
we will not , however , be acting alone .
i expect forces from about a dozen countries to join us in this mission .
when we see somalia 's children starving , all of america hurts .
we 've tried to help in many ways .
and make no mistake about it , now we and our allies will ensure that aid gets through .
here is what we and our coalition partners will do : 
 first , we will create a secure environment in the hardest hit parts of somalia , so that food can move from ships over land to the people in the countryside now devastated by starvation .
second , once we have created that secure environment , we will withdraw our troops , handing the security mission back to a regular u. n. peacekeeping force .
our mission has a limited objective : to open the supply routes , to get the food moving , and to prepare the way for a u. n. peacekeeping force to keep it moving .
this operation is not open - ended .
we will not stay one day longer than is absolutely necessary .
let me be very clear : our mission is humanitarian , but we will not tolerate armed gangs ripping off their own people , condemning them to death by starvation .
general hoar and his troops have the authority to take whatever military action is necessary to safeguard the lives of our troops and the lives of somalia 's people .
the outlaw elements in somalia must understand this is serious business .
we will accomplish our mission .
we have no intent to remain in somalia with fighting forces , but we are determined to do it right , to secure an environment that will allow food to get to the starving people of somalia .
to the people of somalia i promise this : we do not plan to dictate political outcomes .
we respect your sovereignty and independence .
based on my conversations with other coalition leaders , i can state with confidence : we come to your country for one reason only , to enable the starving to be fed .
let me say to the men and women of our armed forces : we are asking you to do a difficult and dangerous job .
as commander in chief i assure you , you will have our full support to get the job done , and we will bring you home as soon as possible .
finally , let me close with a message to the families of the men and women who take part in this mission : i understand it is difficult to see your loved ones go , to send them off knowing they will not be home for the holidays , but the humanitarian mission they undertake is in the finest traditions of service .
so , to every sailor , soldier , airman , and marine who is involved in this mission , let me say , you 're doing god 's work .
we will not fail .
thank you , and may god bless the united states of america .

mr. chief justice , mr. president , vice president quayle , senator mitchell , speaker wright , senator dole , congressman michel , and fellow citizens , neighbors , and friends : 
 there is a man here who has earned a lasting place in our hearts and in our history .
president reagan , on behalf of our nation , i thank you for the wonderful things that you have done for america .
i 've just repeated word for word the oath taken by george washington 200 years ago , and the bible on which i placed my hand is the bible on which he placed his .
it is right that the memory of washington be with us today not only because this is our bicentennial inauguration but because washington remains the father of our country .
and he would , i think , be gladdened by this day ; for today is the concrete expression of a stunning fact : our continuity , these 200 years , since our government began .
we meet on democracy 's front porch .
a good place to talk as neighbors and as friends .
for this is a day when our nation is made whole , when our differences , for a moment , are suspended .
and my first act as president is a prayer .
i ask you to bow your heads .
heavenly father , we bow our heads and thank you for your love .
accept our thanks for the peace that yields this day and the shared faith that makes its continuance likely .
make us strong to do your work , willing to heed and hear your will , and write on our hearts these words : " use power to help people . "
for we are given power not to advance our own purposes , nor to make a great show in the world , nor a name .
there is but one just use of power , and it is to serve people .
help us remember , lord .
amen .
i come before you and assume the presidency at a moment rich with promise .
we live in a peaceful , prosperous time , but we can make it better .
for a new breeze is blowing , and a world refreshed by freedom seems reborn .
for in man 's heart , if not in fact , the day of the dictator is over .
the totalitarian era is passing , its old ideas blown away like leaves from an ancient , lifeless tree .
a new breeze is blowing , and a nation refreshed by freedom stands ready to push on .
there is new ground to be broken and new action to be taken .
there are times when the future seems thick as a fog ; you sit and wait , hoping the mists will lift and reveal the right path .
but this is a time when the future seems a door you can walk right through into a room called tomorrow .
great nations of the world are moving toward democracy through the door to freedom .
men and women of the world move toward free markets through the door to prosperity .
the people of the world agitate for free expression and free thought through the door to the moral and intellectual satisfactions that only liberty allows .
we know what works : freedom works .
we know what 's right : freedom is right .
we know how to secure a more just and prosperous life for man on earth : through free markets , free speech , free elections , and the exercise of free will unhampered by the state .
for the first time in this century , for the first time in perhaps all history , man does not have to invent a system by which to live .
we do n't have to talk late into the night about which form of government is better .
we do n't have to wrest justice from the kings .
we only have to summon it from within ourselves .
we must act on what we know .
i take as my guide the hope of a saint : in crucial things , unity ; in important things , diversity ; in all things , generosity .
america today is a proud , free nation , decent and civil , a place we can not help but love .
we know in our hearts , not loudly and proudly but as a simple fact , that this country has meaning beyond what we see , and that our strength is a force for good .
but have we changed as a nation even in our time ?
are we enthralled with material things , less appreciative of the nobility of work and sacrifice ?
my friends , we are not the sum of our possessions .
they are not the measure of our lives .
in our hearts we know what matters .
we can not hope only to leave our children a bigger car , a bigger bank account .
we must hope to give them a sense of what it means to be a loyal friend ; a loving parent ; a citizen who leaves his home , his neighborhood , and town better than he found it .
and what do we want the men and women who work with us to say when we 're no longer there ?
that we were more driven to succeed than anyone around us ?
or that we stopped to ask if a sick child had gotten better and stayed a moment there to trade a word of friendship ?
no president , no government can teach us to remember what is best in what we are .
but if the man you have chosen to lead this government can help make a difference ; if he can celebrate the quieter , deeper successes that are made not of gold and silk but of better hearts and finer souls ; if he can do these things , then he must .
america is never wholly herself unless she is engaged in high moral principle .
we as a people have such a purpose today .
it is to make kinder the face of the nation and gentler the face of the world .
my friends , we have work to do .
there are the homeless , lost and roaming .
there are the children who have nothing , no love and no normalcy .
there are those who can not free themselves of enslavement to whatever addiction -- drugs , welfare , the demoralization that rules the slums .
there is crime to be conquered , the rough crime of the streets .
there are young women to be helped who are about to become mothers of children they ca n't care for and might not love .
they need our care , our guidance , and our education , though we bless them for choosing life .
the old solution , the old way , was to think that public money alone could end these problems .
but we have learned that that is not so .
and in any case , our funds are low .
we have a deficit to bring down .
we have more will than wallet , but will is what we need .
we will make the hard choices , looking at what we have and perhaps allocating it differently , making our decisions based on honest need and prudent safety .
and then we will do the wisest thing of all .
we will turn to the only resource we have that in times of need always grows : the goodness and the courage of the american people .
and i am speaking of a new engagement in the lives of others , a new activism , hands - on and involved , that gets the job done .
we must bring in the generations , harnessing the unused talent of the elderly and the unfocused energy of the young .
for not only leadership is passed from generation to generation but so is stewardship .
and the generation born after the second world war has come of age .
i have spoken of a thousand points of light , of all the community organizations that are spread like stars throughout the nation , doing good .
we will work hand in hand , encouraging , sometimes leading , sometimes being led , rewarding .
we will work on this in the white house , in the cabinet agencies .
i will go to the people and the programs that are the brighter points of light , and i 'll ask every member of my government to become involved .
the old ideas are new again because they 're not old , they are timeless : duty , sacrifice , commitment , and a patriotism that finds its expression in taking part and pitching in .
we need a new engagement , too , between the executive and the congress .
the challenges before us will be thrashed out with the house and the senate .
and we must bring the federal budget into balance .
and we must ensure that america stands before the world united , strong , at peace , and fiscally sound .
but of course things may be difficult .
we need to compromise ; we 've had dissension .
we need harmony ; we 've had a chorus of discordant voices .
for congress , too , has changed in our time .
there has grown a certain divisiveness .
we have seen the hard looks and heard the statements in which not each other 's ideas are challenged but each other 's motives .
and our great parties have too often been far apart and untrusting of each other .
it 's been this way since vietnam .
that war cleaves us still .
but , friends , that war began in earnest a quarter of a century ago , and surely the statute of limitation has been reached .
this is a fact : the final lesson of vietnam is that no great nation can long afford to be sundered by a memory .
a new breeze is blowing , and the old bipartisanship must be made new again .
to my friends , and , yes , i do mean friends -- in the loyal opposition and , yes , i mean loyal -- i put out my hand .
i am putting out my hand to you , mr. speaker .
i am putting out my hand to you , mr. majority leader .
for this is the thing : this is the age of the offered hand .
and we ca n't turn back clocks , and i do n't want to .
but when our fathers were young , mr. speaker , our differences ended at the water 's edge .
and we do n't wish to turn back time , but when our mothers were young , mr. majority leader , the congress and the executive were capable of working together to produce a budget on which this nation could live .
let us negotiate soon and hard .
but in the end , let us produce .
the american people await action .
they did n't send us here to bicker .
they ask us to rise above the merely partisan . "
in crucial things , unity " -- and this , my friends , is crucial .
to the world , too , we offer new engagement and a renewed vow : we will stay strong to protect the peace .
the offered hand is a reluctant fist ; once made -- strong , and can be used with great effect .
there are today americans who are held against their will in foreign lands and americans who are unaccounted for .
assistance can be shown here and will be long remembered .
good will begets good will .
good faith can be a spiral that endlessly moves on .
great nations like great men must keep their word .
when america says something , america means it , whether a treaty or an agreement or a vow made on marble steps .
we will always try to speak clearly , for candor is a compliment ; but subtlety , too , is good and has its place .
while keeping our alliances and friendships around the world strong , ever strong , we will continue the new closeness with the soviet union , consistent both with our security and with progress .
one might say that our new relationship in part reflects the triumph of hope and strength over experience .
but hope is good , and so is strength and vigilance .
here today are tens of thousands of our citizens who feel the understandable satisfaction of those who have taken part in democracy and seen their hopes fulfilled .
but my thoughts have been turning the past few days to those who would be watching at home , to an older fellow who will throw a salute by himself when the flag goes by and the woman who will tell her sons the words of the battle hymns .
i do n't mean this to be sentimental .
i mean that on days like this we remember that we are all part of a continuum , inescapably connected by the ties that bind .
our children are watching in schools throughout our great land .
and to them i say , thank you for watching democracy 's big day .
for democracy belongs to us all , and freedom is like a beautiful kite that can go higher and higher with the breeze .
and to all i say , no matter what your circumstances or where you are , you are part of this day , you are part of the life of our great nation .
a president is neither prince nor pope , and i do n't seek a window on men 's souls .
in fact , i yearn for a greater tolerance , and easygoingness about each other 's attitudes and way of life .
there are few clear areas in which we as a society must rise up united and express our intolerance .
the most obvious now is drugs .
and when that first cocaine was smuggled in on a ship , it may as well have been a deadly bacteria , so much has it hurt the body , the soul of our country .
and there is much to be done and to be said , but take my word for it : this scourge will stop !
and so , there is much to do .
and tomorrow the work begins .
and i do not mistrust the future .
i do not fear what is ahead .
for our problems are large , but our heart is larger .
our challenges are great , but our will is greater .
and if our flaws are endless , god 's love is truly boundless .
some see leadership as high drama and the sound of trumpets calling , and sometimes it is that .
but i see history as a book with many pages , and each day we fill a page with acts of hopefulness and meaning .
the new breeze blows , a page turns , the story unfolds .
and so , today a chapter begins , a small and stately story of unity , diversity , and generosity -- shared , and written , together .
thank you .
god bless you .
and god bless the united states of america .

mr. speaker and mr. president , distinguished members of congress , honored guests , and fellow citizens : thank you very much for that warm reception .
you know , with the big buildup this address has had , i wanted to make sure it would be a big hit , but i could n't convince barbara to deliver it for me .
i see the speaker and the vice president are laughing .
they saw what i did in japan , and they 're just happy they 're sitting behind me .
i mean to speak tonight of big things , of big changes and the promises they hold , and of some big problems and how , together , we can solve them and move our country forward as the undisputed leader of the age .
we gather tonight at a dramatic and deeply promising time in our history and in the history of man on earth .
for in the past 12 months , the world has known changes of almost biblical proportions .
and even now , months after the failed coup that doomed a failed system , i 'm not sure we 've absorbed the full impact , the full import of what happened .
but communism died this year .
even as president , with the most fascinating possible vantage point , there were times when i was so busy managing progress and helping to lead change that i did n't always show the joy that was in my heart .
but the biggest thing that has happened in the world in my life , in our lives , is this : by the grace of god , america won the cold war .
i mean to speak this evening of the changes that can take place in our country , now that we can stop making the sacrifices we had to make when we had an avowed enemy that was a superpower .
now we can look homeward even more and move to set right what needs to be set right .
i will speak of those things .
but let me tell you something i 've been thinking these past few months .
it 's a kind of rollcall of honor .
for the cold war did n't end ; it was won .
and i think of those who won it , in places like korea and vietnam .
and some of them did n't come back .
back then they were heroes , but this year they were victors .
the long rollcall , all the g. i. joes and janes , all the ones who fought faithfully for freedom , who hit the ground and sucked the dust and knew their share of horror .
this may seem frivolous , and i do n't mean it so , but it 's moving to me how the world saw them .
the world saw not only their special valor but their special style : their rambunctious , optimistic bravery , their do - or - die unity unhampered by class or race or region .
what a group we 've put forth , for generations now , from the ones who wrote " kilroy was here " on the walls of the german stalags to those who left signs in the iraqi desert that said , " i saw elvis . "
what a group of kids we 've sent out into the world .
and there 's another to be singled out , though it may seem inelegant , and i mean a mass of people called the american taxpayer .
no one ever thinks to thank the people who pay a country 's bill or an alliance 's bill .
but for half a century now , the american people have shouldered the burden and paid taxes that were higher than they would have been to support a defense that was bigger than it would have been if imperial communism had never existed .
but it did ; does n't anymore .
and here 's a fact i would n't mind the world acknowledging : the american taxpayer bore the brunt of the burden and deserves a hunk of the glory .
so now , for the first time in 35 years , our strategic bombers stand down .
no longer are they on ' round - the - clock alert .
tomorrow our children will go to school and study history and how plants grow .
and they wo n't have , as my children did , air raid drills in which they crawl under their desks and cover their heads in case of nuclear war .
my grandchildren do n't have to do that and wo n't have the bad dreams children had once , in decades past .
there are still threats .
but the long , drawn - out dread is over .
a year ago tonight , i spoke to you at a moment of high peril .
american forces had just unleashed operation desert storm .
and after 40 days in the desert skies and four days on the ground , the men and women of america 's armed forces and our allies accomplished the goals that i declared and that you endorsed : we liberated kuwait .
soon after , the arab world and israel sat down to talk seriously and comprehensively about peace , an historic first .
and soon after that , at christmas , the last american hostages came home .
our policies were vindicated .
much good can come from the prudent use of power .
and much good can come of this : a world once divided into two armed camps now recognizes one sole and preeminent power , the united states of america .
and they regard this with no dread .
for the world trusts us with power , and the world is right .
they trust us to be fair and restrained .
they trust us to be on the side of decency .
they trust us to do what 's right .
i use those words advisedly .
a few days after the war began , i received a telegram from joanne speicher , the wife of the first pilot killed in the gulf , lieutenant commander scott speicher .
even in her grief , she wanted me to know that some day when her children were old enough , she would tell them " that their father went away to war because it was the right thing to do . "
and she said it all : it was the right thing to do .
and we did it together .
there were honest differences right here in this chamber .
but when the war began , you put partisanship aside , and we supported our troops .
this is still a time for pride , but this is no time to boast .
for problems face us , and we must stand together once again and solve them and not let our country down .
two years ago , i began planning cuts in military spending that reflected the changes of the new era .
but now , this year , with imperial communism gone , that process can be accelerated .
tonight i can tell you of dramatic changes in our strategic nuclear force .
these are actions we are taking on our own because they are the right thing to do .
after completing 20 planes for which we have begun procurement , we will shut down further production of the b-2 bombers .
we will cancel the small icbm program .
we will cease production of new warheads for our sea - based ballistic missiles .
we will stop all new production of the peacekeeper missile .
and we will not purchase any more advanced cruise missiles .
this weekend i will meet at camp david with boris yeltsin of the russian federation .
i 've informed president yeltsin that if the commonwealth , the former soviet union , will eliminate all land - based multiple - warhead ballistic missiles , i will do the following : we will eliminate all peacekeeper missiles .
we will reduce the number of warheads on minuteman missiles to one and reduce the number of warheads on our sea - based missiles by about one - third .
and we will convert a substantial portion of our strategic bombers to primarily conventional use .
president yeltsin 's early response has been very positive , and i expect our talks at camp david to be fruitful .
i want you to know that for half a century , american presidents have longed to make such decisions and say such words .
but even in the midst of celebration , we must keep caution as a friend .
for the world is still a dangerous place .
only the dead have seen the end of conflict .
and though yesterday 's challenges are behind us , tomorrow 's are being born .
the secretary of defense recommended these cuts after consultation with the joint chiefs of staff .
and i make them with confidence .
but do not misunderstand me .
the reductions i have approved will save us an additional $ 50 billion over the next five years .
by 1997 , we will have cut defense by 30 percent since i took office .
these cuts are deep , and you must know my resolve : this deep , and no deeper .
to do less would be insensible to progress , but to do more would be ignorant of history .
we must not go back to the days of " the hollow army . "
we can not repeat the mistakes made twice in this century when armistice was followed by recklessness and defense was purged as if the world were permanently safe .
i remind you this evening that i have asked for your support in funding a program to protect our country from limited nuclear missile attack .
we must have this protection because too many people in too many countries have access to nuclear arms .
and i urge you again to pass the strategic defense initiative , sdi .
there are those who say that now we can turn away from the world , that we have no special role , no special place .
but we are the united states of america , the leader of the west that has become the leader of the world .
and as long as i am president , i will continue to lead in support of freedom everywhere , not out of arrogance , not out of altruism , but for the safety and security of our children .
this is a fact : strength in the pursuit of peace is no vice ; isolationism in the pursuit of security is no virtue .
and now to our troubles at home .
they 're not all economic ; the primary problem is our economy .
there are some good signs .
inflation , that thief , is down .
and interest rates are down .
but unemployment is too high , some industries are in trouble , and growth is not what it should be .
let me tell you right from the start and right from the heart , i know we 're in hard times .
but i know something else : this will not stand .
in this chamber , in this chamber we can bring the same courage and sense of common purpose to the economy that we brought to desert storm .
and we can defeat hard times together .
i believe you 'll help .
one reason is that you 're patriots , and you want the best for your country .
and i believe that in your hearts you want to put partisanship aside and get the job done because it 's the right thing to do .
the power of america rests in a stirring but simple idea , that people will do great things if only you set them free .
well , we 're going to set the economy free .
for if this age of miracles and wonders has taught us anything , it 's that if we can change the world we can change america .
we must encourage investment .
we must make it easier for people to invest money and create new products , new industries , and new jobs .
we must clear away the obstacles to growth : high taxes , high regulation , redtape , and yes , wasteful government spending .
none of this will happen with a snap of the fingers , but it will happen .
and the test of a plan is n't whether it 's called new or dazzling .
the american people are n't impressed by gimmicks ; they 're smarter on this score than all of us in this room .
the only test of a plan is : is it sound , and will it work?we must have a short - term plan to address our immediate needs and heat up the economy .
and then we need a longer term plan to keep combustion going and to guarantee our place in the world economy .
there are certain things that a president can do without congress , and i 'm going to do them .
i have , this evening , asked major cabinet departments and federal agencies to institute a 90-day moratorium on any new federal regulations that could hinder growth .
in those 90 days , major departments and agencies will carry out a top - to - bottom review of all regulations , old and new , to stop the ones that will hurt growth and speed up those that will help growth .
further , for the untold number of hard - working , responsible american workers and business men and women who 've been forced to go without needed bank loans , the banking credit crunch must end .
i wo n't neglect my responsibility for sound regulations that serve the public good , but regulatory overkill must be stopped .
and i 've instructed our government regulators to stop it .
i have directed cabinet departments and federal agencies to speed up progrowth expenditures as quickly as possible .
this should put an extra $ 10 billion into the economy in the next six months .
and our new transportation bill provides more than $ 150 billion for construction and maintenance projects that are vital to our growth and well - being .
and that means jobs building roads , jobs building bridges , and jobs building railways .
and i have , this evening , directed the secretary of the treasury to change the federal tax withholding tables .
with this change , millions of americans from whom the government withholds more than necessary can now choose to have the government withhold less from their paychecks .
something tells me a number of taxpayers may take us up on this one .
this initiative could return about $ 25 billion back into our economy over the next 12 months , money people can use to help pay for clothing , college , or to get a new car .
finally , working with the federal reserve , we will continue to support monetary policy that keeps both interest rates and inflation down .
now , these are the things i can do .
and now , members of congress , let me tell you what you can do for your country .
you must pass the other elements of my plan to meet our economic needs .
everyone knows that investment spurs recovery .
i am proposing this evening a change in the alternative minimum tax and the creation of a new 15-percent investment tax allowance .
this will encourage businesses to accelerate investment and bring people back to work .
real estate has led our economy out of almost all the tough times we 've ever had .
once building starts , carpenters and plumbers work ; people buy homes and take out mortgages .
my plan would modify the passive loss rule for active real estate developers .
and it would make it easier for pension plans to purchase real estate .
for those americans who dream of buying a first home but who ca n't quite afford it , my plan would allow first - time homebuyers to withdraw savings from iras without penalty and provide a $ 5,000 tax credit for the first purchase of that home .
and finally , my immediate plan calls on congress to give crucial help to people who own a home , to everyone who has a business or a farm or a single investment .
this time , at this hour , i can not take no for an answer .
you must cut the capital gains tax on the people of our country .
never has an issue been more demagogued by its opponents .
but the demagogs are wrong .
they are wrong , and they know it .
sixty percent of the people who benefit from lower capital gains have incomes under $ 50,000 .
a cut in the capital gains tax increases jobs and helps just about everyone in our country .
and so , i 'm asking you to cut the capital gains tax to a maximum of 15.4 percent .
i 'll tell you , those of you who say , " oh , no , someone who 's comfortable may benefit from that , " you kind of remind me of the old definition of the puritan who could n't sleep at night , worrying that somehow , someone somewhere was out having a good time .
the opponents of this measure and those who have authored various so - called soak - the - rich bills that are floating around this chamber should be reminded of something : when they aim at the big guy , they usually hit the little guy .
and maybe it 's time that stopped .
this , then , is my short - term plan .
your part , members of congress , requires enactment of these commonsense proposals that will have a strong effect on the economy without breaking the budget agreement and without raising tax rates .
while my plan is being passed and kicking in , we 've got to care for those in trouble today .
i have provided for up to $ 4.4 billion in my budget to extend federal unemployment benefits .
and i ask for congressional action right away .
and i thank the committee .
well , at last .
let 's be frank .
let 's be frank .
let me level with you .
i know and you know that my plan is unveiled in a political season .
i know and you know that everything i propose will be viewed by some in merely partisan terms .
but i ask you to know what is in my heart .
and my aim is to increase our nation 's good .
i 'm doing what i think is right , and i am proposing what i know will help .
i pride myself that i 'm a prudent man , and i believe that patience is a virtue .
but i understand that politics is , for some , a game and that sometimes the game is to stop all progress and then decry the lack of improvement .
but let me tell you : far more important than my political future and far more important than yours is the well - being of our country .
members of this chamber are practical people , and i know you wo n't resent some practical advice .
when people put their party 's fortunes , whatever the party , whatever side of this aisle , before the public good , they court defeat not only for their country but for themselves .
and they will certainly deserve it .
i submit my plan tomorrow , and i 'm asking you to pass it by march 20 .
and i ask the american people to let you know they want this action by march 20 .
from the day after that , if it must be , the battle is joined .
and you know , when principle is at stake i relish a good , fair fight .
i said my plan has two parts , and it does .
and it 's the second part that is the heart of the matter .
for it 's not enough to get an immediate burst .
we need long - term improvement in our economic position .
we all know that the key to our economic future is to ensure that america continues as an economic leader of the world .
we have that in our power .
here , then , is my long - term plan to guarantee our future .
first , trade : we will work to break down the walls that stop world trade .
we will work to open markets everywhere .
and in our major trade negotiations , i will continue pushing to eliminate tariffs and subsidies that damage america 's farmers and workers .
and we 'll get more good american jobs within our own hemisphere through the north american free trade agreement and through the enterprise for the americas initiative .
but changes are here , and more are coming .
the workplace of the future will demand more highly skilled workers than ever , more people who are computer - literate , highly educated .
we must be the world 's leader in education .
and we must revolutionize america 's schools .
my america 2000 strategy will help us reach that goal .
my plan will give parents more choice , give teachers more flexibility , and help communities create new american schools .
thirty states across the nation have established america 2000 programs .
hundreds of cities and towns have joined in .
now congress must join this great movement : pass my proposals for new american schools .
that was my second long - term proposal , and here 's my third : we must make commonsense investments that will help us compete , long - term , in the marketplace .
we must encourage research and development .
my plan is to make the r and d tax credit permanent and to provide record levels of support , over $ 76 billion this year alone , for people who will explore the promise of emerging technologies .
fourth , we must do something about crime and drugs .
it is time for a major , renewed investment in fighting violent street crime .
it saps our strength and hurts our faith in our society and in our future together .
surely a tired woman on her way to work at 6 in the morning on a subway deserves the right to get there safely .
and surely it 's true that everyone who changes his or her life because of crime , from those afraid to go out at night to those afraid to walk in the parks they pay for , surely these people have been denied a basic civil right .
it is time to restore it .
congress , pass my comprehensive crime bill .
it is tough on criminals and supportive of police , and it has been languishing in these hallowed halls for years now .
pass it .
help your country .
fifth , i ask you tonight to fund our hope housing proposal and to pass my enterprise zone legislation which will get businesses into the inner city .
we must empower the poor with the pride that comes from owning a home , getting a job , becoming a part of things .
my plan would encourage real estate construction by extending tax incentives for mortgage revenue bonds and low - income housing .
and i ask tonight for record expenditures for the program that helps children born into want move into excellence , head start .
step six , we must reform our health care system .
for this , too , bears on whether or not we can compete in the world .
american health costs have been exploding .
this year america will spend over $ 800 billion on health , and that is expected to grow to $ 1.6 trillion by the end of the decade .
we simply can not afford this .
the cost of health care shows up not only in your family budget but in the price of everything we buy and everything we sell .
when health coverage for a fellow on an assembly line costs thousands of dollars , the cost goes into the products he makes , and you pay the bill .
we must make a choice .
now , some pretend we can have it both ways .
they call it " play or pay , " but that expensive approach is unstable .
it will mean higher taxes , fewer jobs , and eventually a system under complete government control .
really , there are only two options .
and we can move toward a nationalized system , a system which will restrict patient choice in picking a doctor and force the government to ration services arbitrarily .
and what we 'll get is patients in long lines , indifferent service , and a huge new tax burden .
or we can reform our own private health care system , which still gives us , for all its flaws , the best quality health care in the world .
well , let 's build on our strengths .
my plan provides insurance security for all americans while preserving and increasing the idea of choice .
we make basic health insurance affordable for all low - income people not now covered , and we do it by providing a health insurance tax credit of up to $ 3,750 for each low - income family .
and the middle class gets help , too .
and by reforming the health insurance market , my plan assures that americans will have access to basic health insurance even if they change jobs or develop serious health problems .
we must bring costs under control , preserve quality , preserve choice , and reduce the people 's nagging daily worry about health insurance .
my plan , the details of which i 'll announce very shortly , does just that .
seventh , we must get the federal deficit under control .
we now have , in law , enforceable spending caps and a requirement that we pay for the programs we create .
there are those in congress who would ease that discipline now .
but i can not let them do it , and i wo n't .
my plan would freeze all domestic discretionary budget authority , which means no more next year than this year .
i will not tamper with social security , but i would put real caps on the growth of uncontrolled spending .
and i would also freeze federal domestic government employment .
and with the help of congress , my plan will get rid of 246 programs that do n't deserve federal funding .
some of them have noble titles , but none of them is indispensable .
we can get rid of each and every one of them .
you know , it 's time we rediscovered a home truth the american people have never forgotten : this government is too big and spends too much .
and i call upon congress to adopt a measure that will help put an end to the annual ritual of filling the budget with pork barrel appropriations .
every year , the press has a field day making fun of outrageous examples : a lawrence welk museum , research grants for belgian endive .
we all know how these things get into the budget , and maybe you need someone to help you say no .
i know how to say it , and i know what i need to make it stick .
give me the same thing 43 governors have , the line - item veto , and let me help you control spending .
we must put an end to unfinanced federal government mandates .
these are the requirements congress puts on our cities , counties , and states without supplying the money .
if congress passes a mandate , it should be forced to pay for it and balance the cost with savings elsewhere .
after all , a mandate just increases someone else 's burden , and that means higher taxes at the state and local level .
step eight , congress should enact the bold reform proposals that are still awaiting congressional action : bank reform , civil justice reform , tort reform , and my national energy strategy .
and finally , we must strengthen the family because it is the family that has the greatest bearing on our future .
when barbara holds an aids baby in her arms and reads to children , she 's saying to every person in this country : family matters .
and i am announcing tonight a new commission on america 's urban families .
i 've asked missouri 's governor john ashcroft to be chairman , former dallas mayor annette strauss to be cochair .
you know , i had mayors , the leading mayors from the league of cities , in the other day at the white house , and they told me something striking .
they said that every one of them , republican or democrat , agreed on one thing , that the major cause of the problems of the cities is the dissolution of the family .
they asked for this commission , and they were right to ask because it 's time to determine what we can do to keep families together , strong and sound .
there 's one thing we can do right away : ease the burden of rearing a child .
i ask you tonight to raise the personal exemption by $ 500 per child for every family .
for a family with four kids , that 's an increase of $ 2,000 .
this is a good start in the right direction , and it 's what we can afford .
it 's time to allow families to deduct the interest they pay on student loans .
i am asking you to do just that .
and i 'm asking you to allow people to use money from their iras to pay medical and education expenses , all without penalties .
and i 'm asking for more .
ask american parents what they dislike about how things are going in our country , and chances are good that pretty soon they 'll get to welfare .
americans are the most generous people on earth .
but we have to go back to the insight of franklin roosevelt who , when he spoke of what became the welfare program , warned that it must not become " a narcotic " and a " subtle destroyer " of the spirit .
welfare was never meant to be a lifestyle .
it was never meant to be a habit .
it was never supposed to be passed from generation to generation like a legacy .
it 's time to replace the assumptions of the welfare state and help reform the welfare system .
states throughout the country are beginning to operate with new assumptions that when able - bodied people receive government assistance , they have responsibilities to the taxpayer : a responsibility to seek work , education , or job training ; a responsibility to get their lives in order ; a responsibility to hold their families together and refrain from having children out of wedlock ; and a responsibility to obey the law .
we are going to help this movement .
often , state reform requires waiving certain federal regulations .
i will act to make that process easier and quicker for every state that asks for our help .
i want to add , as we make these changes , we work together to improve this system , that our intention is not scapegoating or finger - pointing .
if you read the papers and watch tv , you know there 's been a rise these days in a certain kind of ugliness : racist comments , anti - semitism , an increased sense of division .
really , this is not us .
this is not who we are .
and this is not acceptable .
and so , you have my plan for america .
and i 'm asking for big things , but i believe in my heart you 'll do what 's right .
you know , it 's kind of an american tradition to show a certain skepticism toward our democratic institutions .
i myself have sometimes thought the aging process could be delayed if it had to make its way through congress .
you will deliberate , and you will discuss , and that is fine .
but , my friends , the people can not wait .
they need help now .
there 's a mood among us .
people are worried .
there 's been talk of decline .
someone even said our workers are lazy and uninspired .
and i thought : really ?
you go tell neil armstrong standing on the moon .
tell the men and women who put him there .
tell the american farmer who feeds his country and the world .
tell the men and women of desert storm .
moods come and go , but greatness endures .
ours does .
and maybe for a moment it 's good to remember what , in the dailiness of our lives , we forget : we are still and ever the freest nation on earth , the kindest nation on earth , the strongest nation on earth .
and we have always risen to the occasion .
and we are going to lift this nation out of hard times inch by inch and day by day , and those who would stop us had better step aside .
because i look at hard times , and i make this vow : this will not stand .
and so , we move on together , a rising nation , the once and future miracle that is still , this night , the hope of the world .
thank you .
god bless you , and god bless our beloved country .
thank you very , very much .

just 2 hours ago , allied air forces began an attack on military targets in iraq and kuwait .
these attacks continue as i speak .
ground forces are not engaged .
this conflict started august 2d when the dictator of iraq invaded a small and helpless neighbor .
kuwait -- a member of the arab league and a member of the united nations -- was crushed ; its people , brutalized .
five months ago , saddam hussein started this cruel war against kuwait .
tonight , the battle has been joined .
this military action , taken in accord with united nations resolutions and with the consent of the united states congress , follows months of constant and virtually endless diplomatic activity on the part of the united nations , the united states , and many , many other countries .
arab leaders sought what became known as an arab solution , only to conclude that saddam hussein was unwilling to leave kuwait .
others traveled to baghdad in a variety of efforts to restore peace and justice .
our secretary of state , james baker , held an historic meeting in geneva , only to be totally rebuffed .
this past weekend , in a last - ditch effort , the secretary - general of the united nations went to the middle east with peace in his heart -- his second such mission .
and he came back from baghdad with no progress at all in getting saddam hussein to withdraw from kuwait .
now the 28 countries with forces in the gulf area have exhausted all reasonable efforts to reach a peaceful resolution -- have no choice but to drive saddam from kuwait by force .
we will not fail .
as i report to you , air attacks are underway against military targets in iraq .
we are determined to knock out saddam hussein 's nuclear bomb potential .
we will also destroy his chemical weapons facilities .
much of saddam 's artillery and tanks will be destroyed .
our operations are designed to best protect the lives of all the coalition forces by targeting saddam 's vast military arsenal .
initial reports from general schwarzkopf are that our operations are proceeding according to plan .
our objectives are clear : saddam hussein 's forces will leave kuwait .
the legitimate government of kuwait will be restored to its rightful place , and kuwait will once again be free .
iraq will eventually comply with all relevant united nations resolutions , and then , when peace is restored , it is our hope that iraq will live as a peaceful and cooperative member of the family of nations , thus enhancing the security and stability of the gulf .
some may ask : why act now ?
why not wait ?
the answer is clear : the world could wait no longer .
sanctions , though having some effect , showed no signs of accomplishing their objective .
sanctions were tried for well over 5 months , and we and our allies concluded that sanctions alone would not force saddam from kuwait .
while the world waited , saddam hussein systematically raped , pillaged , and plundered a tiny nation , no threat to his own .
he subjected the people of kuwait to unspeakable atrocities -- and among those maimed and murdered , innocent children .
while the world waited , saddam sought to add to the chemical weapons arsenal he now possesses , an infinitely more dangerous weapon of mass destruction -- a nuclear weapon .
and while the world waited , while the world talked peace and withdrawal , saddam hussein dug in and moved massive forces into kuwait .
while the world waited , while saddam stalled , more damage was being done to the fragile economies of the third world , emerging democracies of eastern europe , to the entire world , including to our own economy .
the united states , together with the united nations , exhausted every means at our disposal to bring this crisis to a peaceful end .
however , saddam clearly felt that by stalling and threatening and defying the united nations , he could weaken the forces arrayed against him .
while the world waited , saddam hussein met every overture of peace with open contempt .
while the world prayed for peace , saddam prepared for war .
i had hoped that when the united states congress , in historic debate , took its resolute action , saddam would realize he could not prevail and would move out of kuwait in accord with the united nation resolutions .
he did not do that .
instead , he remained intransigent , certain that time was on his side .
saddam was warned over and over again to comply with the will of the united nations : leave kuwait , or be driven out .
saddam has arrogantly rejected all warnings .
instead , he tried to make this a dispute between iraq and the united states of america .
well , he failed .
tonight , 28 nations -- countries from 5 continents , europe and asia , africa , and the arab league -- have forces in the gulf area standing shoulder to shoulder against saddam hussein .
these countries had hoped the use of force could be avoided .
regrettably , we now believe that only force will make him leave .
prior to ordering our forces into battle , i instructed our military commanders to take every necessary step to prevail as quickly as possible , and with the greatest degree of protection possible for american and allied service men and women .
i 've told the american people before that this will not be another vietnam , and i repeat this here tonight .
our troops will have the best possible support in the entire world , and they will not be asked to fight with one hand tied behind their back .
i 'm hopeful that this fighting will not go on for long and that casualties will be held to an absolute minimum .
this is an historic moment .
we have in this past year made great progress in ending the long era of conflict and cold war .
we have before us the opportunity to forge for ourselves and for future generations a new world order -- a world where the rule of law , not the law of the jungle , governs the conduct of nations .
when we are successful -- and we will be -- we have a real chance at this new world order , an order in which a credible united nations can use its peacekeeping role to fulfill the promise and vision of the u. n. 's founders .
we have no argument with the people of iraq .
indeed , for the innocents caught in this conflict , i pray for their safety .
our goal is not the conquest of iraq .
it is the liberation of kuwait .
it is my hope that somehow the iraqi people can , even now , convince their dictator that he must lay down his arms , leave kuwait , and let iraq itself rejoin the family of peace - loving nations .
thomas paine wrote many years ago : " these are the times that try men 's souls . "
those well - known words are so very true today .
but even as planes of the multinational forces attack iraq , i prefer to think of peace , not war .
i am convinced not only that we will prevail but that out of the horror of combat will come the recognition that no nation can stand against a world united , no nation will be permitted to brutally assault its neighbor .
no president can easily commit our sons and daughters to war .
they are the nation 's finest .
ours is an all - volunteer force , magnificently trained , highly motivated .
the troops know why they 're there .
and listen to what they say , for they 've said it better than any president or prime minister ever could .
listen to hollywood huddleston , marine lance corporal .
he says , " let 's free these people , so we can go home and be free again . "
and he 's right .
the terrible crimes and tortures committed by saddam 's henchmen against the innocent people of kuwait are an affront to mankind and a challenge to the freedom of all .
listen to one of our great officers out there , marine lieutenant general walter boomer .
he said : " there are things worth fighting for .
a world in which brutality and lawlessness are allowed to go unchecked is n't the kind of world we 're going to want to live in . "
listen to master sergeant j. p. kendall of the 82d airborne : " we 're here for more than just the price of a gallon of gas .
what we 're doing is going to chart the future of the world for the next 100 years .
it 's better to deal with this guy now than 5 years from now . "
and finally , we should all sit up and listen to jackie jones , an army lieutenant , when she says , " if we let him get away with this , who knows what 's going to be next ? "
i have called upon hollywood and walter and j. p. and jackie and all their courageous comrades - in - arms to do what must be done .
tonight , america and the world are deeply grateful to them and to their families .
and let me say to everyone listening or watching tonight : when the troops we 've sent in finish their work , i am determined to bring them home as soon as possible .
tonight , as our forces fight , they and their families are in our prayers .
may god bless each and every one of them , and the coalition forces at our side in the gulf , and may he continue to bless our nation , the united states of america .

