when we first arrived at camp david , the first thing upon which we agreed was to ask the people of the world to pray that our negotiations would be successful .
those prayers have been answered far beyond any expectations .
we are privileged to witness tonight a significant achievement in the cause of peace , an achievement none thought possible a year ago , or even a month ago , an achievement that reflects the courage and wisdom of these two leaders .
through 13 long days at camp david , we have seen them display determination and vision and flexibility which was needed to make this agreement come to pass .
all of us owe them our gratitude and respect .
they know that they will always have my personal admiration .
there are still great difficulties that remain and many hard issues to be settled .
the questions that have brought warfare and bitterness to the middle east for the last 30 years will not be settled overnight .
but we should all recognize the substantial achievements that have been made .
one of the agreements that president sadat and prime minister begin are signing tonight is entitled , " a framework for peace in the middle east . "
this framework concerns the principles and some specifics , in the most substantive way , which will govern a comprehensive peace settlement .
it deals specifically with the future of the west bank and gaza and the need to resolve the palestinian problem in all its aspects .
the framework document proposes a 5-year transitional period in the west bank and gaza during which the israeli military government will be withdrawn and a self - governing authority will be elected with full autonomy .
it also provides for israeli forces to remain in specified locations during this period to protect israel 's security .
the palestinians will have the right to participate in the determination of their own future , in negotiations which will resolve the final status of the west bank and gaza , and then to produce an israeli - jordanian peace treaty .
these negotiations will be based on all the provisions and all the principles of united nations security council resolution 242 .
and it provides that israel may live in peace , within secure and recognized borders .
and this great aspiration of israel has been certified without constraint , with the greatest degree of enthusiasm , by president sadat , the leader of one of the greatest nations on earth .
the other document is entitled , " framework for the conclusion of a peace treaty between egypt and israel . "
it provides for the full exercise of egyptian sovereignty over the sinai .
it calls for the full withdrawal of israeli forces from the sinai and , after an interim withdrawal which will be accomplished very quickly , the establishment of normal , peaceful relations between the two countries , including diplomatic relations .
together with accompanying letters , which we will make public tomorrow , these two camp david agreements provide the basis for progress and peace throughout the middle east .
there is one issue on which agreement has not been reached .
egypt states that the agreement to remove israeli settlements from egyptian territory is a prerequisite to a peace treaty .
israel states that the issue of the israeli settlements should be resolved during the peace negotiations .
that 's a substantial difference .
within the next two weeks , the knesset will decide on the issue of these settlements .
tomorrow night , i will go before the congress to explain these agreements more fully and to talk about their implications for the united states and for the world .
for the moment , and in closing , i want to speak more personally about my admiration for all of those who have taken part in this process and my hope that the promise of this moment will be fulfilled .
during the last two weeks , the members of all three delegations have spent endless hours , day and night , talking , negotiating , grappling with problems that have divided their people for 30 years .
whenever there was a danger that human energy would fail , or patience would be exhausted or good will would run out -- and there were many such moments -- these two leaders and the able advisers in all delegations found the resources within them to keep the chances for peace alive .
well , the long days at camp david are over .
but many months of difficult negotiations still lie ahead .
i hope that the foresight and the wisdom that have made this session a success will guide these leaders and the leaders of all nations as they continue the progress toward peace .
thank you very much .

mr. president , mr. speaker , members of the 95th congress , ladies and gentlemen : two years ago today we had the first caucus in iowa , and one year ago tomorrow , i walked from here to the white house to take up the duties of president of the united states .
i did n't know it then when i walked , but i 've been trying to save energy ever since .
i return tonight to fulfill one of those duties of the constitution : to give to the congress -- and to the nation -- information on the state of the union .
militarily , politically , economically , and in spirit , the state of our union is sound .
we are a great country , a strong country , a vital and a dynamic country -- and so we will remain .
we are a confident people and a hardworking people , a decent and a compassionate people -- and so we will remain .
i want to speak to you tonight about where we are and where we must go , about what we have done and what we must do .
and i want to pledge to you my best efforts and ask you to pledge yours .
each generation of americans has to face circumstances not of its own choosing , but by which its character is measured and its spirit is tested .
there are times of emergency , when a nation and its leaders must bring their energies to bear on a single urgent task .
that was the duty abraham lincoln faced when our land was torn apart by conflict in the war between the states .
that was the duty faced by franklin roosevelt when he led america out of an economic depression and again when he led america to victory in war .
there are other times when there is no single overwhelming crisis , yet profound national interests are at stake .
at such times the risk of inaction can be equally great .
it becomes the task of leaders to call forth the vast and restless energies of our people to build for the future .
that is what harry truman did in the years after the second world war , when we helped europe and japan rebuild themselves and secured an international order that has protected freedom from aggression .
we live in such times now , and we face such duties .
we 've come through a long period of turmoil and doubt , but we 've once again found our moral course , and with a new spirit , we are striving to express our best instincts to the rest of the world .
there is all across our land a growing sense of peace and a sense of common purpose .
this sense of unity can not be expressed in programs or in legislation or in dollars .
it 's an achievement that belongs to every individual american .
this unity ties together , and it towers over all our efforts here in washington , and it serves as an inspiring beacon for all of us who are elected to serve .
this new atmosphere demands a new spirit , a partnership between those of us who lead and those who elect .
the foundations of this partnership are truth , the courage to face hard decisions , concern for one another and the common good over special interests , and a basic faith and trust in the wisdom and strength and judgment of the american people .
for the first time in a generation , we are not haunted by a major international crisis or by domestic turmoil , and we now have a rare and a priceless opportunity to address persistent problems and burdens which come to us as a nation -- quietly and steadily getting worse over the years .
as president , i 've had to ask you , the members of congress , and you , the american people , to come to grips with some of the most difficult and hard questions facing our society .
we must make a maximum effort , because if we do not aim for the best , we are very likely to achieve little .
i see no benefit to the country if we delay , because the problems will only get worse .
we need patience and good will , but we really need to realize that there is a limit to the role and the function of government .
government can not solve our problems , it ca n't set our goals , it can not define our vision .
government can not eliminate poverty or provide a bountiful economy or reduce inflation or save our cities or cure illiteracy or provide energy .
and government can not mandate goodness .
only a true partnership between government and the people can ever hope to reach these goals .
those of us who govern can sometimes inspire , and we can identify needs and marshal resources , but we simply can not be the managers of everything and everybody .
we here in washington must move away from crisis management , and we must establish clear goals for the future -- immediate and the distant future -- which will let us work together and not in conflict .
never again should we neglect a growing crisis like the shortage of energy , where further delay will only lead to more harsh and painful solutions .
every day we spend more than $ 120 million for foreign oil .
this slows our economic growth , it lowers the value of the dollar overseas , and it aggravates unemployment and inflation here at home .
now we know what we must do -- increase production .
we must cut down on waste .
and we must use more of those fuels which are plentiful and more permanent .
we must be fair to people , and we must not disrupt our nation 's economy and our budget .
now , that sounds simple .
but i recognize the difficulties involved .
i know that it is not easy for the congress to act .
but the fact remains that on the energy legislation , we have failed the american people .
almost five years after the oil embargo dramatized the problem for us all , we still do not have a national energy program .
not much longer can we tolerate this stalemate .
it undermines our national interest both at home and abroad .
we must succeed , and i believe we will .
our main task at home this year , with energy a central element , is the nation 's economy .
we must continue the recovery and further cut unemployment and inflation .
last year was a good one for the united states .
we reached all of our major economic goals for 1977 .
four million new jobs were created -- an all time record and the number of unemployed dropped by more than a million .
unemployment right now is the lowest it has been since 1974 , and not since world war ii has such a high percentage of american people been employed .
the rate of inflation went down .
there was a good growth in business profits and investments , the source of more jobs for our workers , and a higher standard of living for all our people .
after taxes and inflation , there was a healthy increase in workers ' wages .
and this year , our country will have the first $ 2 trillion economy in the history of the world .
now , we are proud of this progress the first year , but we must do even better in the future .
we still have serious problems on which all of us must work together .
our trade deficit is too large .
inflation is still too high , and too many americans still do not have a job .
now , i did n't have any simple answers for all these problems .
but we have developed an economic policy that is working , because it 's simple , balanced , and fair .
it 's based on four principles : first , the economy must keep on expanding to produce new jobs and better income , which our people need .
the fruits of growth must be widely shared .
more jobs must be made available to those who have been bypassed until now .
and the tax system must be made fairer and simpler .
secondly , private business and not the government must lead the expansion in the future .
third , we must lower the rate of inflation and keep it down .
inflation slows down economic growth , and it 's the most cruel to the poor and also to the elderly and others who live on fixed incomes .
and fourth , we must contribute to the strength of the world economy .
i will announce detailed proposals for improving our tax system later this week .
we can make our tax laws fairer , we can make them simpler and easier to understand , and at the same time , we can - and we will -- reduce the tax burden on american citizens by $ 25 billion .
the tax reforms and the tax reductions go together .
only with the long overdue reforms will the full tax cut be advisable .
almost $ 17 billion in income tax cuts will go to individuals .
ninety - six percent of all american taxpayers will see their taxes go down .
for a typical family of four , this means an annual saving of more than $ 250 a year , or a tax reduction of about 20 percent .
a further $ 2 billion cut in excise taxes will give more relief and also contribute directly to lowering the rate of inflation .
and we will also provide strong additional incentives for business investment and growth through substantial cuts in the corporate tax rates and improvement in the investment tax credit .
now , these tax proposals will increase opportunity everywhere in the nation .
but additional jobs for the disadvantaged deserve special attention .
we 've already passed laws to assure equal access to the voting booth and to restaurants and to schools , to housing , and laws to permit access to jobs .
but job opportunity -- the chance to earn a decent living -- is also a basic human right , which we can not and will not ignore .
a major priority for our nation is the final elimination of the barriers that restrict the opportunities available to women and also to black people and hispanics and other minorities .
we 've come a long way toward that goal .
but there is still much to do .
what we inherited from the past must not be permitted to shackle us in the future .
i 'll be asking you for a substantial increase in funds for public jobs for our young people , and i also am recommending that the congress continue the public service employment programs at more than twice the level of a year ago .
when welfare reform is completed , we will have more than a million additional jobs so that those on welfare who are able to work can work .
however , again , we know that in our free society , private business is still the best source of new jobs .
therefore , i will propose a new program to encourage businesses to hire young and disadvantaged americans .
these young people only need skills and a chance in order to take their place in our economic system .
let 's give them the chance they need .
a major step in the right direction would be the early passage of a greatly improved humphrey - hawkins bill .
my budget for 1979 addresses these national needs , but it is lean and tight .
i have cut waste wherever possible .
i am proposing an increase of less than 2 percent after adjusting for inflation -- the smallest increase in the federal budget in four years .
lately , federal spending has taken a steadily increasing portion of what americans produce .
our new budget reverses that trend , and later i hope to bring the government 's toll down even further .
and with your help , we 'll do that .
in time of high employment and a strong economy , deficit spending should not be a feature of our budget .
as the economy continues to gain strength and as our unemployment rates continue to fall , revenues will grow .
with careful planning , efficient management , and proper restraint on spending , we can move rapidly toward a balanced budget -- and we will .
next year the budget deficit will be only slightly less than this year .
but one - third of the deficit is due to the necessary tax cuts that i 've proposed .
this year the right choice is to reduce the burden on taxpayers and provide more jobs for our people .
the third element in our program is a renewed attack on inflation .
we 've learned the hard way that high unemployment will not prevent or cure inflation .
government can help us by stimulating private investment and by maintaining a responsible economic policy .
through a new top - level review process , we will do a better job of reducing government regulation that drives up costs and drives up prices .
but again , government alone can not bring down the rate of inflation .
when a level of high inflation is expected to continue , then companies raise prices to protect their profit margins against prospective increases in wages and other costs , while workers demand higher wages as protection against expected price increases .
it 's like an escalation in the arms race , and understandably , no one wants to disarm alone .
now , no one firm or a group of workers can halt this process .
it 's an effort that we must all make together .
i 'm therefore asking government , business , labor , and other groups to join in a voluntary program to moderate inflation by holding wage and price increases in each sector of the economy during 1978 below the average increases of the last two years .
i do not believe in wage and price controls .
a sincere commitment to voluntary constraint provides a way -- perhaps the only way -- to fight inflation without government interference .
as i came into the capitol tonight , i saw the farmers , my fellow farmers , standing out in the snow .
i 'm familiar with their problem , and i know from congress action that you are too .
when i was running carters warehouse , we had spread on our own farms 5 - 10 - 15 fertilizer for about $ 40 a ton .
the last time i was home , the price was about $ 100 a ton .
the cost of nitrogen has gone up 150 percent , and the price of products that farmers sell has either stayed the same or gone down a little .
now , this past year in 1977 , you , the congress , and i together passed a new agricultural act .
it went into effect october 1 .
it 'll have its first impact on the 1978 crops .
it will help a great deal .
it 'll add $ 6.5 billion or more to help the farmers with their price supports and target prices .
last year we had the highest level of exports of farm products in the history of our country -- $ 24 billion .
we expect to have more this year .
we 'll be working together .
but i think it 's incumbent on us to monitor very carefully the farm situation and continue to work harmoniously with the farmers of our country .
what 's best for the farmers , the farm families , in the long run is also best for the consumers of our country .
economic success at home is also the key to success in our international economic policy .
an effective energy program , strong investment and productivity , and controlled inflation will provide   our trade balance and balance it , and it will help to protect the integrity of the dollar overseas .
by working closely with our friends abroad , we can promote the economic health of the whole world , with fair and balanced agreements lowering the barriers to trade .
despite the inevitable pressures that build up when the world economy suffers from high unemployment , we must firmly resist the demands for self - defeating protectionism .
but free trade must also be fair trade .
and i am determined to protect american industry and american workers against foreign trade practices which are unfair or illegal .
in a separate written message to congress , i 've outlined other domestic initiatives , such as welfare reform , consumer protection , basic education skills , urban policy , reform of our labor laws , and national health care later on this year .
i will not repeat these tonight .
but there are several other points that i would like to make directly to you .
during these past years , americans have seen our government grow far from us .
for some citizens , the government has almost become like a foreign country , so strange and distant that we 've often had to deal with it through trained ambassadors who have sometimes become too powerful and too influential -- lawyers , accountants , and lobbyists .
this can not go on .
we must have what abraham lincoln wanted -- a government for the people .
we 've made progress toward that kind of government .
you 've given me the authority i requested to reorganize the federal bureaucracy .
and i am using that authority .
we 've already begun a series of reorganization plans which will be completed over a period of three years .
we have also proposed abolishing almost 500 federal advisory and other commissions and boards .
but i know that the american people are still sick and tired of federal paperwork and redtape .
bit by bit we are chopping down the thicket of unnecessary federal regulations by which government too often interferes in our personal lives and our personal business .
we 've cut the public 's federal paperwork load by more than 12 percent in less than a year .
and we are not through cutting .
we 've made a good start on turning the gobbledygook of federal regulations into plain english that people can understand .
but we know that we still have a long way to go .
we 've brought together parts of 11 government agencies to create a new department of energy .
and now it 's time to take another major step by creating a separate department of education .
but even the best organized government will only be as effective as the people who carry out its policies .
for this reason , i consider civil service reform to be absolutely vital .
worked out with the civil servants themselves , this reorganization plan will restore the merit principle to a system which has grown into a bureaucratic maze .
it will provide greater management flexibility and better rewards for better performance without compromising job security .
then and only then can we have a government that is efficient , open , and truly worthy of our people 's understanding and respect .
i have promised that we will have such a government , and i intend to keep that promise .
in our foreign policy , the separation of people from government has been in the past a source of weakness and error .
in a democratic system like ours , foreign policy decisions must be able to stand the test of public examination and public debate .
if we make a mistake in this administration , it will be on the side of frankness and openness with the american people .
in our modern world , when the deaths of literally millions of people can result from a few terrifying seconds of destruction , the path of national strength and security is identical to the path of peace .
tonight , i am happy to report that because we are strong , our nation is at peace with the world .
we are a confident nation .
we 've restored a moral basis for our foreign policy .
the very heart of our identity as a nation is our firm commitment to human rights .
we stand for human rights because we believe that government has as a purpose to promote the well - being of its citizens .
this is true in our domestic policy ; it 's also true in our foreign policy .
the world must know that in support of human rights , the united states will stand firm .
we expect no quick or easy results , but there has been significant movement toward greater freedom and humanity in several parts of the world .
thousands of political prisoners have been freed .
the leaders of the world -- even our ideological adversaries -- now see that their attitude toward fundamental human rights affects their standing in the international community , and it affects their relations with the united states .
to serve the interests of every american , our foreign policy has three major goals .
the first and prime concern is and will remain the security of our country .
security is based on our national will , and security is based on the strength of our armed forces .
we have the will , and militarily we are very strong .
security also comes through the strength of our alliances .
we have reconfirmed our commitment to the defense of europe , and this year we will demonstrate that commitment by further modernizing and strengthening our military capabilities there .
security can also be enhanced by agreements with potential adversaries which reduce the threat of nuclear disaster while maintaining our own relative strategic capability .
in areas of peaceful competition with the soviet union , we will continue to more than hold our own .
at the same time , we are negotiating with quiet confidence , without haste , with careful determination , to ease the tensions between us and to ensure greater stability and security .
the strategic arms limitation talks have been long and difficult .
we want a mutual limit on both the quality and the quantity of the giant nuclear arsenals of both nations , and then we want actual reductions in strategic arms as a major step toward the ultimate elimination of nuclear weapons from the face of the earth .
if these talks result in an agreement this year -- and i trust they will -- i pledge to you that the agreement will maintain and enhance the stability of the world 's strategic balance and the security of the united states .
for 30 years , concerted but unsuccessful efforts have been made to ban the testing of atomic explosives -- both military weapons and peaceful nuclear devices .
we are hard at work with great britain and the soviet union on an agreement which will stop testing and will protect our national security and provide for adequate verification of compliance .
we are now making , i believe , good progress toward this comprehensive ban on nuclear explosions .
we are also working vigorously to halt the proliferation of nuclear weapons among the nations of the world which do not now have them and to reduce the deadly global traffic in conventional arms sales .
our stand for peace is suspect if we are also the principal arms merchant of the world .
so , we 've decided to cut down our arms transfers abroad on a year - by - year basis and to work with other major arms exporters to encourage their similar constraint .
every american has a stake in our second major goal -- a world at peace .
in a nuclear age , each of us is threatened when peace is not secured everywhere .
we are trying to promote harmony in those parts of the world where major differences exist among other nations and threaten international peace .
in the middle east , we are contributing our good offices to maintain the momentum of the current negotiations and to keep open the lines of communication among the middle eastern leaders .
the whole world has a great stake in the success of these efforts .
this is a precious opportunity for a historic settlement of a longstanding conflict -- an opportunity which may never come again in our lifetime .
our role has been difficult and sometimes thankless and controversial .
but it has been constructive and it has been necessary , and it will continue .
our third major foreign policy goal is one that touches the life of every american citizen every day -- world economic growth and stability .
this requires strong economic performance by the industrialized democracies like ourselves and progress in resolving the global energy crisis .
last fall , with the help of others , we succeeded in our vigorous efforts to maintain the stability of the price of oil .
but as many foreign leaders have emphasized to me personally and , i am sure , to you , the greatest future contribution that america can make to the world economy would be an effective energy conservation program here at home .
we will not hesitate to take the actions needed to protect the integrity of the american dollar .
we are trying to develop a more just international system .
and in this spirit , we are supporting the struggle for human development in africa , in asia , and in latin america .
finally , the world is watching to see how we act on one of our most important and controversial items of business -- approval of the panama canal treaties .
the treaties now before the senate are the result of the work of four administrations -- two democratic , two republican .
they guarantee that the canal will be open always for unrestricted use by the ships of the world .
our ships have the right to go to the head of the line for priority of passage in times of emergency or need .
we retain the permanent right to defend the canal with our own military forces , if necessary , to guarantee its openness and its neutrality .
the treaties are to the clear advantage of ourselves , the panamanians , and the other users of the canal .
ratifying the panama canal treaties will demonstrate our good faith to the world , discourage the spread of hostile ideologies in this hemisphere , and directly contribute to the economic well - being and the security of the united states .
i have to say that that 's very welcome applause .
there were two moments on my recent journey which , for me , confirmed the final aims of our foreign policy and what it always must be .
one was in a little village in india , where i met a people as passionately attached to their rights and liberties as we are , but whose children have a far smaller chance for good health or food or education or human fulfillment than a child born in this country .
the other moment was in warsaw , capital of a nation twice devastated by war in this century .
there , people have rebuilt the city which war 's destruction took from them .
but what was new only emphasized clearly what was lost .
what i saw in those two places crystalized for me the purposes of our own nation 's policy : to ensure economic justice , to advance human rights , to resolve conflicts without violence , and to proclaim in our great democracy our constant faith in the liberty and dignity of human beings everywhere .
we americans have a great deal of work to do together .
in the end , how well we do that work will depend on the spirit in which we approach it .
we must seek fresh answers , unhindered by the stale prescriptions of the past .
it has been said that our best years are behind us .
but i say again that america 's best is still ahead .
we have emerged from bitter experiences chastened but proud , confident once again , ready to face challenges once again , and united once again .
we come together tonight at a solemn time .
last week the senate lost a good and honest man -- lee metcalf of montana .
and today , the flag of the united states flew at half - mast from this capitol and from american installations and ships all over the world , in mourning for senator hubert humphrey .
because he exemplified so well the joy and the zest of living , his death reminds us not so much of our own mortality , but of the possibilities offered to us by life .
he always looked to the future with a special american kind of confidence , of hope and enthusiasm .
and the best way that we can honor him is by following his example .
our task -- to use the words of senator humphrey -- is " reconciliation , rebuilding , and rebirth."reconciliation of private needs and interests into a higher purpose .
rebuilding the old dreams of justice and liberty , and country and community .
rebirth of our faith in the common good .
each of us here tonight -- and all who are listening in your homes -- must rededicate ourselves to serving the common good .
we are a community , a beloved community , all of us .
our individual fates are linked , our futures intertwined .
and if we act in that knowledge and in that spirit , together , as the bible says , we can move mountains .
thank you very much .

late yesterday , i cancelled a carefully planned operation which was underway in iran to position our rescue team for later withdrawal of american hostages , who have been held captive there since november 4 .
equipment failure in the rescue helicopters made it necessary to end the mission .
as our team was withdrawing , after my order to do so , two of our american aircraft collided on the ground following a refueling operation in a remote desert location in iran .
other information about this rescue mission will be made available to the american people when it is appropriate to do so .
there was no fighting ; there was no combat .
but to my deep regret , eight of the crewmen of the two aircraft which collided were killed , and several other americans were hurt in the accident .
our people were immediately airlifted from iran .
those who were injured have gotten medical treatment , and all of them are expected to recover .
no knowledge of this operation by any iranian officials or authorities was evident to us until several hours after all americans were withdrawn from iran .
our rescue team knew and i knew that the operation was certain to be difficult and it was certain to be dangerous .
we were all convinced that if and when the rescue operation had been commenced that it had an excellent chance of success .
they were all volunteers ; they were all highly trained .
i met with their leaders before they went on this operation .
they knew then what hopes of mine and of all americans they carried with them .
to the families of those who died and who were wounded , i want to express the admiration i feel for the courage of their loved ones and the sorrow that i feel personally for their sacrifice .
the mission on which they were embarked was a humanitarian mission .
it was not directed against iran ; it was not directed against the people of iran .
it was not undertaken with any feeling of hostility toward iran or its people .
it has caused no iranian casualties .
planning for this rescue effort began shortly after our embassy was seized , but for a number of reasons , i waited until now to put those rescue plans into effect .
to be feasible , this complex operation had to be the product of intensive planning and intensive training and repeated rehearsal .
however , a resolution of this crisis through negotiations and with voluntary action on the part of the iranian officials was obviously then , has been , and will be preferable .
this rescue attempt had to await my judgment that the iranian authorities could not or would not resolve this crisis on their own initiative .
with the steady unraveling of authority in iran and the mounting dangers that were posed to the safety of the hostages themselves and the growing realization that their early release was highly unlikely , i made a decision to commence the rescue operations plans .
this attempt became a necessity and a duty .
the readiness of our team to undertake the rescue made it completely practicable .
accordingly , i made the decision to set our long - developed plans into operation .
i ordered this rescue mission prepared in order to safeguard american lives , to protect america 's national interests , and to reduce the tensions in the world that have been caused among many nations as this crisis has continued .
it was my decision to attempt the rescue operation .
it was my decision to cancel it when problems developed in the placement of our rescue team for a future rescue operation .
the responsibility is fully my own .
in the aftermath of the attempt , we continue to hold the government of iran responsible for the safety and for the early release of the american hostages , who have been held so long .
the united states remains determined to bring about their safe release at the earliest date possible .
as president , i know that our entire nation feels the deep gratitude i feel for the brave men who were prepared to rescue their fellow americans from captivity .
and as president , i also know that the nation shares not only my disappointment that the rescue effort could not be mounted , because of mechanical difficulties , but also my determination to persevere and to bring all of our hostages home to freedom .
we have been disappointed before .
we will not give up in our efforts .
throughout this extraordinarily difficult period , we have pursued and will continue to pursue every possible avenue to secure the release of the hostages .
in these efforts , the support of the american people and of our friends throughout the world has been a most crucial element .
that support of other nations is even more important now .
we will seek to continue , along with other nations and with the officials of iran , a prompt resolution of the crisis without any loss of life and through peaceful and diplomatic means .
thank you very much .

mr. president , mr. speaker , members of the 96th congress , and my fellow citizens : tonight i want to examine in a broad sense the state of our american union -- how we are building a new foundation for a peaceful and a prosperous world .
our children who will be born this year will come of age in the 21st century .
what kind of society , what kind of world are we building for them ?
will we ourselves be at peace ?
will our children enjoy a better quality of life ?
will a strong and united america still be a force for freedom and prosperity around the world?tonight , there is every sign that the state of our union is sound .
our economy offers greater prosperity for more of our people than ever before .
real per capita income and real business profits have risen substantially in the last two years .
farm exports are setting an all - time record each year , and farm income last year , net farm income , was up more than 25 percent .
our liberties are secure .
our military defenses are strong and growing stronger .
and more importantly , tonight , america -- our beloved country -- is at peace .
our earliest national commitments , modified and reshaped by succeeding generations , have served us well .
but the problems that we face today are different from those that confronted earlier generations of americans .
they are more subtle , more complex , and more interrelated .
at home , we are recognizing ever more clearly that government alone can not solve these problems .
and abroad , few of them can be solved by the united states alone .
but americans as a united people , working with our allies and friends , have never been afraid to face problems and to solve problems , either here or abroad .
the challenge to us is to build a new and firmer foundation for the future -- for a sound economy , for a more effective government , for more political trust , and for a stable peace -- so that the america our children inherit will be even stronger and even better than it is today .
we can not resort to simplistic or extreme solutions which substitute myths for common sense .
in our economy , it is a myth that we must choose endlessly between inflation and recession .
together , we build the foundation for a strong economy , with lower inflation , without contriving either a recession with its high unemployment or unworkable , mandatory government controls .
in our government , it is a myth that we must choose between compassion and competence .
together , we build the foundation for a government that works -- and works for people .
in our relations with our potential adversaries , it is a myth that we must choose between confrontation and capitulation .
together , we build the foundation for a stable world of both diversity and peace .
together , we 've already begun to build the foundation for confidence in our economic system .
during the last two years , in bringing our economy out of the deepest recession since the 1930s , we 've created 7,100,000 new jobs .
the unemployment rate has gone down 25 percent .
and now we must redouble our fight against the persistent inflation that has wracked our country for more than a decade .
that 's our important domestic issue , and we must do it together .
we know that inflation is a burden for all americans , but it 's a disaster for the poor , the sick , and the old .
no american family should be forced to choose among food , warmth , health care , or decent housing because the cost of any of these basic necessities has climbed out of reach .
three months ago , i outlined to the nation a balanced anti - inflation program that couples responsible government restraint with responsible wage and price restraint .
it 's based upon my knowledge that there is a more powerful force than government compulsion -- the force created by the cooperative efforts of millions of americans working toward a common goal .
business and labor have been increasingly supportive .
it 's imperative that we in government do our part .
we must stop excessive government growth , and we must control government spending habits .
i 've sent to this congress a stringent but a fair budget , one that , since i ran for president in 1976 , will have cut the federal deficit in half .
and as a percentage of our gross national product , the deficit will have dropped by almost 75 percent .
this congress had a good record last year , and i now ask the 96th congress to continue this partnership in holding the line on excess federal spending .
it will not be easy .
but we must be strong , and we must be persistent .
this budget is a clear message that , with the help of you and the american people , i am determined , as president , to bring inflation under control .
the 1980 budget provides enough spending restraint to begin unwinding inflation , but enough support for our country to keep american workers productive and to encourage the investments that provide new jobs .
we will continue to mobilize our nation 's resources to reduce our trade deficit substantially this year and to maintain the strength of the american dollar .
we 've demonstrated in this restrained budget that we can build on the gains of the past two years to provide additional support to educate disadvantaged children , to care for the elderly , to provide nutrition and legal services for the poor , and to strengthen the economic base of our urban communities and , also , our rural areas .
this year , we will take our first steps to develop a national health plan .
we must never accept a permanent group of unemployed americans , with no hope and no stake in building our society .
for those left out of the economy because of discrimination , a lack of skills , or poverty , we must maintain high levels of training , and we must continue to provide jobs .
a responsible budget is not our only weapon to control inflation .
we must act now to protect all americans from health care costs that are rising $ 1 million per hour , 24 hours a day , doubling every five years .
we must take control of the largest contributor to that inflation -- skyrocketing hospital costs .
there will be no clearer test of the commitment of this congress to the anti - inflation fight than the legislation that i will submit again this year to hold down inflation in hospital care .
over the next five years , my proposals will save americans a total of $ 60 billion , of which $ 25 billion will be savings to the american taxpayer in the federal budget itself .
the american people have waited long enough .
this year we must act on hospital cost containment .
we must also fight inflation by improvements and better enforcement of our antitrust laws and by reducing government obstacles to competition in the private sector .
we must begin to scrutinize the overall effect of regulation in our economy .
through deregulation of the airline industry we 've increased profits , cut prices for all americans , and begun -- for one of the few times in the history of our nation -- to actually dismantle a major federal bureaucracy .
this year , we must begin the effort to reform our regulatory processes for the railroad , bus , and the trucking industries .
america has the greatest economic system in the world .
let 's reduce government interference and give it a chance to work .
i call on congress to take other anti - inflation action -- to expand our exports to protect american jobs threatened by unfair trade , to conserve energy , to increase production and to speed development of solar power , and to reassess our nation 's technological superiority .
american workers who enlist in the fight against inflation deserve not just our gratitude , but they deserve the protection of the real wage insurance proposal that i have already made to the congress .
to be successful , we must change our attitudes as well as our policies .
we can not afford to live beyond our means .
we can not afford to create programs that we can neither manage nor finance , or to waste our natural resources , and we can not tolerate mismanagement and fraud .
above all , we must meet the challenges of inflation as a united people .
with the support of the american people , government in recent decades has helped to dismantle racial barriers , has provided assistance for the jobless and the retired , has fed the hungry , has protected the safety , health , and bargaining rights of american workers , and has helped to preserve our natural heritage .
but it 's not enough to have created a lot of government programs .
now we must make the good programs more effective and improve or weed out those which are wasteful or unnecessary .
with the support of the congress , we 've begun to reorganize and to get control of the bureaucracy .
we are reforming the civil service system , so that we can recognize and reward those who do a good job and correct or remove those who do not .
this year , we must extend major reorganization efforts to education , to economic development , and to the management of our natural resources .
we need to enact a sunshine   law that when government programs have outlived their value , they will automatically be terminated .
there 's no such thing as an effective and a noncontroversial reorganization and reform .
but we know that honest , effective government is essential to restore public faith in our public action .
none of us can be satisfied when two - thirds of the american citizens chose not to vote last year in a national election .
too many americans feel powerless against the influence of private lobbying groups and the unbelievable flood of private campaign money which threatens our electoral process .
this year , we must regain the public 's faith by requiring limited financial funds from public funds for congressional election campaigns .
house bill 1 provides for this public financing of campaigns .
and i look forward with a great deal of anticipation to signing it at an early date .
a strong economy and an effective government will restore confidence in america .
but the path of the future must be charted in peace .
we must continue to build a new and a firm foundation for a stable world community .
we are building that new foundation from a position of national strength -- the strength of our own defenses , the strength of our friendships with other nations , and of our oldest american ideals .
america 's military power is a major force for security and stability in the world .
we must maintain our strategic capability and continue the progress of the last two years with our nato allies , with whom we have increased our readiness , modernized our equipment , and strengthened our defense forces in europe .
i urge you to support the strong defense budget which i have proposed to the congress .
but our national security in this complicated age requires more than just military might .
in less than a lifetime , world population has more than doubled , colonial empires have disappeared , and a hundred new nations have been born .
mass communications , literacy , and migration to the world 's cities have all awakened new yearnings for economic justice and human rights among people everywhere .
this demand for justice and human rights is a wave of the future .
in such a world , the choice is not which super power will dominate the world .
none can and none will .
the choice instead is between a world of anarchy and destruction , or a world of cooperation and peace .
in such a world , we seek not to stifle inevitable change , but to influence its course in helpful and constructive ways that enhance our values , our national interests , and the cause of peace .
towering over this volatile , changing world , like a thundercloud on a summer day , looms the awesome power of nuclear weapons .
we will continue to help shape the forces of change , to anticipate emerging problems of nuclear proliferation and conventional arms sales , and to use our great strength and influence to settle international conflicts in other parts of the world before they erupt and spread .
we have no desire to be the world 's policeman .
but america does want to be the world 's peacemaker .
we are building the foundation for truly global cooperation , not only with western and industrialized nations but with the developing countries as well .
our ties with japan and our european allies are stronger than ever , and so are our friendly relations with the people of latin america , africa , and the western pacific and asia .
we 've won new respect in this hemisphere with the panama canal treaties .
we 've gained new trust with the developing world through our opposition to racism , our commitment to human rights , and our support for majority rule in africa .
the multilateral trade negotiations are now reaching a successful conclusion , and congressional approval is essential to the economic well - being of our own country and of the world .
this will be one of our top priorities in 1979.we are entering a hopeful era in our relations with one - fourth of the world 's people who live in china .
the presence of vice premier deng xiaoping next week will help to inaugurate that new era .
and with prompt congressional action on authorizing legislation , we will continue our commitment to a prosperous , peaceful , and secure life for the people of taiwan .
i 'm grateful that in the past year , as in the year before , no american has died in combat anywhere in the world .
and in iran , nicaragua , cyprus , namibia , and rhodesia , our country is working for peaceful solutions to dangerous conflicts .
in the middle east , under the most difficult circumstances , we have sought to help ancient enemies lay aside deep - seated differences that have produced four bitter wars in our lifetime .
our firm commitment to israel 's survival and security is rooted in our deepest convictions and in our knowledge of the strategic importance to our own nation of a stable middle east .
to promote peace and reconciliation in the region , we must retain the trust and the confidence both of israel and also of the arab nations that are sincerely searching for peace .
i am determined , as president , to use the full , beneficial influence of our country so that the precious opportunity for lasting peace between israel and egypt will not be lost .
the new foundation of international cooperation that we seek excludes no nation .
cooperation with the soviet union serves the cause of peace , for in this nuclear age , world peace must include peace between the super powers -- and it must mean the control of nuclear arms .
ten years ago , the united states and the soviet union made the historic decision to open the strategic arms limitations talks , or salt .
the purpose of salt , then as now , is not to gain a unilateral advantage for either nation , but to protect the security of both nations , to reverse the costly and dangerous momentum of the nuclear arms race , to preserve a stable balance of nuclear forces , and to demonstrate to a concerned world that we are determined to help preserve the peace .
the first salt agreement was concluded in 1972 .
and since then , during six years of negotiation by both republican and democratic leaders , nearly all issues of salt ii have been resolved .
if the soviet union continues to negotiate in good faith , a responsible salt agreement will be reached .
it 's important that the american people understand the nature of the salt process .
salt ii is not based on sentiment ; it 's based on self - interest -- of the united states and of the soviet union .
both nations share a powerful common interest in reducing the threat of a nuclear war .
i will sign no agreement which does not enhance our national security .
salt ii does not rely on trust ; it will be verifiable .
we have very sophisticated , proven means , including our satellites , to determine for ourselves whether or not the soviet union is meeting its treaty obligations .
i will sign no agreement which can not he verified .
the american nuclear deterrent will remain strong after salt ii .
for example , just one of our relatively invulnerable poseidon submarines -- comprising less than 2 percent of our total nuclear force of submarines , aircraft , and landbased missiles -- carries enough warheads to destroy every large- and medium - sized city in the soviet union .
our deterrent is overwhelming , and i will sign no agreement unless our deterrent force will remain overwhelming .
a salt agreement , of course , can not substitute for wise diplomacy or a strong defense , nor will it end the danger of nuclear war .
but it will certainly reduce that danger .
it will strengthen our efforts to ban nuclear tests and to stop the spread of atomic weapons to other nations .
and it can begin the process of negotiating new agreements which will further limit nuclear arms .
the path of arms control , backed by a strong defense -- the path our nation and every president has walked for 30 years -- can lead to a world of law and of international negotiation and consultation in which all peoples might live in peace .
in this year 1979 , nothing is more important than that the congress and the people of the united states resolve to continue with me on that path of nuclear arms control and world peace .
this is paramount .
i 've outlined some of the changes that have transformed the world and which are continuing as we meet here tonight .
but we in america need not fear change .
the values on which our nation was founded -- individual liberty , self - determination , the potential for human fulfillment in freedom -- all of these endure .
we find these democratic principles praised , even in books smuggled out of totalitarian nations and on wallposters in lands which we thought were closed to our influence .
our country has regained its special place of leadership in the worldwide struggle for human rights .
and that is a commitment that we must keep at home , as well as abroad .
the civil rights revolution freed all americans , black and white , but its full promise still remains unrealized .
i will continue to work with all my strength for equal opportunity for all americans -- and for affirmative action for those who carry the extra burden of past denial of equal opportunity .
we remain committed to improving our labor laws to better protect the rights of american workers .
and our nation must make it clear that the legal rights of women as citizens are guaranteed under the laws of our land by ratifying the equal rights amendment .
as long as i 'm president , at home and around the world america 's examples and america 's influence will be marshaled to advance the cause of human rights .
to establish those values , two centuries ago a bold generation of americans risked their property , their position , and life itself .
we are their heirs , and they are sending us a message across the centuries .
the words they made so vivid are now growing faintly indistinct , because they are not heard often enough .
they are words like " justice , " " equality , " " unity , " " truth , " " sacrifice , " " liberty , " " faith , " and " love."these words remind us that the duty of our generation of americans is to renew our nation 's faith -- not focused just against foreign threats but against the threats of selfishness , cynicism , and apathy .
the new foundation i 've discussed tonight can help us build a nation and a world where every child is nurtured and can look to the future with hope , where the resources now wasted on war can be turned towards meeting human needs , where all people have enough to eat , a decent home , and protection against disease .
it can help us build a nation and a world where all people are free to seek the truth and to add to human understanding , so that all of us may live our lives in peace .
tonight , i ask you , the members of the congress , to join me in building that new foundation -- a better foundation - for our beloved country and our world .
thank you very much .

mr. secretary general and distinguished leaders from throughout our own country and from throughout this hemisphere : 
 first of all , i want to express my deep thanks to the leaders who have come here from 27 nations in our own hemisphere , 20 heads of state , for this historic occasion .
i 'm proud to be here as part of the largest group of heads of state ever assembled in the hall of the americas , mr. secretary general .
we are here to participate in the signing of treaties which will assure a peaceful and prosperous and secure future for an international waterway of great importance to us all .
but the treaties do more than that .
they mark the commitment of the united states to the belief that fairness , and not force , should lie at the heart of our dealings with the nations of the world .
if any agreement between two nations is to last , it must serve the best interests of both nations .
the new treaties do that .
and by guaranteeing the neutrality of the panama canal , the treaties also serve the best interests of every nation that uses the canal .
this agreement thus forms a new partnership to insure that this vital waterway , so important to all of us , will continue to be well operated , safe , and open to shipping by all nations , now and in the future .
under these accords , panama will play an increasingly important role in the operation and defense of the canal during the next 23 years .
and after that , the united states will still be able to counter any threat to the canal 's neutrality and openness for use .
the members of the organization of american states and all the members of the united nations will have a chance to subscribe to the permanent neutrality of the canal .
the accords also give panama an important economic stake in the continued , safe , and efficient operation of the canal and make panama a strong and interested party in the future success of the waterway .
in the spirit of reciprocity suggested by the leaders at the bogota .
summit , the united states and panama have agreed that any future sea - level canal will be built in panama and with the cooperation of the united states .
in this manner , the best interests of both our nations are linked and preserved into the future .
many of you seated at this table have made known for years through the organization of american states and through your own personal expressions of concern to my predecessors in the white house , your own strong feelings about the panama canal treaty of 1903 .
that treaty , drafted in a world so different from ours today , has become an obstacle to better relations with latin america .
i thank each of you for the support and help that you and your countries have given during the long process of negotiation , which is now drawing to a close .
this agreement has been negotiated over a period of 14 years under four presidents of the united states .
i 'm proud to see president ford here with us tonight .
and i 'm also glad to see mrs. lyndon johnson here with us tonight .
many secretaries of state have been involved in the negotiations .
dean rusk ca n't be here .
he has endorsed the treaty .
but secretary of state william rogers is here .
we are glad to have you , sir .
and secretary of state henry kissinger is here too .
this has been a bipartisan effort , and it is extremely important for our country to stay unified in our commitment to the fairness , the symbol of equality , the mutual respect , the preservation of the security and defense of our own nation , and an exhibition of cooperation which sets a symbol that is important to us all before this assembly tonight and before the american people in the future .
this opens a new chapter in our relations with all nations of this hemisphere , and it testifies to the maturity and the good judgment and the decency of our people .
this agreement is a symbol for the world of the mutual respect and cooperation among all our nations .
thank you very much for your help .

good evening .
i would like to read a joint communiqu&eacute ; which is being simultaneously issued in peking at this very moment by the leaders of the people 's republic of china : 


 the united states of america and the people 's republic of china have agreed to recognize each other and to establish diplomatic relations as of january 1 , 1979 .
the united states of america recognizes the government of the people 's republic of china as the sole legal government of china .
within this context , the people of the united states will maintain cultural , commercial , and other unofficial relations with the people of taiwan .
the united states of america and the people 's republic of china reaffirm the principles agreed on by the two sides in the shanghai communiqu&eacute ; and emphasize once again that : 
  -- both wish to reduce the danger of international military conflict .
-- neither should seek hegemony in the asia - pacific region or in any other region of the world and each is opposed to efforts by any other country or group of countries to establish such hegemony .
-- neither is prepared to negotiate on behalf of any third party or to enter into agreements or understandings with the other directed at other states .
-- the government of the united states of america acknowledges the chinese position that there is but one china and taiwan is part of china .
-- both believe that normalization of sino - american relations is not only in the interest of the chinese and american peoples but also contributes to the cause of peace in asia and the world .
the united states of america and the people 's republic of china will exchange ambassadors and establish embassies on march 1 , 1979 .
yesterday , our country and the people 's republic of china reached this final historic agreement .
on january 1 , 1979 , a little more than two weeks from now , our two governments will implement full normalization of diplomatic relations .
as a nation of gifted people who comprise about one - fourth of the total population of the earth , china plays , already , an important role in world affairs , a role that can only grow more important in the years ahead .
we do not undertake this important step for transient tactical or expedient reasons .
in recognizing the people 's republic of china , that it is the single government of china , we are recognizing simple reality .
but far more is involved in this decision than just the recognition of a fact .
before the estrangement of recent decades , the american and the chinese people had a long history of friendship .
we 've already begun to rebuild some of those previous ties .
now our rapidly expanding relationship requires the kind of structure that only full diplomatic relations will make possible .
the change that i 'm announcing tonight will be of great long - term benefit to the peoples of both our country and china -- and , i believe , to all the peoples of the world .
normalization -- and the expanded commercial and cultural relations that it will bring -- will contribute to the well - being of our own nation , to our own national interest , and it will also enhance the stability of asia .
these more positive relations with china can beneficially affect the world in which we live and the world in which our children will live .
we have already begun to inform our allies and other nations and the members of the congress of the details of our intended action .
but i wish also tonight to convey a special message to the people of taiwan -- i have already communicated with the leaders in taiwan -- with whom the american people have had and will have extensive , close , and friendly relations .
this is important between our two peoples .
as the united states asserted in the shanghai communiqu&eacute ; of 1972 , issued on president nixon 's historic visit , we will continue to have an interest in the peaceful resolution of the taiwan issue .
i have paid special attention to ensuring that normalization of relations between our country and the people 's republic will not jeopardize the well - being of the people of taiwan .
the people of our country will maintain our current commercial , cultural , trade , and other relations with taiwan through nongovernmental means .
many other countries in the world are already successfully doing this .
these decisions and these actions open a new and important chapter in our country 's history and also in world affairs .
to strengthen and to expedite the benefits of this new relationship between china and the united states , i am pleased to announce that vice premier teng has accepted my invitation and will visit washington at the end of january .
his visit will give our governments the opportunity to consult with each other on global issues and to begin working together to enhance the cause of world peace .
these events are the final result of long and serious negotiations begun by president nixon in 1972 , and continued under the leadership of president ford .
the results bear witness to the steady , determined , bipartisan effort of our own country to build a world in which peace will be the goal and the responsibility of all nations .
the normalization of relations between the united states and china has no other purpose than this : the advancement of peace .
it is in this spirit , at this season of peace , that i take special pride in sharing this good news with you tonight .
thank you very much .

yes .
mr. stone , i 've had to make thousands of decisions since i 've been president , serving in the oval office .
and with each one of those decisions that affect the future of my country , i have learned in the process .
i think i 'm a much wiser and more experienced man than i was when i debated 4 years ago against president ford .
i 've also learned that there are no simple answers to complicated questions .
h. l. mencken said that for every problem there 's a simple answer .
it would be neat and plausible -- and wrong .
the fact is that this nation , in the 8 years before i became president , had its own military strength decreased .
seven out of eight years , the budget commitments for defense went down , 37 percent , in all .
since i 've been in office , we 've had a steady , carefully planned , methodical but very effective increase in our commitment for defense .
but what we 've done is to use that enormous power and prestige and military strength of the united states to preserve the peace .
we 've not only kept peace for our own country , but we 've been able to extend the benefits of peace to others .
in the middle east , we 've worked for a peace treaty between israel and egypt , successfully , and have tied ourselves together with israel and egypt in a common defense capability .
this is a very good step forward for our nation 's security , and we 'll continue to do as we 've done in the past .
i might also add that there are decisions that are made in the oval office by every president which are profound in nature .
there are always troublespots in the world , and how those troubled areas are addressed by a president , alone in that oval office , affects our nation directly , the involvement of the united states and also our american interests .
that is a basic decision that has to be made so frequently by every president who serves .
that 's what i 've tried to do , successfully , by keeping our country at peace .
mr. stone , in my state of the union address earlier this year , i pointed out that any threat to the stability or security of the persian gulf would be a threat to the security of our own country .
in the past , we 've not had an adequate military presence in that region .
now we have two major carrier task forces .
we have access to facilities in five different areas of that region .
and we 've made it clear that working with our allies and others , that we are prepared to address any foreseeable eventuality which might interrupt commerce with that crucial area of the world .
but in doing this , we have made sure that we address this question peacefully , not injecting american military forces into combat , but letting the strength of our nation be felt in a beneficial way .
this , i believe , has assured that our interests will be protected in the persian gulf region , as we 've done in the middle east and throughout the world .
well , there are various elements of defense .
one is to control nuclear weapons , which i hope we 'll get to later on , because that 's the most important single issue in this campaign .
another one is how to address troubled areas of the world .
i think , habitually , governor reagan has advocated the injection of military forces into troubled areas , when i and my predecessors both democrats and republicans -- have advocated resolving those troubles and those difficult areas of the world peacefully , diplomatically , and through negotiation .
in addition to that , the buildup of military forces is good for our country , because we 've got to have military strength in order to preserve the peace .
but i 'll always remember that the best weapons are the ones that are never fired in combat , and the best soldier is one who never has to lay his life down on the field of battle .
strength is imperative for peace , but the two must go hand in hand .
again it 's important to put the situation into perspective .
in 1974 we had a so - called oil shock , wherein the price of opec oil was raised to an extraordinary degree .
we had an even worse oil shock in 1979 .
in 1974 we had the worst recession , the deepest and most penetrating recession since the second world war .
the recession that resulted this time was the briefest we 've had since the second world war .
in addition , we 've brought down inflation .
earlier this year , the first quarter , we did have a very severe inflation pressure , brought about by the opec price increase .
it averaged about 18 percent the first quarter of this year .
the second quarter , we had dropped it down to about 13 percent .
the most recent figures , the last 3 months , or the third quarter of this year , the inflation rate is 7 percent -- still too high , but it illustrates very vividly that in addition to providing an enormous number of jobs -- 9 million new jobs in the last 3 1/2 years -- that the inflationary threat is still urgent on us .
i noticed that governor reagan recently mentioned the reagan - kemp - roth proposal , which his own running mate , george bush , described as voodoo economics , and said that it would result in a 30-percent inflation rate .
and business week , which is not a democratic publication , said that this reagan - kemp - roth proposal -- and i quote them , i think - was completely irresponsible and would result in inflationary pressures which would destroy this nation .
so , our proposals are very sound and very carefully considered to stimulate jobs , to improve the industrial complex of this country , to create tools for american workers , and at the same time would be anti - inflationary in nature .
so , to add 9 million new jobs , to control inflation , and to plan for the future with the energy policy now intact as a foundation is our plan for the years ahead .
yes .
yes .
we have demanded that the american people sacrifice , and they 've done very well .
as a matter of fact , we 're importing today about one - third less oil from overseas than we did just a year ago .
we 've had a 25-percent reduction since the first year i was in office .
at the same time , as i said earlier , we have added about 9 million net new jobs in that period of time -- a record never before achieved .
also , the new energy policy has been predicated on two factors : one , conservation , which requires sacrifice , and the other one , increase in production of american energy , which is going along very well -- more coal this year than ever before in history , more oil and gas wells drilled this year than ever before in history .
the new economic revitalization program that we have in mind , which will be implemented next year , would result in tax credits which would let business invest in new tools and new factories to create even more new jobs -- about a million in the next 2 years .
and we also have planned a youth employment program which would encompass 600,000 jobs for young people .
this has already passed the house ; now has an excellent prospect to pass the senate .
governor reagan 's proposal , the reagan - kemp - roth proposal , is one of the most highly inflationary ideas that ever has been presented to the american public .
he would actually have to cut government spending by at least $ 130 billion in order to balance the budget under this ridiculous proposal .
i noticed that his task force that 's working for his future plans had some of their ideas revealed in the wall street journal this week .
one of those ideas was to repeal the minimum wage , and several times this year , governor reagan has said that the major cause of unemployment is the minimum wage .
this is a heartless kind of approach to the working families of our country which is typical of many republican leaders in the past , but i think has been accentuated under governor reagan .
in california -- i 'm surprised governor reagan brought this up -- he had the three largest tax increases in the history of that state under his administration .
he more than doubled state spending while he was governor -- 122-percent increase -- and had between a 20- and 30-percent increase in the number of employees -- 



  -- in california .
thank you , sir .
thank you , mr. hilliard .
when i was campaigning in 1976 , everywhere i went the mayors and local officials were in despair about the rapidly deteriorating central cities of our nation .
we initiated a very fine urban renewal program , working with the mayors , the governors , and other interested officials .
this has been a very successful effort .
that 's one of the main reasons that we 've had such an increase in the number of people employed .
of the 9 million people put to work in new jobs since i 've been in office , 1.3 million of those has been among black americans and another million among those who speak spanish .
we now are planning to continue the revitalization program with increased commitments of rapid transit , mass transit .
under the windfall profits tax , we expect to spend about $ 43 billion in the next 10 years to rebuild the transportation systems of our country .
we also are pursuing housing programs .
we 've had a 73-percent increase in the allotment of federal funds for improved education .
these are the kinds of efforts worked on a joint basis with community leaders , particularly in the minority areas of the central cities that had been deteriorating so rapidly in the past .
it 's very important to us that this be done with the full involvement of minority citizens .
i 've brought into the top levels of government -- into the white house , into administrative offices of the executive branch , into the judicial system -- highly qualified black and spanish citizens and women who in the past had been excluded .
i noticed that governor reagan said that when he was a younger man that there was no knowledge of a racial problem in this country .
those who suffered from discrimination because of race or sex certainly knew we had a racial problem .
we have gone a long way toward correcting these problems , but we still have a long way to go .
ours is a nation of refugees , a nation of immigrants .
almost all of our citizens came here from other lands and now have hopes , which are being realized , for a better life , preserving their ethnic commitments , their family structures , their religious beliefs , preserving their relationships with their relatives in foreign countries , but still forming themselves together in a very coherent society , which gives our nation its strength .
in the past , those minority groups have often been excluded from participation in the affairs of government .
since i 've been president , i 've appointed , for instance , more than twice as many black federal judges as all previous presidents in the history of this country .
i 've done the same thing in the appointment of women , and also spanish - speaking americans .
to involve them in administration of government and a feeling that they belong to the societal structure that makes decisions in the judiciary and in executive branch is a very important commitment which i am trying to realize and will continue to do so in the future .
well , it 's obvious that we still have a long way to go in fully incorporating the minority groups into the mainstream of american life .
we have made good progress , and there 's no doubt in my mind that the commitment to unemployment compensation , the minimum wage , welfare , national health insurance , those kinds of commitments that have typified the democratic party since ancient history in this country 's political life are a very important element of the future .
in all those elements , governor reagan has repeatedly spoken out against them , which , to me , shows a very great insensitivity to giving deprived families a better chance in life .
this , to me , is a very important difference between him and me in this election , and i believe the american people will judge accordingly .
there is no doubt in my mind that in the downtown , central cities , with the new commitment on an energy policy , with a chance to revitalize homes and to make them more fuel - efficient , with a chance for a synthetic fuels program , solar power , this will give us an additional opportunity for jobs which will pay rich dividends .
barbara , one of the blights on this world is the threat and the activities of terrorists .
at one of the recent economic summit conferences between myself and the other leaders of the we .
stern world , we committed ourselves to take strong action against terrorism .
airplane hijacking was one of the elements of that commitment .
there is no doubt that we have seen in recent years , in recent months , additional acts of violence against jews in france and , of course , against those who live in israel by the plo and other terrorist organizations .
ultimately , the most serious terrorist threat is if one of those radical nations , who believe in terrorism as a policy , should have atomic weapons .
both i and all my predecessors have had a deep commitment to controlling the proliferation of nuclear weapons in countries like libya or iraq .
we have even alienated some of our closest trade partners , because we have insisted upon the control of the spread of nuclear weapons to those potentially terrorist countries .
when governor reagan has been asked about that , he makes a very disturbing comment that nonproliferation , or the control of the spread of nuclear weapons , is none of our business .
and when he was asked specifically , recently , about iraq , he said there 's nothing we can do about it .
this ultimate terrorist threat is the most fearsome of all , and it 's part of a pattern where our country must stand firm to control terrorism of all kinds .
we will maintain our position of neutrality in the iran and iraq war .
we have no plans to sell additional materiel or goods to iran that might be of a warlike nature .
when i made my decision to stop all trade with iran as a result of the taking of our hostages , i announced then and have consistently maintained since then that if the hostages are released safely , that we would make delivery on those items which iran owns , which they have bought and paid for - also , that the frozen iranian assets would be released .
that 's been a consistent policy , one i intend to carry out .
i did n't hear any comment from governor reagan about what he would do to stop or to reduce terrorism in the future .
what the western allies did decide to do is to stop all air flights - commercial air flights -- to any nation involved in terrorism or the hijacking of airplanes , or the harboring of hijackers .
secondly , we all committed ourselves , as have all my predecessors in the oval office , not to permit the spread of nuclear weapons to a terrorist nation or to any other nation that does not presently have those weapons or capabilities for explosives .
third , not to make any sales of materiel or weapons to a nation which is involved in terrorist activities .
and , lastly , not to deal with the plo until and unless the plo recognizes israel 's right to exist and recognizes u. n. resolution 242 as a basis for a middle east peace .
these are a few of the things to which our nation is committed , and we will continue with these commitments .
yes , i 'd be glad to .
inflation , unemployment , the cities - all very important issues , but they pale into insignificance in the life and duties of a president when compared with the control of nuclear weapons .
every president who has served in the oval office since harry truman has been dedicated to the proposition of controlling nuclear weapons , to negotiate with the soviet union -- balanced , controlled , observable , and then reducing levels of atomic weaponry .
there is a disturbing pattern in the attitude of governor reagan .
he has never supported any of those arms control agreements -- the limited test ban , salt i , nor the antiballistic missile treaty , nor the vladivostok treaty negotiated with the soviet union by president ford -- and now he wants to throw into the wastebasket a treaty to control nuclear weapons on a balanced and equal basis between ourselves and the soviet union , negotiated over a 7-year period , by myself and my two republican predecessors .
the senate has not voted yet on the strategic arms limitation treaty .
there have been preliminary skirmishings in the committees of the senate , but the treaty has never come to the floor of the senate for either a debate or a vote .
it 's understandable that a senator in the preliminary debates can make an irresponsible statement , or , maybe , an ill - advised statement .
you 've got 99 other senators to correct that mistake , if it is a mistake .
but when a man who hopes to be president says , " take this treaty , discard it , do not vote , do not debate , do not explore the issues , do not finally capitalize on this long negotiation " -- that is a very dangerous and disturbing thing .
yes .
governor reagan is making some very misleading and disturbing statements .
he not only advocates the scrapping of this treaty -- and i do n't know that these men that he quotes are against the treaty in its final form -- but he also advocates the possibility - he said it 's been a missing element - of playing a trump card against the soviet union of a nuclear arms race and insisting upon nuclear superiority by our own nation as a predication for negotiation in the future with the soviet union .
if president brezhnev said , " we will scrap this treaty , negotiated under three american presidents over a 7-year period of time ; we insist upon nuclear superiority as a basis for future negotiations ; and we believe that the launching of a nuclear arms race is a good basis for future negotiations , " it 's obvious that i , as president , and all americans would reject such a proposition .
this would mean the resumption of a very dangerous nuclear arms race .
it would be very disturbing to american people .
it would change the basic tone and commitment that our nation has experienced ever since the second world war , with all presidents , democratic and republican , and would also be very disturbing to our allies , all of whom support this nuclear arms treaty .
in addition to that , the adversarial relationship between ourselves and the soviet union would undoubtedly deteriorate very rapidly .
this attitude is extremely dangerous and belligerent in its tone , although it 's said with a quiet voice .
i think , to close out this discussion , it would be better to put into perspective what we 're talking about .
i had a discussion with my daughter , amy , the other day , before i came here , to ask her what the most important issue was .
she said she thought nuclear weaponry and the control of nuclear arms .
this is a formidable force .
some of these weapons have 10 megatons of explosion .
if you put 50 tons of tnt in each one of railroad cars , you would have a trainload of tnt stretching across this nation .
that 's one major war explosion in a warhead .
we have thousands , equivalent of megaton , or million tons , of tnt warheads .
the control of these weapons is the single major responsibility of a president , and to cast out this commitment of all presidents , because of some slight technicalities that can be corrected , is a very dangerous approach .
i do n't think there 's any doubt that , in the future , the cost of oil is going to go up .
what i 've had as a basic commitment since i 've been president is to reduce our dependence on foreign oil : it can only be done in two ways : one , to conserve energy , to stop the waste of energy , and secondly , to produce more american energy .
we 've been very successful in both cases .
we 've now reduced the importing of foreign oil in the last year alone by onethird .
we imported today 2 million barrels of oil less than we did the same day just a year ago .
this commitment has been opening up a very bright vista for our nation in the future , because with the windfall profits tax as a base , we now have an opportunity to use american technology and american ability and american natural resources to expand rapidly the production of synthetic fuels , yes ; to expand rapidly the production of solar energy , yes ; and also to produce the conventional kinds of american energy .
we will drill more oil and gas wells this year than any year in history .
we 'll produce more coal this year than any year in history .
we 're exporting more coal this year than any year in history .
and we have an opportunity now , with improved transportation systems and improved loading facilities in our ports , to see a very good opportunity on the world international market , to replace opec oil with american coal as a basic energy source .
this exciting future will not only give us more energy security but will also open up vast opportunities for americans to live a better life and to have millions of new jobs associated with this new and very dynamic industry now in prospect because of the new energy policy that we 've put into effect .
yes , sir .
to repeat myself , we have this year the opportunity , which we 'll realize , to produce 800 million tons of coal -- an unequaled record in the history of our country .
governor reagan says that this is not a good achievement , and he blames restraints on coal production on regulations -- regulations that affect the life and the health and safety of miners and also regulations that protect the purity of our air and the quality of our water and our land .
we can not cast aside those regulations .
we have a chance in the next 15 years , insisting upon the health and safety of workers in the mines , and also preserving the same high air and water pollution standards , to triple the amount of coal we produce .
governor reagan 's approach to our energy policy , which has already proven its effectiveness , is to repeal or to change substantially the windfall profits tax , to return a major portion of $ 227 billion back to the oil companies , to do away with the department of energy , to shortcircuit our synthetic fuels program , to put a minimal emphasis on solar power , to emphasize strongly nuclear powerplants as a major source of energy in the future .
he wants to put all our eggs in one basket and give that basket to the major oil companies .
sure .
as a matter of fact , the air pollution standard laws that were passed in california were passed over the objections of governor reagan , and this is a very well known fact .
also , recently , when someone suggested that the occupational safety and health act should be abolished , governor reagan responded , " amen."the offshore drilling rights is a question that governor reagan raises often .
as a matter of fact , in the proposal for the alaska lands legislation , 100 percent of all the offshore lands would be open for exploration , and 95 percent of all the alaska lands where it is suspected or believed that minerals might exist .
we have , with our 5-year plan for the leasing of offshore lands , proposed more land to be drilled than has been opened up for drilling since this program first started in 1954.so , we 're not putting restraints on american exploration ; we 're encouraging it in every way we can .
as long as there 's a democratic president in the white house , we will have a strong and viable social security system , free of the threat of bankruptcy .
although governor reagan has changed his position lately , on four different occasions he has advocated making social security a voluntary system , which would , in effect , very quickly bankrupt it .
i noticed also in the wall street journal earlier this week that a preliminary report of his task force advocates making social security more sound by reducing the adjustments in social security for the retired people to compensate for the impact of inflation .
these kinds of approaches are very dangerous to the security and the well - being , and the peace of mind of the retired people of this country and those approaching retirement age .
but no matter what it takes in the future to keep social security sound , it must be kept that way .
and although there was a serious threat to the social security system and its integrity during the 1976 campaign and when i became president , the action of the democratic congress , working with me , has been to put social security back on a sound financial basis .
that 's the way it will stay .
fine .
these constant suggestions that the basic social security system should be changed does cause concern and consternation among the aged of our country .
it 's obvious that we should have a commitment to them , that social security benefits should not be taxed , and that there would be no peremptory change in the standards by which social security payments are made to the retired people .
we also need to continue to index the social security payments so that if inflation rises , the social security payments would rise a commensurate degree to let the buying power of the social security check continue intact .
in the past , the relationship between social security and medicare has been very important to provide some modicum of aid for senior citizens in the retention of health benefits .
governor reagan , as a matter of fact , began his political career campaigning around this nation against medicare .
now we have an opportunity to move toward national health insurance , with an emphasis on the prevention of disease ; an emphasis on outpatient care , not inpatient care ; an emphasis on hospital cost containment to hold down the cost of hospital care for those who are ill ; an emphasis on catastrophic health insurance , so that if a family is threatened with being wiped out economically because of a very high medical bill , then the insurance would help pay for it .
these are the kind of elements of a national health insurance , important to the american people .
governor reagan , again , typically is against such a proposal .
when i opposed medicare , there was another piece of legislation meeting the same problem before the congress .
i happened to favor the other piece of legislation and thought that it would be better for the senior citizens and provide better care than the one that was finally passed .
i was not opposing the principle of providing care for them .
i was opposing one piece of legislation as versus another .
there is something else about social security -- of course , that does n't come out of the payroll tax ; it comes out of the general fund -- that something should be done about .
i think it 's disgraceful that the disability insurance fund in social security finds checks going every month to tens of thousands of people who are locked up in our institutions for crime or for mental illness , and they are receiving disability checks from social security every month while a state institution provides for all of their needs and their care .
> 



  i think this debate on social security , medicare , national health insurance typifies as vividly as any other subject tonight the basic historical differences between the democratic party and the republican party .
the allusions to basic changes in the minimum wage is another , and the deleterious comments that governor reagan has made about unemployment compensation .
these commitments that the democratic party has historically made to the working families of this nation have been extremely important to the growth in their stature and in a better quality of life for them .
i noticed recently that governor reagan frequently quotes democratic presidents , in his acceptance address and otherwise .
i have never heard a candidate for president , who is a republican , quote a republican president , but when they get in office , they try to govern like republicans .
so , its good for the american people to remember there is a sharp basic historical difference between governor reagan and me on these crucial issues - also , between the two parties that we represent . ?
barbara , reluctant as i am to say anything critical about governor reagan , i will try to answer your question .
first of all , there 's the historical perspective that i just described .
this is a contest between a democrat in the mainstream of my party , as exemplified by the actions that i 've taken in the oval office the last 4 years , as contrasted with governor reagan , who in most cases does typify his party , but in some cases , there is a radical departure by him from the heritage of eisenhower and others .
the most important crucial difference in this election campaign , in my judgment , is the approach to the control of nuclear weaponry and the inclination to control or not to control the spread of atomic weapons to other nations that do n't presently have it , particularly the terrorist nations .
the inclination that governor reagan has exemplified in many troubled times since he 's been running for president -- i think since 1968 -- to inject american military forces in places like north korea , to put a blockade around cuba this year , or in some instances , to project american forces into a fishing dispute against the small nation of ecuador on the west coast of south america -- this is typical of his longstanding inclination , on the use of american power , not to resolve disputes diplomatically and peacefully , but to show that the exercise of military power is best proven by the actual use of it .
obviously , no president wants war , and i certainly do not believe that governor reagan , if he were president , would want war .
but a president in the oval office has to make a judgment on almost a daily basis about how to exercise the enormous power of our country for peace , through diplomacy , or in a careless way , in a belligerent attitude which has exemplified his attitudes in the past .
but the president that i quoted had made a promise , a democrat promise , and i quoted him because it was never kept .
and today , you would find that that promise is at the very heart of what republicanism represents in this country today .
and that 's why i believe there are going to be millions of democrats that are going to vote with us this time around , because they too want that promise kept .
it was a promise for less government and less taxes and more freedom for the people .
> 



  yes .
i mentioned the radical departure of governor reagan from the principles or ideals or historical perspective of his own party .
i do n't think this can be better illustrated than in the case with guaranteeing women equal rights under the constitution of our nation .
for 40 years , the republican party platforms called for guaranteeing women equal rights with a constitutional amendment .
six predecessors of mine who served in the oval office called for this guarantee of women 's rights .
governor reagan and the new republican party has departed from this commitment -- a very severe blow to the opportunity for women finally to correct discrimination under which they have suffered .
when a man and a woman do the same amount of work , a man gets paid a dollar ; a woman only gets paid 59 cents .
and the equal rights amendment only says that equality of rights shall not be abridged for women by the federal government or by the state governments .
that 's all it says -- a simple guarantee of equality of opportunity which typifies the democratic party and which is a very important commitment of mine , as contrasted with governor reagan 's radical departure from the longstanding policy of his own party .
yes .
howard , i 'm a southerner , and i share the basic beliefs of my region about an excessive government intrusion into the private affairs of american citizens and also into the private affairs of the free enterprise system .
one of the commitments that i made was to deregulate the major industries of this country .
we 've been remarkably successful , with the help of the democratic congress .
we 've deregulated the air industry , the rail industry , the trucking industry , financial institutions ; now working on the communications industry .
in addition to that , i believe this element of discrimination is something that the south has seen so vividly as a blight on our region of the country which has now been corrected -- not only racial discrimination but discrimination against people that have to work for a living -- because we have been trying to pick ourselves up by our bootstraps since the long depression years and lead a full and useful life in the affairs of this country .
we 've made remarkable success .
it 's part of my consciousness and of my commitment to continue this progress .
so , my heritage as a southerner , my experience in the oval office , convinces me that what i 've just described is a proper course for the future .
first of all , i 'd like to thank the league of women voters for making this debate possible .
i think it 's been a very constructive debate , and i hope it 's helped to acquaint the american people with the sharp differences between myself and governor reagan .
also , i want to thank the people of cleveland and ohio for being such hospitable hosts during this last few hours in my life .
i 've been president now for almost 4 years .
i 've had to make thousands of decisions , and each one of those decisions has been a learning process .
i 've seen the strength of my nation , and i 've seen the crises that it approached in a tentative way .
and i 've had to deal with those crises as best i could .
as i 've studied the record between myself and governor reagan , i 've been impressed with the stark differences that exist between us .
i think the results of this debate indicate that that fact is true .
i consider myself in the mainstream of my party .
i consider myself in the mainstream even of the bipartisan list of presidents who 've served before me .
the united states must be a nation strong ; the united states must be a nation secure .
we must have a society that 's just and fair .
and we must extend the benefits of our own commitment to peace , to create a peaceful world .
i believe that since i 've been in office , there 've been six or eight areas of combat evolve in other parts of the world .
in each case , i alone have had to determine the interests of my country and the degree of involvement of my country .
i 've done that with moderation , with care , with thoughtfulness ; sometimes consulting experts .
but i 've learned in this last 3 1/2 years that when an issue is extremely difficult , when the call is very close , the chances are the experts will be divided almost 50 - 50 .
and the final judgment about the future of our nation -- war , peace , involvement , reticence , thoughtfulness , care , consideration , concern -- has to be made by the man in the oval office .
it 's a lonely job , but with the involvement of the american people in the process , with an open government , the job is a very gratifying one .
the american people now are facing , next tuesday , a lonely decision .
those listening to my voice will have to make a judgment about the future of this country .
and i think they ought to remember that one vote can make a lot of difference .
if one vote per precinct had changed in 1960 , john kennedy would never have been president of this nation .
and if a few more people had gone to the polls and voted in 1968 , hubert humphrey would have been president ; richard nixon would not .
there is a partnership involved .
and our nation , to stay strong , to stay at peace , to raise high the banner of human rights , to set an example for the rest of the world , to let our deep beliefs and commitments be felt by others in all other nations is my plan for the future .
i ask the american people to join me in this partnership .

fellow democrats , fellow citizens : i thank you for the nomination you 've offered me , and i especially thank you for choosing as my running mate the best partner any president ever had , fritz mondale .
with gratitude and with determination i accept your nomination , and i am proud to run on the progressive and sound platform that you have hammered out at this convention .
fritz and i will mount a campaign that defines the real issues , a campaign that responds to the intelligence of the american people , a campaign that talks sense .
and we 're going to beat the republicans in november .
we 'll win because we are the party of a great president who knew how to get reelected -- franklin delano roosevelt .
and we are the party of a courageous fighter who knew how to give 'em hell -- harry truman .
and as truman said , he just told the truth and they thought it was hell .
and we 're the party of a gallant man of spirit -- john fitzgerald kennedy .
and we 're the party of a great leader of compassion -- lyndon baines johnson , and the party of a great man who should have been president , who would have been one of the greatest presidents in history -- hubert horatio hornblower -- humphrey .
i have appreciated what this convention has said about senator humphrey , a great man who epitomized the spirit of the democratic party .
and i would like to say that we are also the party of governor jerry brown and senator edward kennedy .
i 'd like to say a personal word to senator kennedy .
ted , you 're a tough competitor and a superb campaigner , and i can attest to that .
your speech before this convention was a magnificent statement of what the democratic party is and what it means to the people of this country and why a democratic victory is so important this year .
i reach out to you tonight , and i reach out to all those who supported you in your valiant and passionate campaign .
ted , your party needs and i need you .
and i need your idealism and your dedication working for us .
there is no doubt that even greater service lies ahead of you , and we are grateful to you and to have your strong partnership now in a larger cause to which your own life has been dedicated .
i thank you for your support ; we 'll make great partners this fall in whipping the republicans .
we are democrats and we 've had our differences , but we share a bright vision of america 's future -- a vision of a good life for all our people , a vision of a secure nation , a just society , a peaceful world , a strong america -- confident and proud and united .
and we have a memory of franklin roosevelt , 40 years ago , when he said that there are times in our history when concerns over our personal lives are overshadowed by our concern over " what will happen to the county we have known . "
this is such a time , and i can tell you that the choice to be made this year can transform our own personal lives and the life of our country as well .
during the last presidential campaign , i crisscrossed this country and i listened to thousands and thousands of people - housewives and farmers , teachers and small business leaders , workers and students , the elderly and the poor , people of every race and every background and every walk of life .
it was a powerful experience -- a total immersion in the human reality of america .
and i have now had another kind of total immersion -- being president of the united states of america .
let me talk for a moment about what that job is like and what i 've learned from it .
i 've learned that only the most complex and difficult task comes before me in the oval office .
no easy answers are found there , because no easy questions come there .
i 've learned that for a president , experience is the best guide to the right decisions .
i 'm wiser tonight than i was 4 years ago .
and i have learned that the presidency is a place of compassion .
my own heart is burdened for the troubled americans .
the poor and the jobless and the afflicted - they've become part of me .
my thoughts and my prayers for our hostages in iran are as though they were my own sons and daughters .
the life of every human being on earth can depend on the experience and judgment and vigilance of the person in the oval office .
the president 's power for building and his power for destruction are awesome .
and the power 's greatest exactly where the stakes are highest -- in matters of war and peace .
and i 've learned something else , something that i have come to see with extraordinary clarity : above all , i must look ahead , because the president of the united states is the steward of the nation 's destiny .
he must protect our children and the children they will have and the children of generations to follow .
he must speak and act for them .
that is his burden and his glory .
and that is why a president can not yield to the shortsighted demands , no matter how rich or powerful the special interests might be that make those demands .
and that 's why the president can not bend to the passions of the moment , however popular they might be .
that 's why the president must sometimes ask for sacrifice when his listeners would rather hear the promise of comfort .
the president is a servant of today , but his true constituency is the future .
that 's why the election of 1980 is so important .
some have said it makes no difference who wins this election .
they are wrong .
this election is a stark choice between two men , two parties , two sharply different pictures of what america is and what the world is , but it 's more than that -- it 's a choice between two futures .
the year 2000 is just less than 20 years away , just four presidential elections after this one .
children born this year will come of age in the 21st century .
the time to shape the world of the year 2000 is now .
the decisions of the next few years will set our course , perhaps an irreversible course , and the most important of all choices will be made by the american people at the polls less than 3 months from tonight .
the choice could not be more clear nor the consequences more crucial .
in one of the futures we can choose , the future that you and i have been building together , i see security and justice and peace .
i see a future of economic security - security that will come from tapping our own great resources of oil and gas , coal and sunlight , and from building the tools and technology and factories for a revitalized economy based on jobs and stable prices for everyone .
i see a future of justice -- the justice of good jobs , decent health care , quality education , a full opportunity for all people regardless of color or language or religion ; the simple human justice of equal rights for all men and for all women , guaranteed equal rights at last under the constitution of the united states of america .
and i see a future of peace -- a peace born of wisdom and based on a fairness toward all countries of the world , a peace guaranteed both by american military strength and by american moral strength as well .
that is the future i want for all people , a future of confidence and hope and a good life .
it 's the future america must choose , and with your help and with your commitment , it is the future america will choose .
but there is another possible future .
in that other future i see despair -- despair of millions who would struggle for equal opportunity and a better life and struggle alone .
and i see surrender -- the surrender of our energy future to the merchants of oil , the surrender of our economic future to a bizarre program of massive tax cuts for the rich , service cuts for the poor , and massive inflation for everyone .
and i see risk -- the risk of international confrontation , the risk of an uncontrollable , unaffordable , and unwinnable nuclear arms race .
no one , democrat or republican either , consciously seeks such a future , and i do not claim that my opponent does .
but i do question the disturbing commitments and policies already made by him and by those with him who have now captured control of the republican party .
the consequences of those commitments and policies would drive us down the wrong road .
it 's up to all of us to make sure america rejects this alarming and even perilous destiny .
the only way to build a better future is to start with the realities of the present .
but while we democrats grapple with the real challenges of a real world , others talk about a world of tinsel and make - believe .
let 's look for a moment at their make - believe world .
in their fantasy america , inner - city people and farm workers and laborers do not exist .
women , like children , are to be seen but not heard .
the problems of working women are simply ignored .
the elderly do not need medicare .
the young do not need more help in getting a better education .
workers do not require the guarantee of a healthy and a safe place to work .
in their fantasy world , all the complex global changes of the world since world war ii have never happened .
in their fantasy america , all problems have simple solutions -- simple and wrong .
it 's a make - believe world , a world of good guys and bad guys , where some politicians shoot first and ask questions later .
no hard choices , no sacrifice , no tough decisions -- it sounds too good to be true , and it is .
the path of fantasy leads to irresponsibility .
the path of reality leads to hope and peace .
the two paths could not be more different , nor could the futures to which they lead .
let 's take a hard look at the consequences of our choice .
you and i have been working toward a more secure future by rebuilding our military strength -- steadily , carefully , and responsibly .
the republicans talk about military strength , but they were in office for 8 out of the last 11 years , and in the face of a growing soviet threat they steadily cut real defense spending by more than a third .
we 've reversed the republican decline in defense .
every year since i 've been president we 've had real increases in our commitment to a stronger nation , increases which are prudent and rational .
there is no doubt that the united states of america can meet a threat from the soviet union .
our modernized strategic forces , a revitalized nato , the trident submarine , the cruise missile , the rapid deployment force -- all these guarantee that we will never be second to any nation .
deeds , not words ; fact , not fiction .
we must and we will continue to build our own defenses .
we must and we will continue to seek balanced reductions in nuclear arms .
the new leaders of the republican party , in order to close the gap between their rhetoric and their record , have now promised to launch an all - out nuclear arms race .
this would negate any further effort to negotiate a strategic arms limitation agreement .
there can be no winners in such an arms race , and all the people of the earth can be the losers .
the republican nominee advocates abandoning arms control policies which have been important and supported by every democratic president since harry , truman , and also by every republican president since dwight d. eisenhower .
this radical and irresponsible course would threaten our security and could put the whole world in peril .
you and i must never let this come to pass .
it 's simple to call for a new arms race , but when armed aggression threatens world peace , tough - sounding talk like that is not enough .
a president must act responsibly .
when soviet troops invaded afghanistan , we moved quickly to take action .
i suspended some grain sales to the soviet union ; i called for draft registration ; and i joined wholeheartedly with the congress and with the u. s. olympic committee and led more than 60 other nations in boycotting the big propaganda show in russia -- the moscow olympics .
the republican leader opposed two of these forceful but peaceful actions , and he waffled on the third .
but when we asked him what he would do about aggression in southwest asia , he suggested blockading cuba .
even his running mate would n't go along with that .
he does n't seem to know what to do with the russians .
he 's not sure if he wants to feed them or play with them or fight with them .
as i look back at my first term , i 'm grateful that we 've had a country for the full 4 years of peace .
and that 's what we 're going to have for the next 4 years - peace .
it 's only common sense that if america is to stay secure and at peace , we must encourage others to be peaceful as well .
as you know , we 've helped in zimbabwe - rhodesia where we 've stood firm for racial justice and democracy .
and we have also helped in the middle east .
some have criticized the camp david accords and they 've criticized some delays in the implementation of the middle east peace treaty .
well , before i became president there was no camp david accords and there was no middle east peace treaty .
before camp david , israel and egypt were poised across barbed wire , confronting each other with guns and tanks and planes .
but afterward , they talked face - to - face with each other across a peace table , and they also communicated through their own ambassadors in cairo and tel aviv .
now that 's the kind of future we 're offering -- of peace to the middle east if the democrats are reelected in the fall .
i am very proud that nearly half the aid that our country has ever given to israel in the 32 years of her existence has come during my administration .
unlike our republican predecessors , we have never stopped nor slowed that aid to israel .
and as long as i am president , we will never do so .
our commitment is clear : security and peace for israel ; peace for all the peoples of the middle east .
but if the world is to have a future of freedom as well as peace , america must continue to defend human rights .
now listen to this : the new republican leaders oppose our human rights policy .
they want to scrap it .
they seem to think it 's naive for america to stand up for freedom and democracy .
just what do they think we should stand up for?ask the former political prisoners who now live in freedom if we should abandon our stand on human rights .
ask the dissidents in the soviet union about our commitment to human rights .
ask the hungarian americans , ask the polish americans , listen to pope john paul ii .
ask those who are suffering for the sake of justice and liberty around the world .
ask the millions who 've fled tyranny if america should stop speaking out for human principles .
ask the american people .
i tell you that as long as i am president , we will hold high the banner of human rights , and you can depend on it .
here at home the choice between the two futures is equally important .
in the long run , nothing is more crucial to the future of america than energy ; nothing was so disastrously neglected in the past .
long after the 1973 arab oil embargo , the republicans in the white house had still done nothing to meet the threat to the national security of our nation .
then , as now , their policy was dictated by the big oil companies .
we democrats fought hard to rally our nation behind a comprehensive energy policy and a good program , a new foundation for challenging and exciting progress .
now , after 3 years of struggle , we have that program .
the battle to secure america 's energy future has been fully and finally joined .
americans ' have cooperated with dramatic results .
we 've reversed decades of dangerous and growing dependence on foreign oil .
we are now importing 20 percent less oil -- that is 1 1/2 million barrels of oil every day less than the day i took office .
and with our new energy policy now in place , we can discover more , produce more , create more , and conserve more energy , and we will use american resources , american technology , and millions of american workers to do it with .
now , what do the republicans propose ?
basically , their energy program has two parts .
the first part is to get rid of almost everything that we 've done for the american public in the last 3 years .
they want to reduce or abolish the synthetic fuels program .
they want to slash the solar energy incentives , the conservation programs , aid to mass transit , aid to elderly americans to help pay their fuel bills .
they want to eliminate the 55-mile speed limit .
and while they are at it , the republicans would like to gut the clean air act .
they never liked it to begin with .
that 's one part of their program ; the other part is worse .
to replace what we have built , this is what they propose : to destroy the windfall profits tax and to " unleash " the oil companies and let them solve the energy problem for us .
that 's it .
that is it .
that 's their whole program .
there is no more .
can this nation accept such an outrageous program ?
no !
we democrats will fight it every step of the way , and we 'll begin tomorrow morning with a campaign for reelection in november .
when i took office , i inherited a heavy load of serious economic problems besides energy , and we 've met them all head - on .
we 've slashed government regulations and put free enterprise back into the airlines , the trucking and the financial systems of our country , and we 're now doing the same thing for the railroads .
this is the greatest change in the relationship between government and business since the new deal .
we 've increased our exports dramatically .
we 've reversed the decline in the basic research and development , and we have created more than 8 million new jobs -- the biggest increase in the history of our country .
but the road is bumpy , and last year 's skyrocketing opec price increases have helped to trigger a worldwide inflation crisis .
we took forceful action , and interest rates have now fallen , the dollar is stable and , although we still have a battle on our hands , we 're struggling to bring inflation under control .
we are now at the critical point , a turning point in our economic history of our country .
but because we made the hard decisions , because we have guided our nation and its economy through a rough but essential period of transition , we 've laid the groundwork for a new economic age .
our economic renewal program for the 1980 's will meet our immediate need for jobs and attack the very same , long - range problem that caused unemployment and inflation in the first place .
it 'll move america simultaneously towards our five great economic goals -- lower inflation , better productivity , revitalization of american industry , energy security , and jobs .
it 's time to put all america back to work -- but not in make - work , in real work .
and there is real work in modernizing american industries and creating new industries for america as well .
here are just a few things we 'll rebuild together and build together : -- new industries to turn our own coal and shale and farm products into fuel for our cars and trucks and to turn the light of the sun into heat and electricity for our homes ; -- a modern transportation system of railbeds and ports to make american coal into a powerful rival of opec oil ; -- industries that will provide the convenience of futuristic computer technology and communications to serve millions of american homes and offices and factories ; -- job training for workers displaced by economic changes ; -- new investment pinpointed in regions and communities where jobs are needed most ; -- better mass transit in our cities and in between cities ; -- and a whole new generation of american jobs to make homes and vehicles and buildings that will house us and move us in comfort with a lot less energy .
this is important , too : i have no doubt that the ingenuity , and dedication of the american people can make every single one of these things happen .
we are talking about the united states of america , and those who count this country out as an economic superpower are going to find out just how wrong they are .
we 're going to share in the exciting enterprise of making the 1980 's a time of growth for america .
the republican alternative is the biggest tax giveaway in history .
they call it reagan - kemp - roth ; i call it a free lunch that americans can not afford .
the republican tax program offers rebates to the rich , deprivation for the poor , and fierce inflation for all of us .
their party 's own vice presidential nominee said that reagan - kemp - roth would result in an inflation rate of more than 30 percent .
he called it " voodoo economics " .
he suddenly changed his mind toward the end of the republican convention , but he was right the first time .
along with this gigantic tax cut , the new republican leaders promise to protect retirement and health programs and to have massive increases in defense spending - and they claim they can balance the budget .
if they are serious about these promises , and they say they are , then a close analysis shows that the entire rest of the government would have to be abolished , everything from education to farm programs , from the g. i. bill to the night watchman at the lincoln memorial -- and their budget would still be in the red .
the only alternative would be to build more printing presses to print cheap money .
either way , the american people lose .
but the american people will not stand for it .
the democratic party has always embodied the hope of our people for justice , opportunity , and a better life , and we 've worked in every way possible to strengthen the american family , to encourage self - reliance , and to follow the old testament admonition : " defend the poor and the fatherless ; give justice to the afflicted and needy . "
we 've struggled to assure that no child in america ever goes to bed hungry , that no elderly couple in america has to live in a substandard home , and that no young person in america is excluded from college because the family is poor .
but what have the republicans proposed ? --
just an attack on everything that we 've done in the achievement of social justice and decency that we 've won in the last 50 years , ever since franklin delano roosevelt 's first term .
they would make social security voluntary .
they would reverse our progress on the minimum wage , full employment laws , safety in the work place , and a healthy environment .
lately , as you know , the republicans have been quoting democratic presidents .
but who can blame them ?
would you rather quote herbert hoover or franklin delano roosevelt ?
would you rather quote richard nixon or john fitzgerald kennedy?the republicans have always been the party of privilege , but this year their leaders have gone even further .
in their platform , they have repudiated the best traditions of their own party .
where is the conscience of lincoln in the party of lincoln ?
what 's become of their traditional republican commitment to fiscal responsibility ?
what 's happened to their commitment to a safe and sane arms control?now , i do n't claim perfection for the democratic party .
i do n't claim that every decision that we have made has been right or popular ; certainly , they 've not all been easy .
but i will say this : we 've been tested under fire .
we 've neither ducked nor hidden , and we 've tackled the great central issues of our time , the historic challenges of peace and energy , which have been ignored for years .
we 've made tough decisions , and we 've taken the heat for them .
we 've made mistakes , and we 've learned from them .
but we have built the foundation now for a better future .
we 've done something else , perhaps even more important .
in good times and bad , in the valleys and on the peaks , we 've told people the truth , the hard truth , the truth that sometimes hurts .
one truth that we americans have learned is that our dream has been earned for progress and for peace .
look what our land has been through within our own memory -- a great depression , a world war , a technological explosion , the civil rights revolution , the bitterness of vietnam , the shame of watergate , the twilight peace of nuclear terror .
through each of these momentous experiences we 've learned the hard way about the world and about ourselves .
but we 've matured and we 've grown as a nation and we 've grown stronger .
we 've learned the uses and the limitations of power .
we 've learned the beauty and responsibility of freedom .
we 've learned the value and the obligation of justice .
and we have learned the necessity of peace .
some would argue that to master these lessons is somehow to limit our potential .
that is not so .
a nation which knows its true strengths , which sees its true challenges , which understands legitimate constraints , that nation -- our nation -- is far stronger than one which takes refuge in wishful thinking or nostalgia .
the democratic party -- the american people - have understood these fundamental truths .
all of us can sympathize with the desire for easy answers .
there 's often the temptation to substitute idle dreams for hard reality .
the new republican leaders are hoping that our nation will succumb to that temptation this year , but they profoundly misunderstand and underestimate the character of the american people .
three weeks after pearl harbor , winston churchill came to north america and he said , " we have not journeyed all this way across the centuries , across the oceans , across the mountains , across the prairies , because we are made of sugar candy . "
we americans have courage .
americans have always been on the cutting edge of change .
we 've always looked forward with anticipation and confidence .
i still want the same thing that all of you want -- a self - reliant neighborhood , strong families , work for the able - bodied and good medical care for the sick , opportunity for our youth and dignity for our old , equal rights and justice for all people .
i want teachers eager to explain what a civilization really is , and i want students to understand their own needs and their own aims , but also the needs and yearnings of their neighbors .
i want women free to pursue without limit the full life of what they want for themselves .
i want our farmers growing crops to feed our nation and the world , secure in the knowledge that the family farm will thrive and with a fair return on the good work they do for all of us .
i want workers to see meaning in the labor they perform and work enough to guarantee a job for every worker in this country .
and i want the people in business free to pursue with boldness and freedom new ideas .
and i want minority citizens fully to join the mainstream of american life .
and i want from the bottom of my heart to remove the blight of racial and other discrimination from the face of our nation , and i 'm determined to do it .
i need for all of you to join me in fulfilling that vision .
the choice , the choice between the two futures , could not be more clear .
if we succumb to a dream world then we 'll wake up to a nightmare .
but if we start with reality and fight to make our dreams a reality , then americans will have a good life , a life of meaning and purpose in a nation that 's strong and secure .
above all , i want us to be what the founders of our nation meant us to become -- the land of freedom , the land of peace , and the land of hope .
thank you very much .

good evening .
this is a special night for me .
exactly 3 years ago , on july 15 , 1976 , i accepted the nomination of my party to run for president of the united states .
i promised you a president who is not isolated from the people , who feels your pain , and who shares your dreams and who draws his strength and his wisdom from you .
during the past 3 years i 've spoken to you on many occasions about national concerns , the energy crisis , reorganizing the government , our nation 's economy , and issues of war and especially peace .
but over those years the subjects of the speeches , the talks , and the press conferences have become increasingly narrow , focused more and more on what the isolated world of washington thinks is important .
gradually , you 've heard more and more about what the government thinks or what the government should be doing and less and less about our nation 's hopes , our dreams , and our vision of the future .
ten days ago i had planned to speak to you again about a very important subject -- energy .
for the fifth time i would have described the urgency of the problem and laid out a series of legislative recommendations to the congress .
but as i was preparing to speak , i began to ask myself the same question that i now know has been troubling many of you .
why have we not been able to get together as a nation to resolve our serious energy problem ?
it 's clear that the true problems of our nation are much deeper -- deeper than gasoline lines or energy shortages , deeper even than inflation or recession .
and i realize more than ever that as president i need your help .
so , i decided to reach out and listen to the voices of america .
i invited to camp david people from almost every segment of our society -- business and labor , teachers and preachers , governors , mayors , and private citizens .
and then i left camp david to listen to other americans , men and women like you .
it has been an extraordinary 10 days , and i want to share with you what i 've heard .
first of all , i got a lot of personal advice .
let me quote a few of the typical comments that i wrote down .
this from a southern governor : " mr. president , you are not leading this nation -- you 're just managing the government . "
" you do n't see the people enough any more . "
" some of your cabinet members do n't seem loyal .
there is not enough discipline among your disciples . "
" do n't talk to us about politics or the mechanics of government , but about an understanding of our common good . "
" mr. president , we 're in trouble .
talk to us about blood and sweat and tears . "
" if you lead , mr. president , we will follow . "
many people talked about themselves and about the condition of our nation .
this from a young woman in pennsylvania : " i feel so far from government .
i feel like ordinary people are excluded from political power . "
and this from a young chicano : " some of us have suffered from recession all our lives . "
" some people have wasted energy , but others have n't had anything to waste . "
and this from a religious leader : " no material shortage can touch the important things like god 's love for us or our love for one another . "
and i like this one particularly from a black woman who happens to be the mayor of a small mississippi town : " the big - shots are not the only ones who are important .
remember , you ca n't sell anything on wall street unless someone digs it up somewhere else first . "
this kind of summarized a lot of other statements : " mr. president , we are confronted with a moral and a spiritual crisis . "
several of our discussions were on energy , and i have a notebook full of comments and advice .
i 'll read just a few .
" we ca n't go on consuming 40 percent more energy than we produce .
when we import oil we are also importing inflation plus unemployment . "
" we 've got to use what we have .
the middle east has only 5 percent of the world 's energy , but the united states has 24 percent . "
and this is one of the most vivid statements : " our neck is stretched over the fence and opec has a knife . "
" there will be other cartels and other shortages .
american wisdom and courage right now can set a path to follow in the future . "
this was a good one : " be bold , mr. president .
we may make mistakes , but we are ready to experiment . "
and this one from a labor leader got to the heart of it : " the real issue is freedom .
we must deal with the energy problem on a war footing . "
and the last that i 'll read : " when we enter the moral equivalent of war , mr. president , do n't issue us bb guns . "
these 10 days confirmed my belief in the decency and the strength and the wisdom of the american people , but it also bore out some of my longstanding concerns about our nation 's underlying problems .
i know , of course , being president , that government actions and legislation can be very important .
that 's why i 've worked hard to put my campaign promises into law -- and i have to admit , with just mixed success .
but after listening to the american people i have been reminded again that all the legislation in the world ca n't fix what 's wrong with america .
so , i want to speak to you first tonight about a subject even more serious than energy or inflation .
i want to talk to you right now about a fundamental threat to american democracy .
i do not mean our political and civil liberties .
they will endure .
and i do not refer to the outward strength of america , a nation that is at peace tonight everywhere in the world , with unmatched economic power and military might .
the threat is nearly invisible in ordinary ways .
it is a crisis of confidence .
it is a crisis that strikes at the very heart and soul and spirit of our national will .
we can see this crisis in the growing doubt about the meaning of our own lives and in the loss of a unity of purpose for our nation .
the erosion of our confidence in the future is threatening to destroy the social and the political fabric of america .
the confidence that we have always had as a people is not simply some romantic dream or a proverb in a dusty book that we read just on the fourth of july .
it is the idea which founded our nation and has guided our development as a people .
confidence in the future has supported everything else -- public institutions and private enterprise , our own families , and the very constitution of the united states .
confidence has defined our course and has served as a link between generations .
we 've always believed in something called progress .
we 've always had a faith that the days of our children would be better than our own .
our people are losing that faith , not only in government itself but in the ability as citizens to serve as the ultimate rulers and shapers of our democracy .
as a people we know our past and we are proud of it .
our progress has been part of the living history of america , even the world .
we always believed that we were part of a great movement of humanity itself called democracy , involved in the search for freedom , and that belief has always strengthened us in our purpose .
but just as we are losing our confidence in the future , we are also beginning to close the door on our past .
in a nation that was proud of hard work , strong families , close - knit communities , and our faith in god , too many of us now tend to worship self - indulgence and consumption .
human identity is no longer defined by what one does , but by what one owns .
but we 've discovered that owning things and consuming things does not satisfy our longing for meaning .
we 've learned that piling up material goods can not fill the emptiness of lives which have no confidence or purpose .
the symptoms of this crisis of the american spirit are all around us .
for the first time in the history of our country a majority of our people believe that the next 5 years will be worse than the past 5 years .
two - thirds of our people do not even vote .
the productivity of american workers is actually dropping , and the willingness of americans to save for the future has fallen below that of all other people in the western world .
as you know , there is a growing disrespect for government and for churches and for schools , the news media , and other institutions .
this is not a message of happiness or reassurance , but it is the truth and it is a warning .
these changes did not happen overnight .
they 've come upon us gradually over the last generation , years that were filled with shocks and tragedy .
we were sure that ours was a nation of the ballot , not the bullet , until the murders of john kennedy and robert kennedy and martin luther king , jr. we were taught that our armies were always invincible and our causes were always just , only to suffer the agony of vietnam .
we respected the presidency as a place of honor until the shock of watergate .
we remember when the phrase " sound as a dollar " was an expression of absolute dependability , until 10 years of inflation began to shrink our dollar and our savings .
we believed that our nation 's resources were limitless until 1973 , when we had to face a growing dependence on foreign oil .
these wounds are still very deep .
they have never been healed .
looking for a way out of this crisis , our people have turned to the federal government and found it isolated from the mainstream of our nation 's life .
washington , d. c. , has become an island .
the gap between our citizens and our government has never been so wide .
the people are looking for honest answers , not easy answers ; clear leadership , not false claims and evasiveness and politics as usual .
what you see too often in washington and elsewhere around the country is a system of government that seems incapable of action .
you see a congress twisted and pulled in every direction by hundreds of well - financed and powerful special interests .
you see every extreme position defended to the last vote , almost to the last breath by one unyielding group or another .
you often see a balanced and a fair approach that demands sacrifice , a little sacrifice from everyone , abandoned like an orphan without support and without friends .
often you see paralysis and stagnation and drift .
you do n't like it , and neither do i. what can we do ?
first of all , we must face the truth , and then we can change our course .
we simply must have faith in each other , faith in our ability to govern ourselves , and faith in the future of this nation .
restoring that faith and that confidence to america is now the most important task we face .
it is a true challenge of this generation of americans .
one of the visitors to camp david last week put it this way : " we 've got to stop crying and start sweating , stop talking and start walking , stop cursing and start praying .
the strength we need will not come from the white house , but from every house in america . "
we know the strength of america .
we are strong .
we can regain our unity .
we can regain our confidence .
we are the heirs of generations who survived threats much more powerful and awesome than those that challenge us now .
our fathers and mothers were strong men and women who shaped a new society during the great depression , who fought world wars , and who carved out a new charter of peace for the world .
we ourselves are the same americans who just 10 years ago put a man on the moon .
we are the generation that dedicated our society to the pursuit of human rights and equality .
and we are the generation that will win the war on the energy problem and in that process rebuild the unity and confidence of america .
we are at a turning point in our history .
there are two paths to choose .
one is a path i 've warned about tonight , the path that leads to fragmentation and self - interest .
down that road lies a mistaken idea of freedom , the right to grasp for ourselves some advantage over others .
that path would be one of constant conflict between narrow interests ending in chaos and immobility .
it is a certain route to failure .
all the traditions of our past , all the lessons of our heritage , all the promises of our future point to another path , the path of common purpose and the restoration of american values .
that path leads to true freedom for our nation and ourselves .
we can take the first steps down that path as we begin to solve our energy problem .
energy will be the immediate test of our ability to unite this nation , and it can also be the standard around which we rally .
on the battlefield of energy we can win for our nation a new confidence , and we can seize control again of our common destiny .
in little more than two decades we 've gone from a position of energy independence to one in which almost half the oil we use comes from foreign countries , at prices that are going through the roof .
our excessive dependence on opec has already taken a tremendous toll on our economy and our people .
this is the direct cause of the long lines which have made millions of you spend aggravating hours waiting for gasoline .
it 's a cause of the increased inflation and unemployment that we now face .
this intolerable dependence on foreign oil threatens our economic independence and the very security of our nation .
the energy crisis is real .
it is worldwide .
it is a clear and present danger to our nation .
these are facts and we simply must face them : 
 what i have to say to you now about energy is simple and vitally important .
point one : i am tonight setting a clear goal for the energy policy of the united states .
beginning this moment , this nation will never use more foreign oil than we did in 1977 -- never .
from now on , every new addition to our demand for energy will be met from our own production and our own conservation .
the generation - long growth in our dependence on foreign oil will be stopped dead in its tracks right now and then reversed as we move through the 1980 's , for i am tonight setting the further goal of cutting our dependence on foreign oil by one - half by the end of the next decade -- a saving of over 4 1/2 million barrels of imported oil per day .
point two : to ensure that we meet these targets , i will use my presidential authority to set import quotas .
i 'm announcing tonight that for 1979 and 1980 , i will forbid the entry into this country of one drop of foreign oil more than these goals allow .
these quotas will ensure a reduction in imports even below the ambitious levels we set at the recent tokyo summit .
point three : to give us energy security , i am asking for the most massive peacetime commitment of funds and resources in our nation 's history to develop america 's own alternative sources of fuel -- from coal , from oil shale , from plant products for gasohol , from unconventional gas , from the sun .
i propose the creation of an energy security corporation to lead this effort to replace 2 1/2 million barrels of imported oil per day by 1990 .
the corporation will issue up to $ 5 billion in energy bonds , and i especially want them to be in small denominations so that average americans can invest directly in america 's energy security .
just as a similar synthetic rubber corporation helped us win world war ii , so will we mobilize american determination and ability to win the energy war .
moreover , i will soon submit legislation to congress calling for the creation of this nation 's first solar bank , which will help us achieve the crucial goal of 20 percent of our energy coming from solar power by the year 2000 .
these efforts will cost money , a lot of money , and that is why congress must enact the windfall profits tax without delay .
it will be money well spent .
unlike the billions of dollars that we ship to foreign countries to pay for foreign oil , these funds will be paid by americans to americans .
these funds will go to fight , not to increase , inflation and unemployment .
point four : i 'm asking congress to mandate , to require as a matter of law , that our nation 's utility companies cut their massive use of oil by 50 percent within the next decade and switch to other fuels , especially coal , our most abundant energy source .
point five : to make absolutely certain that nothing stands in the way of achieving these goals , i will urge congress to create an energy mobilization board which , like the war production board in world war ii , will have the responsibility and authority to cut through the redtape , the delays , and the endless roadblocks to completing key energy projects .
we will protect our environment .
but when this nation critically needs a refinery or a pipeline , we will build it .
point six : i 'm proposing a bold conservation program to involve every state , county , and city and every average american in our energy battle .
this effort will permit you to build conservation into your homes and your lives at a cost you can afford .
i ask congress to give me authority for mandatory conservation and for standby gasoline rationing .
to further conserve energy , i 'm proposing tonight an extra $ 10 billion over the next decade to strengthen our public transportation systems .
and i 'm asking you for your good and for your nation 's security to take no unnecessary trips , to use carpools or public transportation whenever you can , to park your car one extra day per week , to obey the speed limit , and to set your thermostats to save fuel .
every act of energy conservation like this is more than just common sense -- i tell you it is an act of patriotism .
our nation must be fair to the poorest among us , so we will increase aid to needy americans to cope with rising energy prices .
we often think of conservation only in terms of sacrifice .
in fact , it is the most painless and immediate way of rebuilding our nation 's strength .
every gallon of oil each one of us saves is a new form of production .
it gives us more freedom , more confidence , that much more control over our own lives .
so , the solution of our energy crisis can also help us to conquer the crisis of the spirit in our country .
it can rekindle our sense of unity , our confidence in the future , and give our nation and all of us individually a new sense of purpose .
you know we can do it .
we have the natural resources .
we have more oil in our shale alone than several saudi arabias .
we have more coal than any nation on earth .
we have the world 's highest level of technology .
we have the most skilled work force , with innovative genius , and i firmly believe that we have the national will to win this war .
i do not promise you that this struggle for freedom will be easy .
i do not promise a quick way out of our nation 's problems , when the truth is that the only way out is an all - out effort .
what i do promise you is that i will lead our fight , and i will enforce fairness in our struggle , and i will ensure honesty .
and above all , i will act .
we can manage the short - term shortages more effectively and we will , but there are no short - term solutions to our long - range problems .
there is simply no way to avoid sacrifice .
twelve hours from now i will speak again in kansas city , to expand and to explain further our energy program .
just as the search for solutions to our energy shortages has now led us to a new awareness of our nation 's deeper problems , so our willingness to work for those solutions in energy can strengthen us to attack those deeper problems .
i will continue to travel this country , to hear the people of america .
you can help me to develop a national agenda for the 1980s .
i will listen and i will act .
we will act together .
these were the promises i made 3 years ago , and i intend to keep them .
little by little we can and we must rebuild our confidence .
we can spend until we empty our treasuries , and we may summon all the wonders of science .
but we can succeed only if we tap our greatest resources -- america 's people , america 's values , and america 's confidence .
i have seen the strength of america in the inexhaustible resources of our people .
in the days to come , let us renew that strength in the struggle for an energy secure nation .
in closing , let me say this : i will do my best , but i will not do it alone .
let your voice be heard .
whenever you have a chance , say something good about our country .
with god 's help and for the sake of our nation , it is time for us to join hands in america .
let us commit ourselves together to a rebirth of the american spirit .
working together with our common faith we can not fail .
thank you and good night .

good evening .
in a few days i will lay down my official responsibilities in this office , to take up once more the only title in our democracy superior to that of president , the title of citizen .
of vice president mondale , my cabinet , and the hundreds of others who have served with me during the last 4 years , i wish to say now publicly what i have said in private : i thank them for the dedication and competence they 've brought to the service of our country .
but i owe my deepest thanks to you , to the american people , because you gave me this extraordinary opportunity to serve .
we 've faced great challenges together , and we know that future problems will also be difficult .
but i 'm now more convinced than ever that the united states , better than any other country , can meet successfully whatever the future might bring .
these last 4 years have made me more certain than ever of the inner strength of our country , the unchanging value of our principles and ideals , the stability of our political system , the ingenuity and the decency of our people .
tonight i would like first to say a few words about this most special office , the presidency of the united states .
this is at once the most powerful office in the world and among the most severely constrained by law and custom .
the president is given a broad responsibility to lead but can not do so without the support and consent of the people , expressed formally through the congress and informally in many ways through a whole range of public and private institutions .
this is as it should be .
within our system of government every american has a right and a duty to help shape the future course of the united states .
thoughtful criticism and close scrutiny of all government officials by the press and the public are an important part of our democratic society .
now , as in the past , only the understanding and involvement of the people through full and open debate can help to avoid serious mistakes and assure the continued dignity and safety of the nation .
today we are asking our political system to do things of which the founding fathers never dreamed .
the government they designed for a few hundred thousand people now serves a nation of almost 230 million people .
their small coastal republic now spans beyond a continent , and we also now have the responsibility to help lead much of the world through difficult times to a secure and prosperous future .
today , as people have become ever more doubtful of the ability of the government to deal with our problems , we are increasingly drawn to single - issue groups and special interest organizations to ensure that whatever else happens , our own personal views and our own private interests are protected .
this is a disturbing factor in american political life .
it tends to distort our purposes , because the national interest is not always the sum of all our single or special interests .
we are all americans together , and we must not forget that the common good is our common interest and our individual responsibility .
because of the fragmented pressures of these special interests , it 's very important that the office of the president be a strong one and that its constitutional authority be preserved .
the president is the only elected official charged with the primary responsibility of representing all the people .
in the moments of decision , after the different and conflicting views have all been aired , it 's the president who then must speak to the nation and for the nation .
i understand after 4 years in this office , as few others can , how formidable is the task the new president - elect is about to undertake , and to the very limits of conscience and conviction , i pledge to support him in that task .
i wish him success , and godspeed .
i know from experience that presidents have to face major issues that are controversial , broad in scope , and which do not arouse the natural support of a political majority .
for a few minutes now , i want to lay aside my role as leader of one nation , and speak to you as a fellow citizen of the world about three issues , three difficult issues : the threat of nuclear destruction , our stewardship of the physical resources of our planet , and the preeminence of the basic rights of human beings .
it 's now been 35 years since the first atomic bomb fell on hiroshima .
the great majority of the world 's people can not remember a time when the .nuclear shadow did not hang over the earth .
our minds have adjusted to it , as after a time our eyes adjust to the dark .
yet the risk of a nuclear conflagration has not lessened .
it has not happened yet , thank god , but that can give us little comfort , for it only has to happen once .
the danger is becoming greater .
as the arsenals of the superpowers grow in size and sophistication and as other governments , perhaps even in the future dozens of governments , acquire these weapons , it may only be a matter of time before madness , desperation , greed , or miscalculation lets loose this terrible force .
in an all - out nuclear war , more destructive power than in all of world war ii would be unleashed every second during the long afternoon it would take for all the missiles and bombs to fall .
a world war ii every second -- more people killed in the first few hours than in all the wars of history put together .
the survivors , if any , would live in despair amid the poisoned ruins of a civilization that had committed suicide .
national weakness , real or perceived , can tempt aggression and thus cause war .
that 's why the united states can never neglect its military strength .
we must and we will remain strong .
but with equal determination , the united states and all countries must find ways to control and to reduce the horrifying danger that is posed by the enormous world stockpiles of nuclear arms .
this has been a concern of every american president since the moment we first saw what these weapons could do .
our leaders will require our understanding and our support as they grapple with this difficult but crucial challenge .
there is no disagreement on the goals or the basic approach to controlling this enormous destructive force .
the answer lies not just in the attitudes or the actions of world leaders but in the concern and the demands of all of us as we continue our struggle to preserve the peace .
nuclear weapons are an expression of one side of our human character .
but there 's another side .
the same rocket technology that delivers nuclear warheads has also taken us peacefully into space .
from that perspective , we see our earth as it really is -- a small and fragile and beautiful blue globe , the only home we have .
we see no barriers of race or religion or country .
we see the essential unity of our species and our planet .
and with faith and common sense , that bright vision will ultimately prevail .
another major challenge , therefore , is to protect the quality of this world within which we live .
the shadows that fall across the future are cast not only by the kinds of weapons we 've built , but by the kind of world we will either nourish or neglect .
there are real and growing dangers to our simple and our most precious possessions : the air we breathe , the water we drink , and the land which sustains us .
the rapid depletion of irreplaceable minerals , the erosion of topsoil , the destruction of beauty , the blight of pollution , the demands of increasing billions of people , all combine to create problems which are easy to observe and predict , but difficult to resolve .
if we do not act , the world of the year 2000 will be much less able to sustain life than it is now .
but there is no reason for despair .
acknowledging the physical realities of our planet does not mean a dismal future of endless sacrifice .
in fact , acknowledging these realities is the first step in dealing with them .
we can meet the resource problems of the world -- water , food , minerals , farmlands , forests , overpopulation , pollution if we tackle them with courage and foresight .
i 've just been talking about forces of potential destruction that mankind has developed and how we might control them .
it 's equally important that we remember the beneficial forces that we have evolved over the ages and how to hold fast to them .
one of those constructive forces is the enhancement of individual human freedoms through the strengthening of democracy and the fight against deprivation , torture , terrorism , and the persecution of people throughout the world .
the struggle for human rights overrides all differences of color or nation or language .
those who hunger for freedom , who thirst for human dignity , and who suffer for the sake of justice , they are the patriots of this cause .
i believe with all my heart that america must always stand for these basic human rights at home and abroad .
that is both our history and our destiny .
america did not invent human rights .
in a very real sense , it 's the other way around .
human rights invented america .
ours was the first nation in the history of the world to be founded explicitly on such an idea .
our social and political progress has been based on one fundamental principle : the value and importance of the individual .
the fundamental force that unites us is not kinship or place of origin or religious preference .
the love of liberty is the common blood that flows in our american veins .
the battle for human rights , at home and abroad , is far from over .
we should never be surprised nor discouraged , because the impact of our efforts has had and will always have varied results .
rather , we should take pride that the ideals which gave birth to our nation still inspire the hopes of oppressed people around the world .
we have no cause for self - righteousness or complacency , but we have every reason to persevere , both within our own country and beyond our borders .
if we are to serve as a beacon for human rights , we must continue to perfect here at home the rights and the values which we espouse around the world : a decent education for our children , adequate medical care for all americans , an end to discrimination against minorities and women , a job for all those able to work , and freedom from injustice and religious intolerance .
we live in a time of transition , an uneasy era which is likely to endure for the rest of this century .
it will be a period of tensions , both within nations and between nations , of competition for scarce resources , of social , political , and economic stresses and strains .
during this period we may be tempted to abandon some of the time - honored principles and commitments which have been proven during the difficult times of past generations .
we must never yield to this temptation .
our american values are not luxuries , but necessities -- not the salt in our bread , but the bread itself .
our common vision of a free and just society is our greatest source of cohesion at home and strength abroad , greater even than the bounty of our material blessings .
remember these words : " we hold these truths to be self - evident , that all men are created equal , that they are endowed by their creator with certain inalienable rights , that among these are life , liberty and the pursuit of happiness."this vision still grips the imagination of the world .
but we know that democracy is always an unfinished creation .
each generation must renew its foundations .
each generation must rediscover the meaning of this hallowed vision in the light of its own modern challenges .
for this generation , ours , life is nuclear survival ; liberty is human rights ; the pursuit of happiness is a planet whose resources are devoted to the physical and spiritual nourishment of its inhabitants .
during the next few days i will work hard to make sure that the transition from myself to the next president is a good one , that the american people are served well .
and i will continue , as i have the last 14 months , to work hard and to pray for the lives and the well - being of the american hostages held in iran .
i ca n't predict yet what will happen , but i hope you will join me in my constant prayer for their freedom .
as i return home to the south , where i was born and raised , i look forward to the opportunity to reflect and further to assess , i hope with accuracy , the circumstances of our times .
i intend to give our new president my support , and i intend to work as a citizen , as i 've worked here in this office as president , for the values this nation was founded to secure .
again , from the bottom of my heart , i want to express to you the gratitude i feel .
thank you , fellow citizens , and farewell .

yes .
first of all it 's to recognize the tremendous economic strength of this country and to set the putting back to work of our people as a top priority .
this is an effort that ought to be done primarily by strong leadership in the white house , the inspiration of our people , the tapping of business , agriculture , industry , labor , and government at all levels to work on this project .
we will never have an end to the inflationary spiral , and we will never have a balanced budget until we get our people back to work .
there are several things that can be done specifically that are not now being done : first of all , to channel research and development funds into areas that will provide large numbers of jobs ; secondly , we need to have a commitment in the private sector to cooperate with government in matters like housing .
here , a very small investment of taxpayers ' money in the housing field can bring large numbers of extra jobs , in the guarantee of mortgage loans , in the putting forward of 202 programs for housing for older people and so forth , to cut down the roughly 20-percent unemployment that now exists in the construction industry .
another thing is to deal with our needs in the central cities where the unemployment rate is extremely high - sometimes among minority groups , those who do n't speak english or who are black or young people - a 40-percent unemployment .
here , a ccc -type program would be appropriate , to channel money into the sharing with private sector and also local and state governments to employ young people who are now out of work .
another very important aspect of our economy would be to increase production in every way possible , to hold down taxes on individuals , and to shift the tax burdens on to those who have avoided paying taxes in the past .
these kinds of specific things , none of which are being done now , would be a great help in reducing unemployment .
there is an additional factor that needs to be done and covered very succinctly , and that is to make sure that we have a good relationship between management , business on the one hand and labor on the other .
in a lot of places where unemployment is very high , we might channel specific , targeted job opportunities by paying part of the salary of unemployed people and also sharing with local governments the payment of salaries , which would let us cut down the unemployment rate much lower before we hit the inflationary level .
but i believe that by the end of the first 4 years of the next term , we could have the unemployment rate down to 3 percent - adult unemployment - which is about 4 to 4 ? ?
percent overall , a controlled inflation rate , and have a balanced growth of about 4 to 6 percent , around 5 percent , which would give us a balanced budget .
well , we now have such a low utilization of our productive capacity , about 73 percent - i think it 's about the lowest since the great depression years - and such a high unemployment rate now-7.9 percent - that we have a long way to go in getting people to work before we have the inflationary pressures .
and i think this would be easy to accomplish , to get jobs now without having the strong inflationary pressures that would be necessary .
i would not favor the payment of a given fixed income to people unless they are not able to work .
but with tax incentives for the low - income groups , we could build up their income levels above the poverty level and not make welfare more profitable than work .
well , mr. ford is changing considerably his previous philosophy .
the present tax structure is a disgrace to this country .
it 's just a welfare program for the rich .
as a matter of fact , 25 percent of the total tax deductions go for only 1 percent of the richest people in this country , and over 50 percent of the tax credits go for the 14 percent of the richest people in this country .
when mr. ford first became president in august of 1974 , the first thing he did in october was to ask for a $ 4.7 billion increase in taxes on our people in the midst of the heaviest recession since the great depression of the 1940 's .
in january of 1975 , he asked for a tax change , a $ 5.6 billion increase on low and middle - income private individuals , a $ 6 1/2 billion decrease on the corporations and the special interests .
in december of 1975 , he vetoed the roughly $ 18 to $ 20 billion tax reduction bill that had been passed by the congress .
and then he came back later on in january of this year , and he did advocate a $ 10 billion tax reduction , but it would be offset by a $ 6 billion increase this coming january in deductions for social security payments and for unemployment compensation .
the whole philosophy of the republican party , including my opponent , has been to pile on taxes on low - income people , to take them off on the corporations .
as a matter of fact , since the late sixties when mr. nixon took office , we 've had a reduction in the percentage of taxes paid by corporations from 30 percent down to about 20 percent .
we 've had an increase in taxes paid by individuals , payroll taxes , from 14 percent up to 20 percent .
this is what the republicans have done to us .
this is why tax reform is so important .
well , as a matter of fact , there is .
if we assume a rate of growth of our economy equivalent to what it was during president johnson and president kennedy , even before the vietnamese war , and if we assume that , at the end of the 4-year period we can cut our unemployment rate down to 4 to 4 ? ?
percent .
under those circumstances , even assuming no elimination of unnecessary programs and assuming an increase in the allotment of money to finance programs increasing as the inflation rate does , my economic projects , i think confirmed by the house and the senate committees , have been , with a $ 60 billion extra amount of money that can be spent in fiscal year ' 81-which would be the last year of this next term - within that $ 60 billion increase , there would be fit the programs that i promised the american people .
i might say , too , that if we see that these goals can not be reached - and i believe they are reasonable goals - then i would cut back on the rate of implementation of new programs in order to accommodate a balanced budget by fiscal year ' 81 , which is the last year of the next term .
i believe that we ought to have a balanced budget during normal economic circumstances .
and these projections have been very carefully made .
i stand behind them .
and if they should be in error slightly on the down side , then i will phase in the programs that we 've advocated more slowly .
ms. drew .
governor , according to the budget committees of the congress that you referred to , if we get to full employment , what they project at a 4-percent unemployment and , as you say , even allowing for the inflation in the programs , there would not be anything more than a surplus of $ 5 billion by 1981 .
conservative estimates of your programs would be that they 'd be about $ 85 to $ 100 billion .
so , how do you say that you are going to be able to do these things and balance the budget ?
well , the assumption that you have described that 's different is in the rate of growth of our economy .
i believe that it 's accurate to say that the committees to whom you refer , with the employment rate that you state and with the 5 to 5 1/2 percent growth rate in our economy , that the projections would be a $ 60 billion increase in the amount of money that we have to spend in 1981 compared to now .
and in that framework would be fit any improvements in the programs .
now , this does not include any extra control over unnecessary spending , the weeding out of obsolete or obsolescent programs .
we will have a safety version built in with complete reorganization of the executive branch of government , which i am pledged to do .
the present bureaucratic structure of the federal government is a mess .
and if i am elected president , that 's going to be a top priority of mine - to completely revise the structure of the federal government to make it economical , efficient , purposeful , and manageable for a change .
and also , i am going to institute zero - base budgeting , which i used 4 years in georgia , which assesses every program every year and eliminates those programs that are obsolete or obsolescent .
but with these projections we will have a balanced budget by fiscal year 1981 if i am elected president , keep my promises to the american people .
and it 's just predicated on very modest , but i think accurate , projections of employment increases and a growth in our national economy equal to what was experienced under kennedy , johnson , before the vietnam war .
well , i think it 's very difficult for president ford to explain the difference between the pardon of president nixon and his attitude toward those who violated the draft laws .
as a matter of fact now , i do n't advocate amnesty ; i advocate pardon .
there is a difference , in my opinion , and in accordance with the ruling of the supreme court and in accordance with the definition in the dictionary .
amnesty means that what you did was right .
pardon means that what you did , whether it 's right or wrong , you are forgiven for it .
and i do advocate a pardon for draft evaders .
i think it 's accurate to say that 2 years ago , when mr. ford put in this amnesty , that three times as many deserters were excused as were the ones who evaded the draft .
but i think that now is the time to heal our country after the vietnam war .
and i think that what the people are concerned about is not the pardon or the amnesty of those who evaded the draft , but whether or not our crime system is fair .
we have got a sharp distinction drawn between white collar crime .
the big shots who are rich , who are influential , very seldom go to jail .
those who are poor and who have no influence quite often are the ones who are punished .
and the whole subject of crime is one that concerns our people very much .
and i believe that the fairness of it is what is the major problem that addresses our leader , and this is something that has n't been addressed adequately by this administration .
but i hope to have a complete responsibility on my shoulders to help bring ' about a fair criminal justice system and also to bring about an end to the divisiveness that has occurred in our country as a result of the vietnam war .
well , i 've been through this before , mr. gannon , as the governor of georgia .
when i took over we had a bureaucratic mess like we have in washington now .
and we had 300 agencies , departments , bureaus , commissions - some fully budgeted , some not - but all having responsibility to carry out that was in conflict .
and we cut those 300 agencies and so forth down substantially ; we eliminated 278 of them .
we set up a simple structure of government that could be administered fairly , and it was a tremendous success .
it has n't been undone since i was there .
it resulted also in an ability to reshape our court system , our prison system , our education system , our mental health programs , and a clear assignment of responsibility and authority , and also to have our people once again understand and control our government .
i intend to do the same thing if i am elected president .
when i get to washington , coming in as an outsider , one of the major responsibilities that i will have on my shoulder is a complete reorganization of the executive branch of government .
we now have a greatly expanded white house staff .
when mr. nixon went in office , for instance , we had $ 3 1/2 million spent on the white house and its staff .
that has escalated now to $ 16 ? ?
million in the last republican administration .
this needs to be changed .
we need to put the responsibilities back on the cabinet members .
we also need to have a great reduction in agencies and programs .
for instance , we now have in the health area 302 different programs administered by 11 major departments and agencies .
sixty other advisory commissions are responsible for this .
medicaid is in one agency ; medicare is in a different one ; the check on the quality of health care is in a different one .
none of them are responsible for health care itself .
this makes it almost impossible for us to have a good health program .
we have just advocated this past week a consolidation of the responsibilities for energy .
our country now has no comprehensive energy program or policy .
we have 20 different agencies in the federal government responsible for the production , the regulation , the information about energy , the conservation of energy spread all over government .
this is a gross waste of money .
so , tough , competent management of government , giving us a simple , efficient , purposeful , and manageable government will be a great step forward .
and if i am elected - and i intend to be - then it 's going to be done .
i ca n't say for sure that we would have fewer federal employees when i go out of office than when i come in .
it took me about 3 years to completely reorganize the georgia government .
the last year i was in office our budget was actually less than it was a year before , which showed a great improvement .
also , we had a 2-percent increase in the number of employees the last year , but it was a tremendous shift from administrative jobs into the delivery of services .
for instance , we completely revised our prison system .
we established 84 new mental health treatment centers , and we shifted people out of administrative jobs into the field to deliver better services .
the same thing will be done at the federal government level .
i accomplished this with substantial reductions in employees in some departments .
for instance , in the transportation department we cut back about 25 percent of the total number of employees .
in giving our people better mental health care , we increased the number of employees .
but the efficiency of it , the simplicity of it , the ability of people to understand their own government and control it was a substantial benefit derived from complete reorganization .
we have got to do this at the federal government level .
if we do n't , the bureaucratic mess is going to continue .
there is no way for our people now to understand what their government is ; there is no way to get the answer to a question .
when you come to washington to try to - as a governor - to try to begin a new program for your people , like the treatment of drug addicts , i found there were 13 different federal agencies that i had to go to to manage the drug treatment program .
in the georgia government we only had one agency responsible for drug treatment .
this is the kind of change that would be made .
and it would be of tremendous benefit in long - range planning , in tight budgeting , saving the taxpayers ' money , making the government more efficient , cutting down on bureaucratic waste , having a clear delineation of authority and responsibility of employees , and giving our people a better chance to understand and control their government .
well , mr. ford takes the same attitude that the republicans always take .
in the last 3 months before an election , they are always for the programs that they fight the other 3 1/2 years .
i remember when herbert hoover was against jobs for people .
i remember when all landon was against social security .
and later president nixon-16 years ago - was telling the public that john kennedy 's proposals would bankrupt the country and would double the cost .
the best thing to do is to look at the record of mr. ford 's administration and mr. nixon 's before his .
we had last year a $ 65 billion deficit , the largest deficit in the history of our country , more of a deficit spending than we had in the entire 8-year period under president johnson and president kennedy .
we 've got 500,000 more americans out of jobs today than were out of work 3 months ago .
and since mr. ford has been in office , in 2 years we 've had a 50-percent increase in unemployment , from 5 million people out of work to 2 1/2 million more people out of work , or a total of 7 1/2 million .
we 've also got a comparison between himself and mr. nixon .
he 's got four times the size of the deficits that mr. nixon even had himself .
this talking about more people at work is distorted because with the 14-percent increase in the cost of living in the last 2 years , it means that women and young people have had to go to work when they did n't want to because their fathers could n't make enough to pay the increased cost of food and housing and clothing .
we have , in this last 2 years alone , $ 120 billion total deficits under president ford , and at the same time we 've had in the last 8 years a doubling in the number of bankruptcies for small business .
we 've had a negative growth in our national economy , measured in real dollars .
the take - home pay of a worker in this country is actually less now than it was in 1968 , measured in real dollars .
this is the kind of record that is there , and talk about the future and a drastic change or conversion on the part of mr. ford at the last minute is one that just does n't go .
well , among my other experiences in the past i 've been a nuclear engineer , and i did graduate work in this field .
i think i know the capabilities and limitations of atomic power .
but the energy policy of our nation is one that has not yet been established under this administration .
i think almost every other developed nation in the world has an energy policy except us .
we have seen the federal energy agency   established , for instance , in the crisis of 1973 .
it was supposed to be a temporary agency ; now it 's permanent .
it 's enormous ; it 's growing every day .
and i think the wall street journal reported not too long ago they have 112 public relations experts working for the federal energy agency   to try to justify to the american people its own existence .
we 've got to have a firm way to handle the energy question .
the reorganization proposal that i 've put forward is one first step .
in addition to that , we need to have a realization that we 've got about 35 years worth of oil left in the whole world .
we are going to run out of oil .
when mr. nixon made his famous speech on operation independence , we were importing about 35 percent of our oil .
now we 've increased that amount 25 percent .
we now import about 44 percent of our oil .
we need a shift from oil to coal .
we need to concentrate our research and development effort on coal - burning and extraction that 's safe for miners , that also is clean burning .
we need to shift very strongly toward solar energy and have strict conservation measures and then , as a last resort only , continue to use atomic power .
i would certainly not cut out atomic power altogether .
we ca n't afford to give up that opportunity until later .
but to the extent that we continue to use atomic power , i would be responsible as president to make sure that the safety precautions were initiated and maintained .
for instance , some that have been forgotten : we need to have the reactor core below ground level , the entire powerplant that uses atomic power tightly sealed , and a heavy vacuum maintained .
there ought to be a standardized design .
there ought to be a full - time atomic energy specialist , independent of the power company , in the control room full - time , 24 hours a day , to shut down a plant if an abnormality develops .
these kinds of procedures , along with evacuation procedures , adequate insurance , ought to be initiated .
so , shift from oil to coal ; emphasize research and development on coal use and also on solar power ; strict conservation measures - not yield every time the special interest groups put pressure on the president , like this administration has done ; and use atomic energy only as a last resort with the strictest possible safety precautions .
that 's the best overall energy policy in the brief time we have to discuss it .
yes , i would .
some of the things that can be done about this is a change in the rate structure of electric power companies .
we now encourage people to waste electricity by giving the lowest rates to the biggest users .
we do n't do anything to cut down on peak load requirements .
we do n't have an adequate requirement for the insulation of homes , for the efficiency of automobiles .
and whenever the automobile manufacturers come forward and say they ca n't meet the limits that the congress has put forward , this republican administration has delayed the implementation dates .
in addition to that , we ought to have a shift to the use of coal , particularly in the appalachian regions where the coal is located - a lot of very high - quality , low - carbon coal - i mean low - sulfur coal is there - it 's where our employment is needed .
this would help a great deal .
so , mandatory conservation measures , yes .
encouragement by the president for people to voluntarily conserve , yes .
and also the private sector ought to be encouraged to bring forward to the public the benefits from efficiency .
one bank in washington , for instance , gives lower interest loans for people who adequately insulate their homes or who buy efficient automobiles .
and some major manufacturing companies , like dow chemical , have , through very effective efficiency mechanisms , cut down the use of energy by as much as 40 percent with the same out - product .
these kind of things ought to be done ; they ought to be encouraged and supported and even required by the government , yes .
very substantially to ensure that our nuclear power plants are safer , that they are more efficient , and that we have adequate safeguards .
i think you have to have greater oil and gas production , more coal production , more nuclear production , and in addition , you have to have energy conservation .
> 













  well , mr. ford does n't seem to put into perspective the fact that when 500,000 more people are out of work then there were 3 months ago , where we have 2 ? ?
million more people out of work than were when he took office , that this touches human beings .
i was in a city in pennsylvania not too long ago near here , and there were about 4,000 or 5,000 people in the audience - it was on a train trip - and i said , " how many adults here are out of work ? "
about a thousand raised their hands .
mr. ford actually has fewer people now in the private sector in nonfarm jobs than when he took office , and still he talks about a success ; 7.9 percent unemployment is a terrible tragedy in this country .
he says he has learned how to match unemployment with inflation .
that 's right .
we 've got the highest inflation we 've had in 25 years right now - except under this administration - and that was 50 years ago - and we 've got the highest unemployment we 've had under mr. ford 's administration since the great depression .
this affects human beings .
and his insensitivity in providing those people a chance to work has made this a welfare administration and not a work administration .
he has n't saved $ 9 billion with his vetoes .
it has only been a net saving of $ 4 billion .
and the cost in unemployment compensation , welfare compensation , and lost revenues has increased $ 23 billion in the last 2 years .
this is a typical attitude that really causes havoc in people 's lives .
and then it 's covered over by saying that our country has naturally got a 6-percent unemployment rate or 7-percent unemployment rate and a 6-percent inflation .
it 's a travesty .
it shows a lack of leadership .
and we 've never had a president since the war between the states that vetoed more bills .
mr. ford has vetoed four times as many bills as mr. nixon , per year , and 11 of them have been overridden .
one of his bills that was overridden - he only got one vote in the senate and seven votes in the house from republicans .
so , this shows a breakdown in leadership .
right .
now we have such a grossly unbalanced tax system , as i said earlier , that it is a disgrace .
of all the tax benefits now , 25 percent of them go to the 1 percent of the richest people in this country .
over 50 percent-53 to be exact - percent of the tax benefits go to the 14 percent richest people in this country .
we 've had a 50-percent increase in payroll deductions since mr. nixon went in office 8 years ago .
mr. ford has advocated , since he has been in office , over $ 5 billion in reductions for corporations , special interest groups , and the very , very wealthy , who derive their income not from labor , but from investments .
that has got to be changed .
a few things that can be done : we have now a deferral system so that the multinational corporations , who invest overseas , if they make $ 1 million in profits overseas , they do n't have to pay any of their taxes unless they bring their money back into this country .
where they do n't pay their taxes , the average american pays their taxes for them .
not only that but it robs this country of jobs because instead of coming back with that million dollars and creating a shoe factory , say , in new hampshire or vermont , if the company takes the money down to italy and builds a shoe factory , they do n't have to pay any taxes on the money .
another thing is a system called disc [ domestic international sales corporation [ , which was originally designed and proposed by mr. nixon , to encourage exports .
this permits a company to create a dummy corporation to export their products and then not to pay the full amount of taxes on them .
this costs our government about $ 1.4 billion a year , and when those rich corporations do n't pay that tax , the average american taxpayer pays it for them .
another one that is very important is the business deductions .
jet airplanes , first - class travel , the $ 50 martini lunch - the average working person ca n't take advantage of that , but the wealthier people can .
another system is where a dentist can invest money in , say , raising cattle and can put in $ 100,000 of his own money , borrow $ 900,000-$900,000 , that makes a million - and mark off a great amount of loss through that procedure .
there was one example , for instance , where somebody produced pornographic movies .
they put in $ 30,000 of their own money and got $ 120,000 in tax savings .
these special kinds of programs have robbed the average taxpayer and have benefited those who are powerful and who can employ lobbyists and who can have their c. p. a. 's and their lawyers to help them benefit from the roughly 8,000 pages of the tax code .
the average american person ca n't do it .
you ca n't hire a lobbyist out of unemployment compensation checks .
no , i would n't do away with all business deductions .
i think that would be a very serious mistake .
but if you could just do away with the ones that are unfair , you could lower taxes for everyone .
i would never do anything that would increase the taxes for those who work for a living or who are presently required to list all their income .
what i want to do is not to raise taxes , but to eliminate loopholes .
and this is the point of my first statistic that i gave you , that the present tax benefits that have been carved out over a long period of years-50 years - by sharp tax lawyers and by lobbyists , have benefited just the rich .
these programs that i described to you earlier - the tax deferrals for overseas , the disc , and the tax shelters - they only apply to people in the $ 50,000-a - year bracket or up .
and i think this is the best way to approach it , is to make sure that everybody pays taxes on the income that they earn and make sure that you take whatever savings there is from the higher income levels and give it to the lower and middle - income families .
well , it 's not a matter of republican and democrat ; it 's a matter of leadership or no leadership .
president eisenhower worked with a democratic congress very well .
even president nixon , because he was a strong leader , at least , worked with a democratic congress very well .
mr. ford has vetoed , as i said earlier , four times as many bills per year as mr. nixon .
mr. ford quite often puts forward a program just as a public relations stunt and never tries to put it through the congress by working with the congress .
i think under president nixon and eisenhower - they passed about 60 to 75 percent of their legislation .
this year mr. ford will not pass more than 26 percent of all the legislative proposals he puts forward .
this is government by stalemate .
and we 've seen almost a complete breakdown in the proper relationship between the president , who represents this country , and the congress , who , collectively , also represent this country .
we 've had republican presidents before who have tried to run against a democratic congress .
and i do n't think it's - the congress is mr. ford 's opponent .
but if he insists that i be responsible for the democratic congress , of which i have not been a part , then i think it 's only fair that he be responsible for the nixon administration in its entirety , of which he was a part .
that , i think , is a good balance .
but the point is that a president ought to lead this country .
mr. ford , so far as i know , except for avoiding another watergate , has not accomplished one single major program for his country .
and there has been a constant squabbling between the president and the congress , and that 's not the way this country ought to be run .
i might go back to one other thing .
mr. ford has misquoted an ap news story that was in error to begin with .
that story reported several times that i would lower taxes for lower- and middle - income families , and that correction was delivered to the white house .
and i am sure that the president knows about this correction , but he still insists on repeating an erroneous statement .
what i have said is that the president ought to have a chance to appoint the chairman of the federal reserve board to have a coterminus term ; in other words , both of them serve the same 4 years .
the congress can modify the supply of money by modifying the income tax laws .
the president can modify the economic structure of the country by public statements and general attitudes and the budget that he proposes .
the federal reserve has an independent status that ought to be preserved .
i think that mr. burns did take a typical erroneous republican attitude in the 1973 year when inflation was so high .
he assumed that the inflation rate was because of excessive demand and , therefore , put into effect tight constraint on the economy , very high interest rates - which is typical , also , of a republican administration - tried to increase the tax payments by individuals , cut the tax payments by corporations .
i would have done it opposite .
i think the problem should have been addressed by increasing productivity , by having put people back to work so they could purchase more goods , lower income taxes on individuals , perhaps raise them if necessary on corporations in comparison .
but mr. burns in that respect made a very serious mistake .
i would not want to destroy the independence of the federal reserve board .
but i do think we ought to have a cohesive economic policy with at least the chairman of the federal reserve board and the president 's terms being the same and letting the congress of course be the third entity with independence , subject only to the president 's veto .
well , one of the very serious things that 's happened in our government in recent years and has continued up until now is a breakdown in the trust among our people in the 





  there has been too much government secrecy and not enough respect for the personal privacy of american citizens .
well , tonight , we 've bad a chance to talk a lot about the past , but i think it is time to talk about the future .
our nation in the last 8 years has been divided as never before .
it 's a time for unity .
it is time to draw ourselves together , to have a president and a congress that can work together with mutual respect for a change , cooperating for a change , in the open for a change , so the people can understand their own government .
it is time for government , industry and labor , manufacturing , agriculture , education , other entities in our society to cooperate .
and it 's a time for government to understand and to cooperate with our people .
for a long time our american citizens have been excluded , sometimes misled , sometimes have been lied to .
this is not compatible with the purpose of our nation .
i believe in our country .
it needs to be competent , the government needs to be well managed , efficient , economical .
we need to have a government that 's sensitive to our people 's needs , to those who are poor , who do n't have adequate health care , who have been cheated too long by our tax programs , who 've been out of jobs , whose families have been torn apart .
we need to restore the faith and the trust of the american people in their own government .
in addition to that , we 've suffered because we have n't had leadership in this administration .
we have got a government of stalemate .
we 've lost the vision of what our country can and ought to be .
this is not the america that we 've known in the past .
it 's not the america that we have to have in the future .
i do n't claim to know all the answers , but i 've got confidence in my country .
our economic strength is still there .
our system of government , in spite of vietnam , cambodia , cia , watergate , is still the best system of government on earth .
and the greatest resource of all are the 215 million americans who still have within us the strength , the character , the intelligence , the experience , the patriotism , the idealism , the compassion , the sense of brotherhood on which we can rely in the future to restore the greatness to our country .
we ought not to be excluded from our government anymore .
we need a president that can go in who derives his strength from the people .
i owe the special interests nothing .
i owe everything to you , the people of this country .
and i believe that we can bind our wounds .
i believe that we can work together .
and i believe that if we can tap the tremendous untapped reservoir of innate strength in this country , that we can once again have a government as good as our people and let the world know what we still know and hope for - that we still live in the greatest and the strongest and the best country on earth .

good evening .
more than six months ago , in april , i spoke to you about a need for a national policy to deal with our present and future energy problems , and the next day i sent my proposals to the congress .
the congress has recognized the urgency of this problem and has come to grips with some of the most complex and difficult decisions that a legislative body has ever been asked to make .
working with congress , we 've now formed a new department of energy , headed by secretary james schlesinger .
we have the ability to administer the new energy legislation , and congressional work on the national energy plan has now reached the final stage .
last week the senate sent its version of the legislation to the conference committees , where members of the house and senate will now resolve differences between the bills that they 've passed .
there , in the next few weeks , the strength and courage of our political system will be proven .
the choices facing the members of congress are not easy .
for them to pass an effective and fair plan , they will need your support and your understanding -- your support to resist pressures from a few for special favors at the expense of the rest of us and your understanding that there can be no effective plan without some sacrifice from all of us .
tonight , at this crucial time , i want to emphasize why it is so important that we have an energy plan and what we will risk , as a nation , if we are timid or reluctant to face this challenge .
it 's crucial that you understand how serious this challenge is .
with every passing month , our energy problems have grown worse .
this summer we used more oil and gasoline than ever before in our history .
more of our oil is coming from foreign countries .
just since april , our oil imports have cost us $ 23 billion -- about $ 350 worth of foreign oil for the average american family .
a few weeks ago , in detroit , an unemployed steelworker told me something that may reflect the feelings of many of you . "
mr. president , " he said , " i do n't feel much like talking about energy and foreign policy .
i 'm concerned about how i 'm going to live .... i ca n't be too concerned about other things when i have a 10-year - old daughter to raise and i do n't have a job and i 'm 56 years old . "
well , i understand how he felt , but i must tell you the truth .
and the truth is that you can not talk about economic problems now or in the future without talking about energy .
let me try to describe the size and the effect of the problem .
our farmers are the greatest agricultural exporters the world has ever known , but it now takes all the food and fiber that we export in 2 years just to pay for 1 year of imported oil -- about $ 45 billion .
this excessive importing of foreign oil is a tremendous and rapidly increasing drain on our national economy .
it hurts every american family .
it causes unemployment .
every $ 5 billion increase in oil imports costs us 200,000 american jobs .
it costs us business investments .
vast amounts of american wealth no longer stay in the united states to build our factories and to give us a better life .
it makes it harder for us to balance our federal budget and to finance needed programs for our people .
it unbalances our nation 's trade with other countries .
this year , primarily because of oil , our imports will be at least $ 25 billion more than all the american goods the we sell overseas .
it pushes up international energy prices because excessive importing of oil by the united states makes it easier for foreign producers to raise their prices .
it feeds serious inflationary pressures in our own economy .
if this trend continues , the excessive reliance on foreign oil could make the very security of our nation increasingly dependent on uncertain energy supplies .
our national security depends on more than just our armed forces ; it also rests on the strength of our economy , on our national will , and on the ability of the united states to carry out our foreign policy as a free and independent nation .
america overseas is only as strong as america at home .
the secretary of defense said recently , " the present deficiency of assured energy sources is the single surest threat ... to our security and to that of our allies . "
yesterday , after careful consideration , i announced the postponement of a major overseas trip until after christmas because of the paramount importance of developing an effective energy plan this year .
i have no doubt that this is the right decision , because the other nations of the world -- allies and adversaries alike -- await our energy decisions with a great interest and concern .
as one of the world 's largest producers of coal and oil and gas , why do we have this problem with energy , and why is it so difficult to solve ?
one problem is that the price of all energy is going up , both because of its increasing scarcity and because the price of oil is not set in a free and competitive market .
the world price is set by a foreign cartel -- the governments of the so - called opec nations .
that price is now almost five times as great as it was in 1973 .
our biggest problem , however , is that we simply use too much and waste too much energy .
our imports have more than tripled in the last 10 years .
although all countries could , of course , be more efficient , we are the worst offender .
since the great price rise in 1973 , the japanese have cut their oil imports , the germans , the french , the british , the italians have all cut their oil imports .
meanwhile , although we have large petroleum supplies of our own and most of them do n't , we in the united states have increased our imports more than 40 percent .
this problem has come upon us suddenly .
ten years ago , when foreign oil was cheap , we imported just 2 1/2 million barrels of oil a day , about 20 percent of what we used .
by 1972 , we were importing about 30 percent .
this year , when foreign oil is very expensive , we are importing nearly 9 million barrels a day -- almost one - half of all the oil we use .
unless we act quickly , imports will continue to go up , and all the problems that i 've just described will grow even worse .
there are three things that we must do to avoid this danger : first , cut back on consumption ; second , shift away from oil and gas to other sources of energy ; and third , encourage production of energy here in the united states .
these are the purposes of the new energy legislation .
in order to conserve energy , the congress is now acting to make our automobiles , our homes , and appliances more efficient and to encourage industry to save both heat and electricity .
the congressional conference committees are now considering changes in how electric power rates are set in order to discourage waste , to reward those who use less energy , and to encourage a change in the use of electricity to hours of the day when demand is low .
another very important question before congress is how to let the market price for domestic oil go up to reflect the cost of replacing it while , at the same time , protecting the american consumers and our own economy .
we must face an unpleasant fact about energy prices .
they are going up , whether we pass an energy program or not , as fuel becomes more scarce and more expensive to produce .
the question is , who should benefit from those rising prices for oil already discovered ?
our energy plan captures and returns them to the public , where they can stimulate the economy , save more energy , and create new jobs .
we will use research and development projects , tax incentives and penalties , and regulatory authority to hasten the shift from oil and gas to coal , to wind and solar power , to geothermal , methane , and other energy sources .
we 've also proposed , and the congress is reviewing , incentives to encourage production of oil and gas here in our own country .
this is where another major controversy arises .
it 's important that we promote new oil and gas discoveries and increased production by giving adequate prices to the producers .
we 've recommended that the price , for instance , of new natural gas be raised each year to the average price of domestic oil that would produce the same amount of energy .
with this new policy , the gross income of gas producers would average about $ 2 billion each year more than at the present price level .
new oil prices would also rise in 3 years to the present world level and then be increased annually to keep up with inflation .
this incentive for new oil production would be the highest in the whole world .
these proposals would provide adequate incentives for exploration and production of domestic oil and gas , but some of the oil companies want much more -- tens of billions of dollars more .
they want greatly increased prices for " old " oil and gas -- energy supplies which have already been discovered and which are being produced now .
they want immediate and permanent deregulation of gas prices , which would cost consumers $ 70 billion or more between now and 1985 .
they want even higher prices than those we 've proposed for " new " gas and oil , and they want the higher prices sooner .
they want lower taxes on their profits .
these are all controversial questions , and the congressional debates , as you can well imagine , are intense .
the political pressures are great because the stakes are so high , billions and billions of dollars .
we should reward individuals and companies who discover and produce new oil and gas , but we must not give them huge windfall profits on their existing wells at the expense of the american people .
now the energy proposal that i made to congress last april has three basic elements to ensure that it is well balanced .
first , it 's fair both to the american consumers and to the energy producers , and it will not disrupt our national economy .
second , as i 've said before , it 's designed to meet our important goals for energy conservation , to promote a shift to more plentiful and permanent energy supplies and encourage increased production of energy in the united states .
and third , it protects our federal budget from any unreasonable burden .
these are the three standards by which the final legislation must be judged .
i will sign the energy bills only if they meet these tests .
during the next few weeks , the congress will make a judgment on these vital questions .
i will be working closely with them .
and you are also deeply involved in these decisions .
this is not a contest of strength between the president and the congress , nor between the house and the senate .
what is being measured is the strength and will of our nation -- whether we can acknowledge a threat and meet a serious challenge together .
i 'm convinced that we can have enough energy to permit the continued growth of our economy , to expand production and jobs , and to protect the security of the united states -- if we act wisely .
i believe that this country can meet any challenge , but this is an exceptionally difficult one because the threat is not easy to see and the solution is neither simple nor politically popular .
i said 6 months ago that no one would be completely satisfied with this national energy plan .
unfortunately , that prediction has turned out to be right .
there is some part of this complex legislation to which every region and every interest group can object .
but a common national sacrifice to meet this serious problem should be shared by everyone - some proof that the plan is fair .
many groups have risen to the challenge .
but , unfortunately , there are still some who seek personal gain over the national interest .
it 's also especially difficult to deal with long - range , future challenges .
a president is elected for just 4 years , a senator for 6 , and our representatives in congress for only 2 years .
it 's always been easier to wait until the next year or the next term of office , to avoid political risk .
but you did not choose your elected officials simply to fill an office .
the congress is facing very difficult decisions , courageously , and we 've formed a good partnership .
all of us in government need your help .
this is an effort which requires vision and cooperation from all americans .
i hope that each of you will take steps to conserve our precious energy and also join with your elected officials at all levels of government to meet this test of our nation 's judgment and will .
these are serious problems , and this has been a serious talk .
but our energy plan also reflects the optimism that i feel about our ability to deal with these problems .
the story of the human race is one of adapting to changing circumstances .
the history of our nation is one of meeting challenges and overcoming them .
this major legislation is a necessary first step on a long and difficult road .
this energy plan is a good insurance policy -- for the future , in which relatively small premiums that we pay today will protect us in the years ahead .
but if we fail to act boldly today , then we will surely face a greater series of crises tomorrow -- energy shortages , environmental damage , ever more massive government bureaucracy and regulations , and illconsidered , last - minute crash programs .
i hope that , perhaps a hundred years from now , the change to inexhaustible energy sources will have been made , and our nation 's concern about energy will be over .
but we can make that transition smoothly -- for our country and for our children and for our grandchildren -- only if we take careful steps now to prepare ourselves for the future .
during the next few weeks , attention will be focused on the congress , but the proving of our courage and commitment will continue , in different forms and places , in the months and the years , even generations ahead .
it 's fitting that i 'm speaking to you on an election day , a day which reminds us that you , the people , are the rulers of this nation , that your government will be as courageous and effective and fair as you demand 
 that it be .
this will not be the last time that i , as president , present difficult and controversial choices to you and ask for your help .
i believe that the duties of this office permit me to do no less .
but i 'm confident that we can find the wisdom and the courage to make the right decisions -- even when they are unpleasant -- so that we might , together , preserve the greatness of our nation .
thank you very much .

good evening .
tonight i want to have an unpleasant talk with you about a problem that is unprecedented in our history .
with the exception of preventing war , this is the greatest challenge that our country will face during our lifetime .
the energy crisis has not yet overwhelmed us , but it will if we do not act quickly .
it 's a problem that we will not be able to solve in the next few years , and it 's likely to get progressively worse through the rest of this century .
we must not be selfish or timid if we hope to have a decent world for our children and our grandchildren .
we simply must balance our demand for energy with our rapidly shrinking resources .
by acting now we can control our future instead of letting the future control us .
two days from now , i will present to the congress my energy proposals .. its members will be my partners , and they have already given me a great deal of valuable advice .
many of these proposals will be unpopular .
some will cause you to put up with inconveniences and to make sacrifices .
the most important thing about these proposals is that the alternative may be a national catastrophe .
further delay can affect our strength and our power as a nation .
our decision about energy will test the character of the american people and the ability of the president and the congress to govern this nation .
this difficult effort will be the " moral equivalent of war , " except that we will be uniting our efforts to build and not to destroy .
now , i know that some of you may doubt that we face real energy shortages .
the 1973 gas lines are gone , and with this springtime weather , our homes are warm again .
but our energy problem is worse tonight than it was in 1973 or a few weeks ago in the dead of winter .
it 's worse because more waste has occurred and more time has passed by without our planning for the future .
and it will get worse every day until we act .
the oil and natural gas that we rely on for 75 percent of our energy are simply running out .
in spite of increased effort , domestic production has been dropping steadily at about 6 percent a year .
imports have doubled in the last 5 years .
our nation 's economic and political independence is becoming increasingly vulnerable .
unless profound changes are made to lower oil consumption , we now believe that early in the 1980 's the world will be demanding more oil than it can produce .
the world now uses about 60 million barrels of oil a day , and demand increases each year about 5 percent .
this means that just to stay even we need the production of a new texas every year , an alaskan north slope every 9 months , or a new saudi arabia every 3 years .
obviously , this can not continue .
we must look back into history to understand our energy problem .
twice in the last several hundred years , there has been a transition in the way people use energy .
the first was about 200 years ago , when we changed away from wood -- which had provided about 90 percent of all fuel -- to coal , which was much more efficient .
this change became the basis of the industrial revolution .
the second change took .
place in this century , with the growing use of oil and natural gas .
they were more convenient and cheaper than coal , and the supply seemed to be almost without limit .
they made possible the age of automobile and airplane travel .
nearly everyone who is alive today grew up during this period , and we have never known anything different .
because we are now running out of gas and oil , we must prepare quickly for a third change -- to strict conservation and to the renewed use of coal and to permanent renewable energy sources like solar power .
the world has not prepared for the future .
during the 1950 's , people used twice as much oil as during the 1940 's .
during the 1960 's , we used twice as much as during the 1950 's .
and in each of those decades , more oil was consumed than in all of man 's previous history combined .
world consumption of oil is still going up .
if it were possible to keep it rising during the 1970 's and 1980 's by 5 percent a year , as it has in the past , we could use up all the proven reserves of oil in the entire world by the end of the next decade .
i know that many of you have suspected that some supplies of oil and gas are being withheld from the market .
you may be right , but suspicions about the oil companies can not change the fact that we are running out of petroleum .
all of us have heard about the large oil fields on alaska 's north slope .
in a few years , when the north slope is producing fully , its total output will be just about equal to 2 years ' increase in our own nation 's energy demand .
each new inventory of world oil reserves has been more disturbing than the last .
world oil production can probably keep going up for another 6 or 8 years .
but sometime in the 1980 's , it ca n't go up any more .
demand will overtake production .
we have no choice about that .
but we do have a choice about how we will spend the next few years .
each american uses the energy equivalent of 60 barrels of oil per person each year .
ours is the most wasteful nation on earth .
we waste more energy than we import .
with about the same standard of living , we use twice as much energy per person as do other countries like germany , japan , and sweden .
one choice , of course , is to continue doing what we 've been doing before .
we can drift along for a few more years .
our consumption of oil would keep going up every year .
our cars would continue to be too large and inefficient .
three - quarters of them would carry only one person -- the driver -- while our public transportation system continues to decline .
we can delay insulating our homes , and they will continue to lose about 50 percent of their heat in waste .
we can continue using scarce oil and natural gas to generate electricity and continue wasting two - thirds of their fuel value in the process .
if we do not act , then by 1985 we will be using 33 percent more energy than we use today .
we ca n't substantially increase our domestic production , so we would need to import twice as much oil as we do now .
supplies will be uncertain .
the cost will keep going up .
six years ago , we paid $ 3.7 billion for imported oil .
last year we spent $ 36 billion for imported oil -- nearly 10 times as much .
and this year we may spend $ 45 billion .
unless we act , we will spend more than $ 550 billion for imported oil by 1985 -- more than $ 2,500 for every man , woman , and child in america .
along with that money that we transport overseas , we will continue losing american jobs and become increasingly vulnerable to supply interruptions .
now we have a choice .
but if we wait , we will constantly live in fear of embargoes .
we could endanger our freedom as a sovereign nation to act in foreign affairs .
within 10 years , we would not be able to import enough oil from any country , at any acceptable price .
if we wait and do not act , then our factories will not be able to keep our people on the job with reduced supplies of fuel .
too few of our utility companies will have switched to coal , which is our most abundant energy source .
we will not be ready to keep our transportation system running with smaller and more efficient cars and a better network of buses , trains , and public transportation .
we will feel mounting pressure to plunder the environment .
we will have to have a crash program to build more nuclear plants , strip mine and bum more coal , and drill more offshore wells than if we begin to conserve right now .
inflation will soar ; production will go down ; people will lose their jobs .
intense competition for oil will build up among nations and also among the different regions within our own country .
this has already started .
if we fail to act soon , we will face an economic , social , and political crisis that will threaten our free institutions .
but we still have another choice .
we can begin to prepare right now .
we can decide to act while there is still time .
that is the concept of the energy policy that we will present on wednesday .
our national energy plan is based on 10 fundamental principles .
the first principle is that we can have an effective and comprehensive energy policy only if the government takes responsibility for it and if the people understand the seriousness of the challenge and are willing to make sacrifices .
the second principle is that healthy economic growth must continue .
only by saving energy can we maintain our standard of living and keep our people at work .
an effective conservation program will create hundreds of thousands of new jobs .
the third principle is that we must protect the environment .
our energy problems have the same cause as our environmental problems -- wasteful use of resources .
conservation helps us solve both problems at once .
the fourth principle is that we must reduce our vulnerability to potentially devastating embargoes .
we can protect ourselves from uncertain supplies by reducing our demand for oil , by making the most of our abundant resources such as coal , and by developing a strategic petroleum reserve .
the fifth principle is that we must be fair .
our solutions must ask equal sacrifices from every region , every class of people , and every interest group .
industry will have to do its part to conserve just as consumers will .
the energy .
producers deserve fair treatment , but we will not let the oil companies profiteer .
the sixth principle , and the cornerstone of our policy , is to reduce demand through conservation .
our emphasis on conservation is a clear difference between this plan and others which merely encouraged crash production efforts .
conservation is the quickest , cheapest , most practical source of energy .
conservation is the only way that we can buy a barrel of oil for about $ 2 .
it costs about $ 13 to waste it .
the seventh principle is that prices should generally reflect the true replacement cost of energy .
we are only cheating ourselves if we make energy artificially cheap and use more than we can really afford .
the eighth principle is that government policies must be predictable and certain .
both consumers and producers need policies they can count on so they can plan ahead .
this is one reason that i 'm working with the congress to create a new department of energy to replace more than 50 different agencies that now have some control over energy .
the ninth principle is that we must conserve the fuels that are scarcest and make the most of those that are plentiful .
we ca n't continue to use oil and gas for 75 percent of our consumption , as we do now , when they only make up 7 percent of our domestic reserves .
we need to shift to plentiful coal , while taking care to protect the environment , and to apply stricter safety standards to nuclear energy .
the tenth and last principle is that we must start now to develop the new , unconventional sources of energy that we will rely on in the next century .
now , these 10 principles have guided the development of the policy that i will describe to you and the congress on wednesday night .
our energy plan will also include a number of specific goals to measure our progress toward a stable energy system .
these are the goals that we set for 1985 : 
  -- to reduce the annual growth rate in our energy demand to less than 2 percent ; 
  -- to reduce gasoline consumption by 10 percent below its .
current level ; 
  -- to cut in half the portion of u. s. oil which is imported -- from a potential level of 16 million barrels to 6 million barrels a day ; 
  -- to establish a strategic petroleum reserve of one billion barrels , more than a 6-months supply ; 
  -- to increase our coal production by about two - thirds to more than one billion tons a year ; 
  -- to insulate 90 percent of american homes and all new buildings ; 
  -- to use solar energy in more than 2 1/2 million houses .
we will monitor our progress toward these goals year by year .
our plan will call for strict conservation measures if we fall behind .
i ca n't tell you that these measures will be easy , nor will they be popular .
but i think most of you realize that a policy which does not ask for changes or sacrifices would not be an effective policy at this late date .
this plan is essential to protect our jobs , our environment , our standard of living , and our future .
whether this plan truly makes a difference will not be decided now here in washington but in every town and every factory , in every home and on every highway and every farm .
i believe that this can be a positive challenge .
there is something especially american in the kinds of changes that we have to make .
we 've always been proud , through our history , of being efficient people .
we 've always been proud of our ingenuity , our skill at answering questions .
now we need efficiency and ingenuity more than ever .
we 've always been proud of our leadership in the world .
and now we have a chance again to give the world a positive example .
we 've always been proud of our vision of the future .
we 've always wanted to give our children and our grandchildren a world richer in possibilities than we have had ourselves .
they are the ones that we must provide for now .
they are the ones who will suffer most if we do n't act .
i 've given you some of the principles of the plan .
i 'm sure that each of you will find something you do n't like about the specifics of our proposal .
it will demand that we make sacrifices and changes in every life .
to some degree , the sacrifices will be painful -- but so is any meaningful sacrifice .
it will lead to some higher costs and to some greater inconvenience for everyone .
but the sacrifices can be gradual , realistic , and they are necessary .
above all , they will be fair .
no one will gain an unfair advantage through this plan .
no one will be asked to bear an unfair burden .
we will monitor the accuracy of data from the oil and natural gas companies for the first time , so that we will always know their true production , supplies , reserves , and profits .
those citizens who insist on driving large , unnecessarily powerful cars must expect to pay more for that luxury .
we can be sure that all the special interest groups in the country will attack the part of this plan that affects them directly .
they will say that sacrifice is fine as long as other people do it , but that their sacrifice is unreasonable or unfair or harmful to the country .
if they succeed with this approach , then the burden on the ordinary citizen , who is not organized into an interest group , would be crushing .
there should be only one test for this program -- whether it will help our country .
other generations of americans have faced and mastered great challenges .
i have faith that meeting this challenge will make our own lives even richer .
if you will join me so that we can work together with patriotism and courage , we will again prove that our great nation can lead the world into an age of peace , independence , and freedom .
thank you very much , and good night .

good evening .
tomorrow will be two weeks since i became president .
i have spent a lot of time deciding how i can be a good president .
this talk , which the broadcast networks have agreed to bring to you , is one of several steps that i will take to keep in close touch with the people of our country , and to let you know informally about our plans for the coming months .
when i was running for president , i made a number of commitments .
i take them very seriously .
i believe that they were the reason that i was elected .
and i want you to know that i intend to carry them out .
as you probably noticed already , i have acted on several of my promises .
i will report to you from time to time about our government -- both our problems and our achievements , but tonight i want to tell you how i plan to carry out some of my other commitments .
some of our obvious goals can be achieved very quickly -- for example , through executive orders and decisions made directly by me .
but in many other areas , we must move carefully , with full involvement by the congress , allowing time for citizens to participate in careful study , in order to develop predictable , long - range programs that we can be sure are affordable and that we know will work .
some of these efforts will also require dedication -- perhaps even some sacrifice -- from you .
but i do n't believe that any of us are afraid to learn that our national goals require cooperation and mutual effort .
one of our most urgent projects is to develop a national energy policy .
as i pointed out during the campaign , the united states is the only major industrial country without a comprehensive , long - range energy policy .
the extremely cold weather this winter has dangerously depleted our supplies of natural gas and fuel oil and forced hundreds of thousands of workers off the job .
i congratulate the congress for its quick action on the emergency natural gas act , which was passed today and signed just a few minutes ago .
but the real problem -- our failure to plan for the future or to take energy conservation seriously -- started long before this winter , and it will take much longer to solve .
i realize that many of you have not believed that we really have an energy problem .
but this winter has made all of us realize that we have to act .
now , the congress has already made many of the preparations for energy legislation .
presidential assistant dr. james schlesinger is beginning to direct an effort to develop a national energy policy .
many groups of americans will be involved .
on april 20 , we will have completed the planning for our energy program and will immediately then ask the congress for its help in enacting comprehensive legislation .
our program will emphasize conservation .
the amount of energy being wasted which could be saved is greater than the total energy that we are importing from foreign countries .
we will also stress development of our rich coal reserves in an environmentally sound way ; we will emphasize research on solar energy and other renewable energy sources ; and we will maintain strict safeguards on necessary atomic energy production .
the responsibility for setting energy policy is now split among more than 50 different agencies , departments , and bureaus in the federal government .
later this month , i will ask the congress for its help in combining many of these agencies in a new energy department to bring order out of chaos .
congressional leaders have already been working on this for quite a while .
we must face the fact that the energy shortage is permanent .
there is no way we can solve it quickly .
but if we all cooperate and make modest sacrifices , if we learn to live thriftily and remember the importance of helping our neighbors , then we can find ways to adjust and to make our society more efficient and our own lives more enjoyable and productive .
utility companies must promote conservation and not consumption .
oil and natural gas companies must be honest with all of us about their reserves and profits .
we will find out the difference between real shortages and artificial ones .
we will ask private companies to sacrifice , just as private citizens must do .
all of us must learn to waste less energy .
simply by keeping our thermostats , for instance , at 65 degrees in the daytime and 55 degrees at night we could save half the current shortage of natural gas .
there is no way that i , or anyone else in the government , can solve our energy problems if you are not willing to help .
i know that we can meet this energy challenge if the burden is borne fairly among all our people -- and if we realize that in order to solve our energy problems we need not sacrifice the quality of our lives .
the congress has made great progress toward responsible strip - mining legislation , so that we can produce more energy without unnecessary destruction of our beautiful lands .
my administration will support these efforts this year .
we will also ask congress for its help with legislation which will reduce the risk of future oil tanker spills and help deal with those that do occur .
i also stated during my campaign that our administration would do everything possible to restore a healthy american economy .
our nation was built on the principle of work and not welfare ; productivity and not stagnation .
but i took office a couple of weeks ago in the middle of the worst economic slowdown of the last 40 years .
more than 7 1/2 million people who want to work can not find it according to the latest statistics .
because of high unemployment and idle factories the average american family like yours has been losing $ 1,800 a year in income , and many billions of dollars have been added to the federal deficit .
also , inflation hurts us all .
in every part of the country , whether we have a job or whether we are looking for a job , we must race just to keep up with the constant rise in prices .
inflation has hit us hardest , not in luxuries , but in the essentials -- food , energy , health , housing .
you see it every time you go shopping .
i understand that unemployment and inflation are very real , and have done great harm to many american families .
nothing makes it harder to provide decent health , housing , and education for our people , protect our environment , or to realize our goal of a balanced budget , than a stagnant economy .
as soon as i was elected , the leaders of the congress and my own advisers began to work with me to develop a proposal for economic recovery .
we were guided by the principle that everyone who is able to work ought to work ; that our economic strength is based on a healthy , productive , private business sector ; that we must provide the greatest help to those with the greatest need ; and that there must be a predictable and a steady growth in our economy .
two days ago , i presented this plan to the congress .
it is a balanced plan , with many clements , to meet the many causes of our economic problems .
one element that i am sure you will like is reducing taxes .
this year the one - time tax benefits to the average family of four with $ 10,000 in income will be $ 200 -- a 30-percent reduction in income taxes .
but my primary concern is still jobs , and these one - time tax rebates are the only quick , effective way to get money into the economy and create those jobs .
but at the same time , we are reducing taxes permanently by increasing the standard deduction , which most taxpayers claim .
again , this family of four earning $ 10,000 will save $ 133 on a permanent basis -- about 20 percent -- on future income taxes .
this will also be a major step toward tax simplification , allowing 75 percent of all taxpayers to take the standard deduction and to file a very simple tax return , quite different from the one that you will file this year .
we will also provide tax incentives to business firms to encourage them to fight inflation by expanding output and to hire more of our people who are eager to work .
i think it makes more sense for the government to help workers stay on the payroll than to force them onto unemployment benefits or welfare payments .
we have several proposals , too , in this legislation to help our cities , which have been especially hard hit by nationwide economic problems .
communities where unemployment is worst will be eligible for additional money through the revenue sharing program .
a special program of public service employment will enable those who are now unemployed to contribute to their communities in hospitals , nursing homes , park and recreation programs , and other related activities .
a strong public works program will permit the construction of selected projects which are needed most .
these will not be make - work projects .
they will be especially valuable in communities where budget cutbacks have reduced municipal services , and they will also help to prevent local tax increases .
now , because unemployment is most severe among special groups of our people -- the young , the disabled , minority groups -- we will focus our 
 training programs on them .
the top priority in our job training programs will go to young veterans of the vietnam war .
unemployment is much higher among veterans than among others of the same age who did not serve in the military .
i hope that putting many thousands of veterans back to work will be one more step toward binding up the wounds of the war years and toward helping those who have helped our country in the past .
i realize that very few people will think that this total economic plan is perfect .
many groups would like to see more of one kind of aid and less of another .
but i am confident that this is the best balanced plan that we can produce for the overall economic health of the nation .
it will produce steady , balanced , sustainable growth .
it does not ignore inflation to solve unemployment or vice versa .
it does not ask one group of people to sacrifice solely for the benefit of another group .
it asks all of us to contribute , participate , and share to get the country back on the road to work again .
it is an excellent investment in the future .
i also said many times during the campaign that we must reform and reorganize the federal government .
i have often used the phrase " competent and compassionate " to describe what our government should be .
when the government must perform a function , it should do it efficiently .
wherever free competition would do a better job of serving the public , the government should stay out .
ordinary people should be able to understand how our own government works , and to get satisfactory answers to questions .
our confused and wasteful system that took so long to grow will take a long time to change .
the place to start is at the top in the white house .
i am reducing the size of the white house staff by nearly one - third , and i have asked the members of the cabinet to do the same at their top staff level .
soon , i will put a ceiling on the number of people employed by the federal government agencies so we can bring the growth of government under control .
we are now reviewing the government 's 1,250 advisory committees and commissions to see how many could be abolished without harm to the public .
we have eliminated some expensive and unnecessary luxuries , such as door - to - door limousine service for many top officials , including all members of the white house staff .
government officials ca n't be sensitive to your problems if we are living like royalty here in washington .
while i am deeply grateful for the good wishes that lie behind them , i would like to ask that people not send gifts to me or to my family or to anyone else who serves in my administration .
we will cut down also on government regulations , and we will make sure that those that are written are in plain english for a change .
whenever a regulation is issued , it will carry its author 's name .
and i will request the cabinet members to read all regulations personally before they are released .
this week , i will ask the congress for enabling legislation to let me reorganize the government .
the passage of this legislation , which will give me the same authority extended to every president from franklin roosevelt through richard nixon , and used by many governors across the country , is absolutely crucial to a successful reorganization effort .
so far , news from the congress , because of their support , is very encouraging .
the office of management and budget is now working on this plan , which will include zero - based budgeting , removal of unnecessary government regulations , sunset laws to cancel programs that have outlived their purpose , and elimination of overlap and duplication among government services .
we will not propose changes until we have done our best to be sure they are right .
but we will be eager to learn from experience .
if a program does not work , we will end it instead of just starting another to conceal our first mistakes .
we will also move quickly to reform our tax system and welfare system .
i said in the campaign that our income tax system was a disgrace because it is so arbitrary , complicated , and unfair .
i made a commitment to a total overhaul of the income tax laws .
the economic program that i have already mentioned earlier will , by enabling more taxpayers to use the standard deduction , be just a first step toward a much better tax system .
my advisers have already started working with the congress on a study of a more complete tax reform which will give us a fairer , simpler system .
we will outline the study procedures very soon and , after consultation with many american citizens and with the congress , we will present a comprehensive tax reform package before the end of this year .
the welfare system also needs a complete overhaul .
welfare waste robs both the taxpayers of our country and those who really and genuinely need help .
it often forces families to split .
it discourages people from seeking work .
the secretary of labor and the secretary of health , education , and welfare , and others have already begun a review of the entire welfare system .
they will , of course , work with the congress to develop proposals for a new system which will minimize abuse , strengthen the family , and emphasize adequate support for those who can not work and training and jobs for those who can work .
we expect their first report to be ready within 90 days .
in the meantime , i will support the congress in its efforts to deal with the widespread fraud and waste and abuse of our medicaid system .
reforming the government also means making the government as open and honest as it can be .
congress is moving strongly on ethics legislation .
i 've asked the people appointed by me to high positions in government to abide by strict rules of financial disclosure and to avoid all conflicts of interest .
i intend to make those rules permanent .
and i will select my appointees in such a way which will close the revolving door between government regulatory agencies on the one hand and the businesses they regulate on the other .
my cabinet members and i will conduct an open administration , with frequent press conferences and reports to the people and with " town hall " meetings all across the nation , where you can criticize , make suggestions , and ask questions .
we are also planning with some of the radio networks live , call - in sessions in the oval office during which i can accept your phone calls and answer the questions that are on your mind .
i have asked the members of the cabinet to travel regularly around the country to stay in close touch with you out in your communities where government services are delivered .
there are many other areas of domestic policy -- housing , health , crime , education , agriculture , and others -- that will concern me as president but which i do not have time to discuss tonight .
all of these projects will take careful study and close cooperation with the congress .
many will take longer than i would like .
but we are determined to work on all of them .
later , through other reports , i will explain how , with your help and the help of congress , we can carry them out .
i have also made commitments about our nation 's foreign policy .
as commander in chief of the armed forces , i am determined to have a strong , lean , efficient fighting force .
our policy should be based on close cooperation with our allies and worldwide respect for human rights , a reduction in world armaments , and it must always reflect our own moral values .
i want our nation 's actions to make you proud .
yesterday , vice president mondale returned from his 10-day visit with leaders of western europe and japan .
i asked him to make this trip to demonstrate our intention to consult our traditional allies and friends on all important questions .
i have been very pleased with his report .
vice president mondale will be a constant and close adviser for me .
in a spirit of international friendship we will soon welcome here in the united states the leaders of several nations , beginning with our neighbors , canada and mexico .
this month the secretary of state , cyrus vance , will go to the middle east , seeking ways to achieve a genuine peace between israel and its arab neighbors .
our ambassador to the united nations , andrew young , left last night on a visit to africa to demonstrate our friendship for its peoples and our commitment to peaceful change toward majority rule in southern africa .
i will also strive to improve our relations with the soviet union and the people 's republic of china , ensuring our security while seeking to reduce the risks of conflict .
we will continue to express our concern about violations of human rights , as we have during this past week , without upsetting our efforts toward friendly relationships with other countries .
later , on another program , i will make a much more complete report to you on foreign policy matters .
i would like to tell you now about one of the things that i have already learned in my brief time in office .
i have learned that there are many things that a president can not do .
there is no energy policy that we can develop that would do more good than voluntary conservation .
there is no economic policy that will do as much as shared faith in hard work , efficiency , and in the future of our system .
i know that both the congress and the administration , as partners in leadership , have limited powers .
that 's the way it ought to be .
but in the months in which i have campaigned , prepared to take office , and now begun to serve as your president , i have found a reason for optimism .
with the help of my predecessor , we have come through a very difficult period in our nation 's history .
but for almost 10 years , we have not had a sense of a common national interest .
we have lost faith in joint efforts and mutual sacrifices .
because of the divisions in our country many of us can not remember a time when we really felt united .
but i remember another difficult time in our nation 's history when we felt a different spirit .
during world war ii we faced a terrible crisis -- but the challenge of fighting nazism drew us together .
those of us old enough to remember know that they were dark and frightening times -- but many of our memories are of people ready to help each other for the common good .
i believe that we are ready for that same spirit again -- to plan ahead , to work together , and to use common sense .
not because of war , but because we realize that we must act together to solve our problems , and because we are ready to trust one another .
as president , i will not be able to provide everything that every one of you might like .
i am sure to make many mistakes .
but i can promise that your needs will never be ignored , nor will we forget who put us in office .
we will always be a nation of differences -- business and labor , blacks and whites , men and women , people of different regions and religions and different ethnic backgrounds -- but with faith and confidence in each other our differences can be a source of personal fullness and national strength , rather than a cause of weakness and division .
if we are a united nation , then i can be a good president .
but i will need your help to do it .
i will do my best .
i know you will do yours .
thank you very much , and good night .

for myself and for our nation , i want to thank my predecessor for all he has done to heal our land .
in this outward and physical ceremony we attest once again to the inner and spiritual strength of our nation .
as my high school teacher , miss julia coleman , used to say : " we must adjust to changing times and still hold to unchanging principles."here before me is the bible used in the inauguration of our first president , in 1789 , and i have just taken the oath of office on the bible my mother gave me a few years ago , opened to a timeless admonition from the ancient prophet micah : " he hath showed thee , o man , what is good ; and what doth the lord require of thee , but to do justly , and to love mercy , and to walk humbly with thy god . "
this inauguration ceremony marks a new beginning , a new dedication within our government , and a new spirit among us all .
a president may sense and proclaim that new spirit , but only a people can provide it .
two centuries ago our nation 's birth was a milestone in the long quest for freedom , but the bold and brilliant dream which excited the founders of this nation still awaits its consummation .
i have no new dream to set forth today , but rather urge a fresh faith in the old dream .
ours was the first society openly to define itself in terms of both spirituality and of human liberty .
it is that unique self - definition which has given us an exceptional appeal , but it also imposes on us a special obligation , to take on those moral duties which , when assumed , seem invariably to be in our own best interests .
you have given me a great responsibility -- to stay close to you , to be worthy of you , and to exemplify what you are .
let us create together a new national spirit of unity and trust .
your strength can compensate for my weakness , and your wisdom can help to minimize my mistakes .
let us learn together and laugh together and work together and pray together , confident that in the end we will triumph together in the right .
the american dream endures .
we must once again have full faith in our country and in one another .
i believe america can be better .
we can be even stronger than before .
let our recent mistakes bring a resurgent commitment to the basic principles of our nation , for we know that if we despise our own government we have no future .
we recall in special times when we have stood briefly , but magnificently , united .
in those times no prize was beyond our grasp .
but we can not dwell upon remembered glory .
we can not afford to drift .
we reject the prospect of failure or mediocrity or an inferior quality of life for any person .
our government must at the same time be both competent and compassionate .
we have already found a high degree of personal liberty , and we are now struggling to enhance equality of opportunity .
our commitment to human rights must be absolute , our laws fair , our natural beauty preserved ; the powerful must not persecute the weak , and human dignity must be enhanced .
we have learned that " more " is not necessarily " better , " that even our great nation has its recognized limits , and that we can neither answer all questions nor solve all problems .
we can not afford to do everything , nor can we afford to lack boldness as we meet the future .
so , together , in a spirit of individual sacrifice for the common good , we must simply do our best .
our nation can be strong abroad only if it is strong at home .
and we know that the best way to enhance freedom in other lands is to demonstrate here that our democratic system is worthy of emulation .
to be true to ourselves , we must be true to others .
we will not behave in foreign places so as to violate our rules and standards here at home , for we know that the trust which our nation earns is essential to our strength .
the world itself is now dominated by a new spirit .
peoples more numerous and more politically aware are craving and now demanding their place in the sun -- not just for the benefit of their own physical condition , but for basic human rights .
the passion for freedom is on the rise .
tapping this new spirit , there can be no nobler nor more ambitious task for america to undertake on this day of a new beginning than to help shape a just and peaceful world that is truly humane .
we are a strong nation , and we will maintain strength so sufficient that it need not be proven in combat -- a quiet strength based not merely on the size of an arsenal , but on the nobility of ideas .
we will be ever vigilant and never vulnerable , and we will fight our wars against poverty , ignorance , and injustice -- for those are the enemies against which our forces can be honorably marshaled .
we are a purely idealistic nation , but let no one confuse our idealism with weakness .
because we are free we can never be indifferent to the fate of freedom elsewhere .
our moral sense dictates a clearcut preference for these societies which share with us an abiding respect for individual human rights .
we do not seek to intimidate , but it is clear that a world which others can dominate with impunity would be inhospitable to decency and a threat to the well - being of all people .
the world is still engaged in a massive armaments race designed to ensure continuing equivalent strength among potential adversaries .
we pledge perseverance and wisdom in our efforts to limit the world 's armaments to those necessary for each nation 's own domestic safety .
and we will move this year a step toward ultimate goal -- the elimination of all nuclear weapons from this earth .
we urge all other people to join us , for success can mean life instead of death .
within us , the people of the united states , there is evident a serious and purposeful rekindling of confidence .
and i join in the hope that when my time as your president has ended , people might say this about our nation : that we had remembered the words of micah and renewed our search for humility , mercy , and justice;that we had torn down the barriers that separated those of different race and region and religion , and where there had been mistrust , built unity , with a respect for diversity;that we had found productive work for those able to perform it;that we had strengthened the american family , which is the basis of our society;that we had ensured respect for the law , and equal treatment under the law , for the weak and the powerful , for the rich and the poor;and that we had enabled our people to be proud of their own government once again .
i would hope that the nations of the world might say that we had built a lasting peace , built not on weapons of war but on international policies which reflect our own most precious values .
these are not just my goals , and they will not be my accomplishments , but the affirmation of our nation 's continuing moral strength and our belief in an undiminished , ever - expanding american dream .

i come to you this evening to discuss the extremely important and rapidly changing circumstances in southwest asia .
i continue to share with all of you the sense of outrage and impatience because of the kidnaping of innocent american hostages and the holding of them by militant terrorists with the support and the approval of iranian officials .
our purposes continue to be the protection of the longrange interests of our nation and the safety of the american hostages .
we are attempting to secure the release of the americans through the international court of justice , through the united nations , and through public and private diplomatic efforts .
we are determined to achieve this goal .
we hope to do so without bloodshed and without any further danger to the lives of our 50 fellow americans .
in these efforts , we continue to have the strong support of the world community .
the unity and the common sense of the american people under such trying circumstances are essential to the success of our efforts .
recently , there has been another very serious development which threatens the maintenance of the peace in southwest asia .
massive soviet military forces have invaded the small , nonaligned , sovereign nation of afghanistan . ,
which had hitherto not been an occupied satellite of the soviet union .
fifty thousand heavily armed soviet troops have crossed the border and are now dispersed throughout afghanistan , attempting to conquer the fiercely independent muslim people of that country .
the soviets claim , falsely , that they were invited into afghanistan to help protect that country from some unnamed outside threat .
but the president , who had been the leader of afghanistan before the soviet invasion , was assassinated?along with several members of his family?after the soviets gained control of the capital city of kabul .
only several days later was the new puppet leader even brought into afghanistan by the soviets .
this invasion is an extremely serious threat to peace because of the threat of further soviet expansion into neighboring countries in southwest asia and also because such an aggressive military policy is unsettling to other peoples throughout the world .
this is a callous violation of international law and the united nations charter .
it is a deliberate effort of a powerful atheistic government to subjugate an independent islamic people .
we must recognize the strategic importance of afghanistan to stability and peace .
a soviet - occupied afghanistan threatens both iran and pakistan and is a steppingstone to possible control over much of the world 's oil supplies .
the united states wants all nations in the region to be free and to be independent .
if the soviets are encouraged in this invasion by eventual success , and if they maintain their dominance over afghanistan and then extend their control to adjacent countries , the stable , strategic , and peaceful balance of the entire world will be changed .
this would threaten the security of all nations including , of course , the united states , our allies , and our friends .
therefore , the world simply can not stand by and permit the soviet union to commit this act with impunity .
fifty nations have petitioned the united nations security council to condemn the soviet union and to demand the immediate withdrawal of all soviet troops from afghanistan .
we realize .
that under the united nations charter the soviet union and other permanent members may veto action of the security council .
if the will of the security council should be thwarted in this manner , then immediate action would be appropriate in the general assembly of the united nations , where no soviet veto exists .
in the meantime , neither the united states nor any other nation which is committed to world peace and stability can continue to do business as usual with the soviet union .
i have already recalled the united states ambassador from moscow hack to washington .
he 's working with me and with my other senior advisers in an immediate and comprehensive evaluation of the whole range of our relations with the soviet union .
the successful negotiation of the salt ii treaty has been a major goal and a major achievement of this administration , and we americans , the people of the soviet union , and indeed the entire world will benefit from the successful control of strategic nuclear weapons through the implementation of this carefully negotiated treaty .
however , because of the soviet aggression , i have asked the united states senate to defer further consideration of the salt ii treaty so that the congress and i can assess soviet actions and intentions and devote our primary attention to the legislative and other measures required to respond to this crisis .
as circumstances change in the future , we will , of course , keep the ratification of salt ii under active review in consultation with the leaders of the senate .
the soviets must understand our deep concern .
we will delay opening of any new american or soviet consular facilities , and most of the cultural and economic exchanges currently under consideration will be deferred .
trade with the soviet union will be severely restricted .
i have decided to halt or to reduce exports to the soviet union in three areas that are particularly important to them .
these new policies are being and will be coordinated with those of our allies .
i 've directed that no high technology or other strategic items will be licensed for sale to the soviet union until further notice , while we revise our licensing policy .
fishing privileges for the soviet union in united states waters will be severely curtailed .
the 17 million tons of grain ordered by the soviet union in excess of that amount which we are committed to sell will not be delivered .
this grain was not intended for human consumption but was to be used for building up soviet livestock herds .
i am determined to minimize any adverse impact on the american farmer from this action .
the undelivered grain will be removed from the market through storage and price support programs and through purchases at market prices .
we will also increase amounts of grain devoted to the alleviation of hunger in poor countries , and we 'll have a massive increase of the use of grain for gasohol production here at home .
after consultation with other principal grain - exporting nations , i am confident that they will not replace these quantities of grain by additional shipments on their part to the soviet union .
these actions will require some sacrifice on the part of all americans , but there is absolutely no doubt that these actions are in the interest of world peace and in the interest of the security of our own nation , and they are also compatible with actions being taken by our own major trading partners and others who share our deep concern about this new soviet threat to world stability .
although the united states would prefer not to withdraw from the olympic games scheduled in moscow this summer , the soviet union must realize that its continued aggressive actions will endanger both the participation of athletes and the travel to moscow by spectators who would normally wish to attend the olympic games .
along with other countries , we will provide military equipment , food , and other assistance to help pakistan defend its independence and its national security against the seriously increased threat it now faces from the north .
the united states also stands ready to help other nations in the region in similar ways .
neither our allies nor our potential adversaries should have the slightest doubt about our willingness , our determination , and our capacity to take the measures i have outlined tonight .
i have consulted with leaders of the congress , and i am confident they will support legislation that may be required to carry out these measures .
history teaches , perhaps , very few clear lessons .
but surely one such lesson learned by the world at great cost is that aggression , unopposed , becomes a contagious disease .
the response of the international community to the soviet attempt to crush afghanistan must match the gravity of the soviet action .
with the support of the american people and working with other nations , we will deter aggression , we will protect our nation 's security , and we will preserve the peace .
the united states will meet its responsibilities .
thank you very much .

to father hesburgh and the great faculty of notre dame , to those who have been honored this afternoon with the degree from your great university , to the graduate and undergraduate group who , i understand , is the largest in the history of this great institution , friends and parents : 
 thank you for that welcome .
i 'm very glad to be with you .
you may have started a new graduation trend which i do n't deplore , that is , throwing peanuts on graduation day .
the more that are used or consumed the higher the price goes .
i really did appreciate the great honor bestowed upon me this afternoon .
my other degree is blue and gold from the navy , and i want to let you know that i do feel a kinship with those who are assembled here this afternoon .
i was a little taken aback by the comment that i had brought a new accent to the white house .
in the minds of many people in our country , for the first time in almost 150 years , there is no accent .
i tried to think of a story that would illustrate two points simultaneously and also be brief , which is kind of a difficult assignment .
i was sitting on the truman balcony the other night with my good friend , charles kirbo , who told me about a man who was arrested and taken in to court for being drunk and for setting a bed on fire .
when the judge asked him how he pled , he said , " not guilty . "
he said , " i was drunk but the bed was on fire when i got in it . "
i think most of the graduates can draw the parallel between that statement and what you are approaching after this graduation exercise .
but there are two points to that , and i 'll come to the other one in just a few minutes .
in his 25 years as president of notre dame , father hesburgh has spoken more consistently and more effectively in the support of the rights of human beings than any other person i know .
his interest in the notre dame center for civil rights has never wavered .
and he played an important role in broadening the scope of the center 's work -- and i visited there last fall -- to see this work include , now , all people in the world , as shown by last month 's conference here on human rights and american foreign policy .
and that concern has been demonstrated again today in a vivid fashion by the selection of bishop donal lamont , paul cardinal arns , and stephen cardinal kim to receive honorary degrees .
in their fight for human freedoms in rhodesia , brazil , and south korea , these three religious leaders typify all that is best in their countries and in our church .
i 'm honored to join you in recognizing their dedication , their personal sacrifice , and their supreme courage .
quite often , brave men like these are castigated and sometimes punished , sometimes even put to death , because they enter the realm where human rights is a struggle .
and sometimes they are blamed for the very circumstance which they helped to dramatize , but it 's been there for a long time .
and the flames which they seek to extinguish concern us all and are increasingly visible around the world .
last week , i spoke in california about the domestic agenda for our nation : to provide more efficiently for the needs of our people , to demonstrate - against the dark faith of our times -- that our government can be both competent and more humane .
but i want to speak to you today about the strands that connect our actions overseas with our essential character as a nation .
i believe we can have a foreign policy that is democratic , that is based on fundamental values , and that uses power and influence , which we have , for humane purposes .
we can also have a foreign policy that the american people both support and , for a change , know about and understand .
i have a quiet confidence in our own political system .
because we know that democracy works , we can reject the arguments of those rulers who deny human rights to their people .
we are confident that democracy 's example will be compelling , and so we seek to bring that example closer to those from whom in the past few years we have been separated and who are not yet convinced about the advantages of our kind of life .
we are confident that the democratic methods are the most effective , and so we are not tempted to employ improper tactics here at home or abroad .
we are confident of our own strength , so we can seek substantial mutual reductions in the nuclear arms race .
and we are confident of the good sense of american people , and so we let them share in the process of making foreign policy decisions .
we can thus speak with the voices of 215 million , and not just of an isolated handful .
democracy 's great recent successes -- in india , portugal , spain , greece -- show that our confidence in this system is not misplaced .
being confident of our own future , we are now free of that inordinate fear of communism which once led us to embrace any dictator who joined us in that fear .
i 'm glad that that 's being changed .
for too many years , we 've been willing to adopt the flawed and erroneous principles and tactics of our adversaries , sometimes abandoning our own values for theirs .
we 've fought fire with fire , never thinking that fire is better quenched with water .
this approach failed , with vietnam the best example of its intellectual and moral poverty .
but through failure we have now found our way back to our own principles and values , and we have regained our lost confidence .
by the measure of history , our nation 's 200 years are very brief , and our rise to world eminence is briefer still .
it dates from 1945 , when europe and the old international order lay in ruins .
before then , .america was largely on the periphery of world affairs .
but since then , we have inescapably been at the center of world affairs .
our policy during this period was guided by two principles : a belief that soviet expansion was almost inevitable but that it must be contained , and the corresponding belief in the importance of an almost exclusive alliance among non - communist nations on both sides of the atlantic .
that system could not last forever unchanged .
historical trends have weakened its foundation .
the unifying threat of conflict with the soviet union has become less intensive , even though the competition has become more extensive .
the vietnamese war produced a profound moral crisis , sapping worldwide faith in our own policy and our system of life , a crisis of confidence made even more grave by the covert pessimism of some of our leaders .
in less than a generation , we 've seen the world change dramatically .
the daily lives and aspirations of most human beings have been transformed .
colonialism is nearly gone .
a new sense of national identity now exists in almost 100 new countries that have been formed in the last generation .
knowledge has become more widespread .
aspirations are higher .
as more people have been freed from traditional constraints , more have been determined to achieve , for the first time in their lives , social justice .
the world is still divided by ideological disputes , dominated by regional conflicts , and threatened by danger that we will not resolve the differences of race and wealth without violence or without drawing into combat the major military powers .
we can no longer separate the traditional issues of war and peace from the new global questions of justice , equity , and human rights .
it is a new world , but america should not fear it .
it is a new world , and we should help to shape it .
it is a new world that calls for a new american foreign policy -- a policy based on constant decency in its values and on optimism in our historical vision .
we can no longer have a policy solely for the industrial nations as the foundation of global stability , but we must respond to the new reality of a politically awakening world .
we can no longer expect that the other 150 nations will follow the dictates of the powerful , but we must continue -- confidently -- our efforts to inspire , to persuade , and to lead .
our policy must reflect our belief that the world can hope for more than simple survival and our belief that dignity and freedom are fundamental spiritual requirements .
our policy must shape an international system that will last longer than secret deals .
we can not make this kind of policy by manipulation .
our policy must be open ; it must be candid ; it must be one of constructive global involvement , resting on five cardinal principles .
i 've tried to make these premises clear to the american people since last january .
let me review what we have been doing and discuss what we intend to do .
first , we have reaffirmed america 's commitment to human rights as a fundamental tenet of our foreign policy .
in ancestry , religion , color , place of origin , and cultural background , we americans are as diverse a nation as the world has even seen .
no common mystique of blood or soil unites us .
what draws us together , perhaps more than anything else , is a belief in human freedom .
we want the world to know that our nation stands for more than financial prosperity .
this does not mean that we can conduct our foreign policy by rigid moral maxims .
we live in a world that is imperfect and which will always be imperfect -- a world that is complex and confused and which will always be complex and confused .
i understand fully the limits of moral suasion .
we have no illusion that changes will come easily or soon .
but i also believe that it is a mistake to undervalue the power of words and of the ideas that words embody .
in our own history , that power has ranged from thomas paine 's " common sense " to martin luther king , jr. 's " i have a dream . "
in the life of the human spirit , words are action , much more so than many of us may realize who live in countries where freedom of expression is taken for granted .
the leaders of totalitarian nations understand this very well .
the proof is that words are precisely the action for which dissidents in those countries are being persecuted .
nonetheless , we can already see dramatic , worldwide advances in the protection of the individual from the arbitrary power of the state .
for us to ignore this trend would be to lose influence and moral authority in the world .
to lead it will be to regain the moral stature that we once had .
the great democracies are not free because we are strong and prosperous .
i believe we are strong and influential and prosperous because we are free .
throughout the world today , in free nations and in totalitarian countries as well , there is a preoccupation with the subject of human freedom , human rights .
and i believe it is incumbent on us in this country to keep that discussion , that debate , that contention alive .
no other country is as well - qualified as we to set an example .
we have our own shortcomings and faults , and we should strive constantly and with courage to make sure that we are legitimately proud of what we have .
second , we 've moved deliberately to reinforce the bonds among our democracies .
in our recent meetings in london , we agreed to widen our economic cooperation , to promote free trade , to strengthen the world 's monetary system , to seek ways of avoiding nuclear proliferation .
we prepared constructive proposals for the forthcoming meetings on north - south problems of poverty , development , and global well - being .
and we agreed on joint efforts to reinforce and to modernize our common defense .
you may be interested in knowing that at this nato meeting , for the first time in more than 25 years , all members are democracies .
even more important , all of us reaffirmed our basic optimism in the future of the democratic system .
our spirit of confidence is spreading .
together , our democracies can help to shape the wider architecture of global cooperation .
third , we 've moved to engage the soviet union in a joint effort to halt the strategic arms race .
this race is not only dangerous , it 's morally deplorable .
we must put an end to it .
i know it will not be easy to reach agreements .
our goal is to be fair to both sides , to produce reciprocal stability , parity , and security .
we desire a freeze on further modernization and production of weapons and a continuing , substantial reduction of strategic nuclear weapons as well .
we want a comprehensive ban on all nuclear testing , a prohibition against all chemical warfare , no attack capability against space satellites , and arms limitations in the indian ocean .
we hope that we can take joint steps with all nations toward a final agreement eliminating nuclear weapons completely from our arsenals of death .
we will persist in this effort .
now , i believe in detente with the soviet union .
to me it means progress toward peace .
but the effects of detente should not be limited to our own two countries alone .
we hope to persuade the soviet union that one country can not impose its system of society upon another , either through direct military intervention or through the use of a client state 's military force , as was the case with cuban intervention in angola .
cooperation also implies obligation .
we hope that the soviet union will join with us and other nations in playing a larger role in aiding the developing world , for common aid efforts will help us build a bridge of mutual confidence in one another .
fourth , we are taking deliberate steps to improve the chances of lasting peace in the middle east .
through wide - ranging consultation with leaders of the countries involved - israel , syria , jordan , and egypt -- we have found some areas of agreement and some movement toward consensus .
the negotiations must continue .
through my own public comments , i 've also tried to suggest a more flexible framework for the discussion of the three key issues which have so far been so intractable : the nature of a comprehensive peace -- what is peace ; what does it mean to the israelis ; what does it mean to their arab neighbors ; secondly , the relationship between security and borders - how can the dispute over border delineations be established and settled with a feeling of security on both sides ; and the issue of the palestinian homeland .
the historic friendship that the united states has with israel is not dependent on domestic politics in either nation ; it 's derived from our common respect for human freedom and from a common search for permanent peace .
we will continue to promote a settlement which all of us need .
our own policy will not be affected by changes in leadership in any of the countries in the middle east .
therefore , we expect israel and her neighbors to continue to be bound by united nations resolutions 242 and 338 , which they have previously accepted .
this may be the most propitious time for a genuine settlement since the beginning of the arab - israeli conflict almost 30 years ago .
to let this opportunity pass could mean disaster not only for the middle east but , perhaps , for the international political and economic order as well .
and fifth , we are attempting , even at the risk of some friction with our friends , to reduce the danger of nuclear proliferation and the worldwide spread of conventional weapons .
at the recent summit , we set in motion an international effort to determine the best ways of harnessing nuclear energy for peaceful use while reducing the risks that its products will be diverted to the making of explosives .
we 've already completed a comprehensive review of our own policy on arms transfers .
competition in arms sales is inimical to peace and destructive of the economic development of the poorer countries .
we will , as a matter of national policy now in our country , seek to reduce the annual dollar volume of arms sales , to restrict the transfer of advanced weapons , and to reduce the extent of our coproduction arrangements about weapons with foreign states .
and just as important , we are trying to get other nations , both free and otherwise , to join us in this effort .
but all of this that i 've described is just the beginning .
it 's a beginning aimed towards a clear goal : to create a wider framework of international cooperation suited to the new and rapidly changing historical circumstances .
we will cooperate more closely with the newly influential countries in latin america , africa , and asia .
we need their friendship and cooperation in a common effort as the structure of world power changes .
more than 100 years ago , abraham lincoln said that our nation could not exist half slave and half free .
we know a peaceful world can not long exist one - third rich and two - thirds hungry .
most nations share our faith that , in the long run , expanded and equitable trade will best help the developing countries to help themselves .
but the immediate problems of hunger , disease , illiteracy , and repression are here now .
the western democracies , the opec nations , and the developed communist countries can cooperate through existing international institutions in providing more effective aid .
this is an excellent alternative to war .
we have a special need for cooperation and consultation with other nations in this hemisphere -- to the north and to the south .
we do not need another slogan .
although these are our close friends and neighbors , our links with them are the same links of equality that we forge for the rest of the world .
we will be dealing with them as part of a new , worldwide mosaic of global , regional , and bilateral relations .
it 's important that we make progress toward normalizing relations with the people 's republic of china .
we see the american and chinese relationship as a central element of our global policy and china as a key force for global peace .
we wish to cooperate closely with the creative chinese people on the problems that confront all mankind .
and we hope to find a formula which can bridge some of the difficulties that still separate us .
finally , let me say that we are committed to a peaceful resolution of the crisis in southern africa .
the time has come for the principle of majority rule to be the basis for political order , recognizing that in a democratic system the rights of the minority must also be protected .
to be peaceful , change must come promptly .
the united states is determined to work together with our european allies and with the concerned african states to shape a congenial international framework for the rapid and progressive transformation of southern african society and to help protect it from unwarranted outside interference .
let me conclude by summarizing : our policy is based on an historical vision of america 's role .
our policy is derived from a larger view of global change .
our policy is rooted in our moral values , which never change .
our policy is reinforced by our material wealth and by our military power .
our policy is designed to serve mankind .
and it is a policy that i hope will make you proud to be americans .
thank you .

good evening .
i want to have a frank talk with you tonight about our most serious domestic problem .
that problem is inflation .
inflation can threaten all the economic gains we 've made , and it can stand in the way of what we want to achieve in the future .
this has been a long - time threat .
for the last 10 years , the annual inflation rate in the united states has averaged 6 1/2 percent .
and during the 3 years before my inauguration , it had increased to an average of 8 percent .
inflation has , therefore , been a serious problem for me ever since i became president .
we 've tried to control it , but we have not been successful .
it 's time for all of us to make a greater and a more coordinated effort .
if inflation gets worse , several things will happen .
your purchasing power will continue to decline , and most of the burden will fall on those who can least afford it .
our national productivity will suffer .
the value of our dollar will continue to fall in world trade .
we 've made good progress in putting our people back to work over the past 21 months .
we 've created more than 6 million new jobs for american workers .
we 've reduced the unemployment rate by about 25 percent , and we will continue our efforts to reduce unemployment further , especially among our young people and minorities .
but i must tell you tonight that inflation threatens this progress .
if we do not get inflation under control , we will not be able to reduce unemployment further , and we may even slide backward .
inflation is obviously a serious problem .
what is the solution?i do not have all the answers .
nobody does .
perhaps there is no complete and adequate answer .
but i want to let you know that fighting inflation will be a central preoccupation of mine during the months ahead , and i want to arouse our nation to join me in this effort .
there are two simplistic and familiar answers which are sometimes proposed - simple , familiar , and too extreme .
one of these answers is to impose a complicated scheme of federal government wage and price controls on our entire free economic system .
the other is a deliberate recession , which would throw millions of people out of work .
both of these extreme proposals would not work , and they must be rejected .
i 've spent many hours in the last few months reviewing , with my own advisers and with a number of outside experts , every proposal , every suggestion , every possibility for eliminating inflation .
if there 's one thing i have learned beyond any doubt , it is that there is no single solution for inflation .
what we have , instead , is a number of partial remedies .
some of them will help ; others may not .
but we have no choice but to use the best approaches we have and to maintain a constant search for additional steps which may be effective .
i want to discuss with you tonight some of the approaches we have been able to develop .
they involve action by government , business , labor , and every other sector of our economy .
some of these factors are under my control as president -- especially government actions -- and i will insist that the government does its part of the job .
but whether our efforts are successful will finally depend on you as much as on me .
your decisions -- made every day at your service station or your grocery store , in your business , in your union meetings - will determine our nation 's answer to inflation as much as decisions made here in the white house or by the congress on capitol hill .
i can not guarantee that our joint effort will succeed .
in fact , it is almost certain not to succeed if success means quick or dramatic changes .
every free government on earth is wrestling with this problem of inflation , and every one of them knows that a long - term disease requires longterm treatment .
it 's up to us to make the improvements we can , even at the risk of partial failure , rather than to ensure failure by not trying at all .
i will concentrate my efforts within the government .
we know that government is not the only cause of inflation .
but it is one of the causes , and government does set an example .
therefore , it must take the lead in fiscal restraint .
we are going to hold down government spending , reduce the budget deficit , and eliminate government waste .
we will slash federal hiring and cut the federal work force .
we will eliminate needless regulations .
we will bring more competition back to our economy .
and we will oppose any further reduction in federal income taxes until we have convincing prospects that inflation will be controlled .
let me explain what each one of these steps means .
the federal deficit is too high .
our people are simply sick and tired of wasteful federal spending and the inflation it brings with it .
we have already had some success .
we 've brought the deficit down by one - third since i ran for president -- from more than $ 66 billion in fiscal year 1976 to about $ 40 billion in fiscal year 1979 -- a reduction of more than $ 25 billion in the federal deficit in just 3 years .
it will keep going down .
next year , with tough restraints on federal spending and moderate economic growth in prospect , i plan to reduce the budget deficit to less than one - half what it was when i ran for office -- to $ 30 billion or less .
the government has been spending too great a portion of what our nation produces .
during my campaign i promised to cut the government 's share of our total national spending from 23 percent , which it was then , to 21 percent in fiscal year 1981 .
we now plan to meet that goal 1 year earlier .
reducing the deficit will require difficult and unpleasant decisions .
we must face a time of national austerity .
hard choices are necessary if we want to avoid consequences that are even worse .
i intend to make those hard choices .
i have already vetoed bills that would undermine our fight against inflation , and the congress has sustained those vetoes .
i know that the congress will continue to cooperate in the effort to meet our needs in responsible , noninflationary ways .
i will use the administrative and the budgetary powers of my office , including the veto , if necessary , to keep our nation firmly on the path of fiscal restraint .
restraint involves tax policy as well as spending decisions .
tax reduction has never been more politically popular than it is today .
but if future tax cuts are made rashly , with no eye on the budget deficits , they will hurt us all by causing more inflation .
there are tax cuts which could directly lower costs and prices and help in the fight against inflation .
i may consider ways to reduce those particular taxes while still cutting the budget deficit , but until we have a convincing prospect of controlling inflation , i will oppose any further reductions in federal income taxes .
to keep the government to a manageable size , i 'm ordering tonight a cut in federal hiring .
this order will mean a reduction of more than 20,000 in the number of permanent federal employees already budgeted for this fiscal year and will cut the total size of the federal work force .
i 've already placed a 5?-percent cap on the pay increase for federal employees , and federal executive officers are receiving no pay increases at all .
it 's not enough just to control government deficits , spending , and hiring .
we must also control the costs of government regulations .
in recent years , congress has passed a number of landmark statutes to improve social and environmental conditions .
we must and we will continue progress toward protecting the health and safety of the american people .
but we must also realize that everything has a price and that consumers eventually pick up the tab .
where regulations are essential , they must be efficient .
where they fight inflation , they should be encouraged .
where they are unnecessary , they should be removed .
early this year , i directed federal agencies to eliminate unnecessary regulations and to analyze the costs and benefits of new ones .
today , for instance , the occupational safety and health administration , sometimes called osha , eliminated nearly 1,000 unnecessary regulations .
now , we can build on this progress .
i 've directed a council of my regulatory departments and agencies to coordinate their regulations , to prevent overlapping and duplication .
most important , the council will develop a unified calendar of planned major regulations .
the calendar will give us , for the first time , a comprehensive list of regulations the federal government is proposing , with their costs and objectives .
as president , i will personally use my authority to ensure that regulations are issued only when needed and that they meet their goals at the lowest possible cost .
we are also cutting away the regulatory thicket that has grown up around us and giving our competitive free enterprise system a chance to grow up in its place .
last year we gave the airline industry a fresh shot of competition .
regulations were removed .
free market forces drove prices down , record numbers of passengers traveled , and profits went up .
our new airline deregulation bill will make these benefits permanent .
for the first time in decades , we have actually deregulated a major industry .
next year we will work with congress to bring more competition to others , such as the railroad and trucking industries .
of all our weapons against inflation , competition is the most powerful .
without real competition , prices and wages go up , even when demand is going down .
we must therefore work to allow more competition wherever possible so that powerful groups -- government , business , labor - must think twice before abusing their economic power .
we will redouble our efforts to put competition back into the american free enterprise system .
another reason for inflation is the slowdown in productivity growth .
more efficient production is essential if we are to control inflation , make american goods more competitive in world markets , add new jobs , and increase the real incomes of our people .
we 've made a start toward improving productivity .
the tax bill just passed by the congress includes many of the investment incentives that i recommended last january .
federal support for research and development will continue to increase , especially for basic research .
we will coordinate and strengthen federal programs that support productivity improvements throughout our economy .
our government efforts will attack the inflation that hurts most , inflation in the essentials -- food , housing , and medical care .
we will continue to use our agricultural policies to sustain farm production , to maintain stable prices , and to keep inflation down .
rising interest rates have always accompanied inflation .
they add further to the costs of business expansion and to what consumers must pay when they buy houses and other consumer items .
the burden of controlling inflation can not be left to monetary policy alone , which must deal with the problem through tight restrictions on money and credit that push interest rates up .
i will work for a balanced , concerted , and sustained program under which tight budget restraint , private wage and price moderation , and responsible monetary policy support each other .
if successful , we should expect lower inflation and lower interest rates for consumers and businesses alike .
as for medical care , where costs have gone up much faster than the general inflation rate , the most important step we can take is to pass a strong bill to control hospital costs .
this year the senate passed one .
next year i will try again , and i believe the whole congress will act to hold down hospital costs -- if your own members of congress hear from you .
between now and january , when the new congress convenes , i will be preparing a package of specific legislative proposals to help fight inflation .
the government will do its part , but in a country like ours , government can not do the job alone .
in the end , the success or failure of this effort will also rest on whether the private sector will accept - and act on -- the voluntary wage and price standards i am announcing tonight .
these standards are fair .
they are standards that everyone can follow .
if we do follow them , they will slow prices down so that wages will not have to chase prices just to stay even .
and they point the way toward an eventual cure for inflation , by removing the pressures that cause it in the first place .
in the last 10 years , in our attempts to protect ourselves from inflation we 've developed attitudes and habits that actually keep inflation going once it has begun .
most companies raise their prices because they expect costs to rise .
unions call for large wage settlements because they expect inflation to continue .
because we expect it to happen , it does happen ; and once it 's started , wages and prices chase each other up and up .
it 's like a crowd standing at a football stadium .
no one can see any better than when everyone is sitting down , but no one is willing to be the first to sit down .
except for our lowest paid workers , i 'm asking all employees in this country to limit total wage increases to a maximum of 7 percent per year .
from tonight on , every contract signed and every pay raise granted should meet this standard .
my price limitation will be equally strict .
our basic target for economy - wide price increases is 5 3/4 percent .
to reach this goal , i 'm tonight setting a standard for each firm in the nation to hold its price increases at least one - half of one percentage point below what they averaged during 1976 and 1977.of course , we have to take into account binding commitments already in effect , which will prevent an absolute adherence to these standards .
but this price standard is much lower than this year 's inflation rate , and more important , it 's less than the standard for wage increases .
that difference is accounted for by rising productivity , and it will allow the income of america 's workers to stay ahead of inflation .
this is a standard for everyone to follow - everyone .
as far as i 'm concerned , every business , every union , every professional group , every individual in this country has no excuse not to adhere to these standards .
if we meet these standards , the real buying power of your paycheck will rise .
the difficulty with a voluntary program is that workers fear that if they cooperate with the standards while others do not , then they will suffer if inflation continues .
to deal with this concern , i will ask the congress next january to enact a program that workers who observe the standards would be eligible for a tax rebate if the inflation rate is more than 7 percent .
in other words , they would have a real wage insurance policy against inflation which might be caused by others .
this will give our workers an additional incentive to observe the program and will remove their only legitimate reason not to cooperate .
because this is not a mandatory control plan , i can not stop an irresponsible corporation from raising its prices or a selfish group of employees from using its power to demand excessive wages .
but then if that happens , the government will respond , using the tools of government authority and public opinion .
soon after they raise prices or demand pay increases that are excessive , the company or the union will feel the pressure that the public can exert , through new competition to drive prices down or removal of government protections and privileges which they now enjoy .
we will also make better use of the $ 80 billion worth of purchases the government makes from private industry each year .
we must be prudent buyers .
if costs rise too fast , we can delay those purchases , as your family would , or switch to another supplier .
we may not buy a fleet of cars this year , for example , if cars cost too much , or we may channel our purchases to suppliers who have observed our wage and price standards rather than to buy from those who have not .
we will require firms that supply goods and services to the government to certify their compliance with the wage and price standards .
we will make every effort , within legal limits , to deny government contracts to companies that fail to meet our wage and price standards .
we will use our buying power more effectively to make price restraint and competition a reality .
the government now extends economic privileges to many parts of the private economy -- special franchises , protected wages and prices , subsidies , protection from foreign competition .
if wages or prices rise too fast in some industry , we will take that as a sign that those privileges are no longer needed and that this protection should be removed .
we will make sure that no part of our economy is able to use its special privilege or its concentrated power to victimize the rest of us .
this approach i 've outlined will not end inflation .
it simply improves our chances of making it better rather than worse .
to summarize the plan i 'm announcing tonight : we will cut the budget deficit .
we will slash federal hiring and reduce the federal work force .
we will restrain federal pay .
we will delay further tax cuts .
we will remove needless regulations .
we will use federal policy to encourage more competition .
we will set specific standards for both wages and prices throughout the economy .
we will use all the powers at our disposal to make this program work .
and we will submit new anti - inflation proposals to the congress next january , including the real wage insurance proposal i 've discussed tonight .
i 've said many times that these steps will be tough -- and they are .
but i also said they will be fair -- and they are .
they apply equally to all groups .
they give all of us an equal chance to move ahead .
and these proposals , which give us a chance , also deserve a chance .
if , tomorrow or next week or next month , you ridicule them , ignore them , pick them apart before they have a chance to work , then you will have reduced their chance of succeeding .
these steps can work , but that will take time , and you are the ones who can give them that time .
if there 's one thing i 'm asking of every american tonight , it is to give this plan a chance to work -- a chance to work for us .
you can help give it that chance ' by using your influence .
business and labor must know that you will not tolerate irresponsible price and wage increases .
your elected officials must know how you feel as they make difficult choices .
too often the only voices they hear are those of special interests , supporting their own narrow cause .
if you want government officials to cut inflation , you have to make sure that they hear your voice .
i have heard you with unmistakable clarity .
nearly 40 years ago , when the world watched to see whether his nation would survive , winston churchill defied those who thought britain would fall to the nazi threat .
churchill replied by asking his countrymen , " what kind of people do they think we are?"there are those today who say that a free economy can not cope with inflation and that we 've lost our ability to act as a nation rather than as a collection of special interests .
and i reply , " what kind of people do they think we are?"i believe that our people , our economic system , and our government are equal to this task .
i hope that you will prove me right .
thank you , and good night .

mr. president , mr. speaker , members of the 96th congress , fellow citizens : this last few months has not been an easy time for any of us .
as we meet tonight , it has never been more clear that the state of our union depends on the state of the world .
and tonight , as throughout our own generation , freedom and peace in the world depend on the state of our union .
the 1980s have been born in turmoil , strife , and change .
this is a time of challenge to our interests and our values and it 's a time that tests our wisdom and our skills .
at this time in iran , 50 americans are still held captive , innocent victims of terrorism and anarchy .
also at this moment , massive soviet troops are attempting to subjugate the fiercely independent and deeply religious people of afghanistan .
these two acts -- one of international terrorism and one of military aggression -- present a serious challenge to the united states of america and indeed to all the nations of the world .
together , we will meet these threats to peace .
i 'm determined that the united states will remain the strongest of all nations , but our power will never be used to initiate a threat to the security of any nation or to the rights of any human being .
we seek to be and to remain secure -- a nation at peace in a stable world .
but to be secure we must face the world as it is .
three basic developments have helped to shape our challenges : the steady growth and increased projection of soviet military power beyond its own borders ; the overwhelming dependence of the western democracies on oil supplies from the middle east ; and the press of social and religious and economic and political change in the many nations of the developing world , exemplified by the revolution in iran .
each of these factors is important in its own right .
each interacts with the others .
all must be faced together , squarely and courageously .
we will face these challenges , and we will meet them with the best that is in us .
and we will not fail .
in response to the abhorrent act in iran , our nation has never been aroused and unified so greatly in peacetime .
our position is clear .
the united states will not yield to blackmail .
we continue to pursue these specific goals : first , to protect the present and long - range interests of the united states ; secondly , to preserve the lives of the american hostages and to secure , as quickly as possible , their safe release , if possible , to avoid bloodshed which might further endanger the lives of our fellow citizens ; to enlist the help of other nations in condemning this act of violence , which is shocking and violates the moral and the legal standards of a civilized world ; and also to convince and to persuade the iranian leaders that the real danger to their nation lies in the north , in the soviet union and from the soviet troops now in afghanistan , and that the unwarranted iranian quarrel with the united states hampers their response to this far greater danger to them .
if the american hostages are harmed , a severe price will be paid .
we will never rest until every one of the american hostages are released .
but now we face a broader and more fundamental challenge in this region because of the recent military action of the soviet union .
now , as during the last three and a half decades , the relationship between our country , the united states of america , and the soviet union is the most critical factor in determining whether the world will live at peace or be engulfed in global conflict .
since the end of the second world war , america has led other nations in meeting the challenge of mounting soviet power .
this has not been a simple or a static relationship .
between us there has been cooperation , there has been competition , and at times there has been confrontation .
in the 1940s we took the lead in creating the atlantic alliance in response to the soviet union 's suppression and then consolidation of its east european empire and the resulting threat of the warsaw pact to western europe .
in the 1950s we helped to contain further soviet challenges in korea and in the middle east , and we rearmed to assure the continuation of that containment .
in the 1960s we met the soviet challenges in berlin , and we faced the cuban missile crisis .
and we sought to engage the soviet union in the important task of moving beyond the cold war and away from confrontation .
and in the 1970s three american presidents negotiated with the soviet leaders in attempts to halt the growth of the nuclear arms race .
we sought to establish rules of behavior that would reduce the risks of conflict , and we searched for areas of cooperation that could make our relations reciprocal and productive , not only for the sake of our two nations but for the security and peace of the entire world .
in all these actions , we have maintained two commitments : to be ready to meet any challenge by soviet military power , and to develop ways to resolve disputes and to keep the peace .
preventing nuclear war is the foremost responsibility of the two superpowers .
that 's why we 've negotiated the strategic arms limitation treaties -- salt i and salt ii .
especially now , in a time of great tension , observing the mutual constraints imposed by the terms of these treaties will be in the best interest of both countries and will help to preserve world peace .
i will consult very closely with the congress on this matter as we strive to control nuclear weapons .
that effort to control nuclear weapons will not be abandoned .
we superpowers also have the responsibility to exercise restraint in the use of our great military force .
the integrity and the independence of weaker nations must not be threatened .
they must know that in our presence they are secure .
but now the soviet union has taken a radical and an aggressive new step .
it 's using its great military power against a relatively defenseless nation .
the implications of the soviet invasion of afghanistan could pose the most serious threat to the peace since the second world war .
the vast majority of nations on earth have condemned this latest soviet attempt to extend its colonial domination of others and have demanded the immediate withdrawal of soviet troops .
the moslem world is especially and justifiably outraged by this aggression against an islamic people .
no action of a world power has ever been so quickly and so overwhelmingly condemned .
but verbal condemnation is not enough .
the soviet union must pay a concrete price for their aggression .
while this invasion continues , we and the other nations of the world can not conduct business as usual with the soviet union .
that 's why the united states has imposed stiff economic penalties on the soviet union .
i will not issue any permits for soviet ships to fish in the coastal waters of the united states .
i 've cut soviet access to high - technology equipment and to agricultural products .
i 've limited other commerce with the soviet union , and i 've asked our allies and friends to join with us in restraining their own trade with the soviets and not to replace our own embargoed items .
and i have notified the olympic committee that with soviet invading forces in afghanistan , neither the american people nor i will support sending an olympic team to moscow .
the soviet union is going to have to answer some basic questions : will it help promote a more stable international environment in which its own legitimate , peaceful concerns can be pursued ?
or will it continue to expand its military power far beyond its genuine security needs , and use that power for colonial conquest ?
the soviet union must realize that its decision to use military force in afghanistan will be costly to every political and economic relationship it values .
the region which is now threatened by soviet troops in afghanistan is of great strategic importance : it contains more than two thirds of the world 's exportable oil .
the soviet effort to dominate afghanistan has brought soviet military forces to within 300 miles of the indian ocean and close to the straits of hormuz , a waterway through which most of the world 's oil must flow .
the soviet union is now attempting to consolidate a strategic position , therefore , that poses a grave threat to the free movement of middle east oil .
this situation demands careful thought , steady nerves , and resolute action , not only for this year but for many years to come .
it demands collective efforts to meet this new threat to security in the persian gulf and in southwest asia .
it demands the participation of all those who rely on oil from the middle east and who are concerned with global peace and stability .
and it demands consultation and close cooperation with countries in the area which might be threatened .
meeting this challenge will take national will , diplomatic and political wisdom , economic sacrifice , and , of course , military capability .
we must call on the best that is in us to preserve the security of this crucial region .
let our position be absolutely clear : an attempt by any outside force to gain control of the persian gulf region will be regarded as an assault on the vital interests of the united states of america , and such an assault will be repelled by any means necessary , including military force .
during the past threeyears , you have joined with me to improve our own security and the prospects for peace , not only in the vital oil - producing area of the persian gulf region but around the world .
we 've increased annually our real commitment for defense , and we will sustain this increase of effort throughout the five - year defense program .
it 's imperative that congress approve this strong defense budget for 1981 , encompassing a 5 percent real growth in authorizations , without any reduction .
we are also improving our capability to deploy u. s. military forces rapidly to distant areas .
we 've helped to strengthen nato and our other alliances , and recently we and other nato members have decided to develop and to deploy modernized , intermediate - range nuclear forces to meet an unwarranted and increased threat from the nuclear weapons of the soviet union .
we are working with our allies to prevent conflict in the middle east .
the peace treaty between egypt and israel is a notable achievement which represents a strategic asset for america and which also enhances prospects for regional and world peace .
we are now engaged in further negotiations to provide full autonomy for the people of the west bank and gaza , to resolve the palestinian issue in all its aspects , and to preserve the peace and security of israel .
let no one doubt our commitment to the security of israel .
in a few days we will observe an historic event when israel makes another major withdrawal from the sinai and when ambassadors will be exchanged between israel and egypt .
we 've also expanded our own sphere of friendship .
our deep commitment to human rights and to meeting human needs has improved our relationship with much of the third world .
our decision to normalize relations with the people 's republic of china will help to preserve peace and stability in asia and in the western pacific .
we 've increased and strengthened our naval presence in the indian ocean , and we are now making arrangements for key naval and air facilities to be used by our forces in the region of northeast africa and the persian gulf .
we 've reconfirmed our 1959 agreement to help pakistan preserve its independence and its integrity .
the united states will take action consistent with our own laws to assist pakistan in resisting any outside aggression .
and i 'm asking the congress specifically to reaffirm this agreement .
i 'm also working , along with the leaders of other nations , to provide additional military and economic aid for pakistan .
that request will come to you in just a few days .
finally , we are prepared to work with other countries in the region to share a cooperative security framework that respects differing values and political beliefs , yet which enhances the independence , security , and prosperity of all .
all these efforts combined emphasize our dedication to defend and preserve the vital interests of the region and of the nation which we represent and those of our allies -- in europe and the pacific , and also in the parts of the world which have such great strategic importance to us , stretching especially through the middle east and southwest asia .
with your help , i will pursue these efforts with vigor and with determination .
you and i will act as necessary to protect and to preserve our nation 's security .
the men and women of america 's armed forces are on duty tonight in many parts of the world .
i 'm proud of the job they are doing , and i know you share that pride .
i believe that our volunteer forces are adequate for current defense needs , and i hope that it will not become necessary to impose a draft .
however , we must be prepared for that possibility .
for this reason , i have determined that the selective service system must now be revitalized .
i will send legislation and budget proposals to the congress next month so that we can begin registration and then meet future mobilization needs rapidly if they arise .
we also need clear and quick passage of a new charter to define the legal authority and accountability of our intelligence agencies .
we will guarantee that abuses do not recur , but we must tighten our controls on sensitive intelligence information , and we need to remove unwarranted restraints on america 's ability to collect intelligence .
the decade ahead will be a time of rapid change , as nations everywhere seek to deal with new problems and age - old tensions .
but america need have no fear .
we can thrive in a world of change if we remain true to our values and actively engaged in promoting world peace .
we will continue to work as we have for peace in the middle east and southern africa .
we will continue to build our ties with developing nations , respecting and helping to strengthen their national independence which they have struggled so hard to achieve .
and we will continue to support the growth of democracy and the protection of human rights .
in repressive regimes , popular frustrations often have no outlet except through violence .
but when peoples and their governments can approach their problems together through open , democratic methods , the basis for stability and peace is far more solid and far more enduring .
that is why our support for human rights in other countries is in our own national interest as well as part of our own national character .
peace -- a peace that preserves freedom -- remains america 's first goal .
in the coming years , as a mighty nation we will continue to pursue peace .
but to be strong abroad we must be strong at home .
and in order to be strong , we must continue to face up to the difficult issues that confront us as a nation today .
the crises in iran and afghanistan have dramatized a very important lesson : our excessive dependence on foreign oil is a clear and present danger to our nation 's security .
the need has never been more urgent .
at long last , we must have a clear , comprehensive energy policy for the united states .
as you well know , i have been working with the congress in a concentrated and persistent way over the past three years to meet this need .
we have made progress together .
but congress must act promptly now to complete final action on this vital energy legislation .
our nation will then have a major conservation effort , important initiatives to develop solar power , realistic pricing based on the true value of oil , strong incentives for the production of coal and other fossil fuels in the united states , and our nation 's most massive peacetime investment in the development of synthetic fuels .
the american people are making progress in energy conservation .
last year we reduced overall petroleum consumption by 8 percent and gasoline consumption by 5 percent below what it was the year before .
now we must do more .
after consultation with the governors , we will set gasoline conservation goals for each of the 50 states , and i will make them mandatory if these goals are not met .
i 've established an import ceiling for 1980 of 8.2 million barrels a day -- well below the level of foreign oil purchases in 1977 .
i expect our imports to be much lower than this , but the ceiling will be enforced by an oil import fee if necessary .
i 'm prepared to lower these imports still further if the other oil - consuming countries will join us in a fair and mutual reduction .
if we have a serious shortage , i will not hesitate to impose mandatory gasoline rationing immediately .
the single biggest factor in the inflation rate last year , the increase in the inflation rate last year , was from one cause : the skyrocketing prices of opec oil .
we must take whatever actions are necessary to reduce our dependence on foreign oil -- and at the same time reduce inflation .
as individuals and as families , few of us can produce energy by ourselves .
but all of us can conserve energy -- every one of us , every day of our lives .
tonight i call on you -- in fact , all the people of america -- to help our nation .
conserve energy .
eliminate waste .
make 1980 indeed a year of energy conservation .
of course , we must take other actions to strengthen our nation 's economy .
first , we will continue to reduce the deficit and then to balance the federal budget .
second , as we continue to work with business to hold down prices , we 'll build also on the historic national accord with organized labor to restrain pay increases in a fair fight against inflation .
third , we will continue our successful efforts to cut paperwork and to dismantle unnecessary government regulation .
fourth , we will continue our progress in providing jobs for america , concentrating on a major new program to provide training and work for our young people , especially minority youth .
it has been said that " a mind is a terrible thing to waste . "
we will give our young people new hope for jobs and a better life in the 1980s .
and fifth , we must use the decade of the 1980s to attack the basic structural weaknesses and problems in our economy through measures to increase productivity , savings , and investment .
with these energy and economic policies , we will make america even stronger at home in this decade -- just as our foreign and defense policies will make us stronger and safer throughout the world .
we will never abandon our struggle for a just and a decent society here at home .
that 's the heart of america -- and it 's the source of our ability to inspire other people to defend their own rights abroad .
our material resources , great as they are , are limited .
our problems are too complex for simple slogans or for quick solutions .
we can not solve them without effort and sacrifice .
walter lippmann once reminded us , " you took the good things for granted .
now you must earn them again .
for every right that you cherish , you have a duty which you must fulfill .
for every good which you wish to preserve , you will have to sacrifice your comfort and your ease .
there is nothing for nothing any longer."our challenges are formidable .
but there 's a new spirit of unity and resolve in our country .
we move into the 1980s with confidence and hope and a bright vision of the america we want : an america strong and free , an america at peace , an america with equal rights for all citizens -- and for women , guaranteed in the united states constitution -- an america with jobs and good health and good education for every citizen , an america with a clean and bountiful life in our cities and on our farms , an america that helps to feed the world , an america secure in filling its own energy needs , an america of justice , tolerance , and compassion .
for this vision to come true , we must sacrifice , but this national commitment will be an exciting enterprise that will unify our people .
together as one people , let us work to build our strength at home , and together as one indivisible union , let us seek peace and security throughout the world .
together let us make of this time of challenge and danger a decade of national resolve and of brave achievement .
thank you very much .

well , i might say first of all , that i think in case of a carter administration , the sacrifices would be much less .
mr. ford 's own environmental agency has projected a 10-percent unemployment rate by 1978 if be is president .
the american people are ready to make sacrifices if they are part of the process , if they know that they will be helping to make decisions and wo n't be excluded from being an involved party to the national purpose .
the major effort that we must put forward is to put our people back to work .
and i think that this is one example where a lot of people have selfish , grasping ideas now .
i remember in 1973 , in the depth of the energy crisis , when president nixon called on the american people to make a sacrifice to cut down on the waste of gasoline , to cut down on the speed of automobiles .
it was a tremendous surge of patriotism . "
i want to make a sacrifice for my country?i think we could call together -- with strong leadership in the white house - business , industry , and labor , and say , let 's have voluntary price restraints , let 's lay down some guidelines so we do n't have continuing inflation .
we could also have an end to the extremes .
we now have one extreme , for instance , of some welfare recipients who , by taking advantage of the welfare laws , the housing laws , the medicaid laws , and the food stamp laws , make over $ 10,000 a year , and they do n't have to pay any taxes on it .
at the other extreme just i percent of the richest people in our country derive 25 percent of all the tax benefits .
so both those extremes grasp for advantage , and the person who has to pay that expense is the middle - income family who is still working for a living .
and they have to pay for the rich who have the privilege and for the poor who are not working .
but i think that a balanced approach , with everybody being part of it , and striving for unselfishness could help , as it did in 1973 , to let people sacrifice for their own country .
i know i 'm ready for it ; i think the american people are , too .
i think the major reason for a decrease in participation that we 've experienced ever since 1960 bas been the deep discouragement of the american people about the performance of public officials .
when you 've got 7 1/2 , 8 million people out of work , when you 've got three times as much inflation as you had during the last 8-year democratic administration , when you have the highest deficits in history , when you have it becoming increasingly difficult for a family to put a child through college or to own a home , there is a natural inclination to be turned off .
also , in the aftermath of vietnam and cambodia and watergate and the cia revelations , people have felt that they 've been betrayed by public officials .
i have to admit that in the heat of the campaign -- i've been in 30 primaries during the springtime ; i 've been campaigning for 22 months -- i've made some mistakes .
and i think this is part of just being a human being .
i have to say that my campaign has been an open one .
the playboy thing bas been of very great concern to me .
i do n't know how to deal with it exactly .
i agreed to give the interview to playboy .
other people have done it who are notable -- governor jerry brown , walter cronkite , albert schweitzer , mr. ford 's own secretary of treasury , mr. simon , william buckley , many other people .
but they were n't running for president .
and in retrospect , from hindsight , i would not have given that interview had i to do it over again .
if i should ever decide in the future to discuss my deep christian beliefs and condemnation and sinfulness , l would use another forum besides playboy .
but i can say this : i 'm doing the best i can to get away from that .
and during the next 10 days , the american people will not see the carter campaign running television advertisements or newspaper advertisements based on a personal attack on president ford 's character .
i believe that the opposite is true with president ford 's campaign .
and i hope that we can leave those issues , in the next 10 days , about personalities and mistakes of the past -- we've both matte some mistakes -- and talk about unemployment , inflation , housing , education , taxation , government organization , stripping away of secrecy , and the things that are crucial to the american people .
i regret the things in my own long campaign that have been mistaken , but i 'm trying to do away with those the last 10 days .
i do n't have any response .
in the last 2 weeks i 've had a chance to talk to two men who have visited the soviet union , yugoslavia , and china .
one is governor averell harriman,1 who visited the soviet union and yugoslavia , and the other one is james schlesinger,2 whom i think you accompanied to china .
i got a complete report back from those countries from these two distinguished gentlemen.1 governor of new york 1954 - 58 and ambassador at large 1961 , 1965 - 68.2secretary of defense 1973 - 75.mr .
harriman talked to the leaders in yugoslavia , and i think it 's accurate to say that there is no prospect , in their opinion , of the soviet union invading yugoslavia should mr. tito pass away .
the present leadership there is fairly uniform in their purpose .
i think it 's a close - knit group , and i think it would be unwise for us to say that we will go to war in yugoslavia if the soviets should invade , which i think would be an extremely unlikely thing .
i have maintained from the very beginning of my campaign -- and this was a standard answer that i made in response to the yugoslavian question -- that i would never go to war , become militarily involved in the internal affairs of another country , unless our own security was directly threatened .
and i do n't believe that our security would be directly threatened if the soviet union went into yugoslavia .
i do n't believe it will happen .
i certainly hope it wo n't .
i would take the strongest possible measures short of actual military action there by our own troops , but i doubt that that would be an eventuality .
no , i did not .
well , just briefly , i think this is the second time that general brown has made a statement for which he did have to apologize -- and i know that everybody makes mistakes .
i think the first one was related to the unwarranted influence of american jews on the media and in the congress .
this one concerned great britain .
i think he said israel was a military burden on us and that iran hoped to reestablish the persian empire .
i am not sure that i remembered earlier that president ford had expressed his concern about the statement or apologized for it .
this is something , though , that i think is indicative of a need among the american people to know how the commander in chief , the president , feels .
and i think the only criticism that i would have of mr. ford is that immediately when the statement was revealed , perhaps a statement from the president would have been a clarifying and a very beneficial thing .
i do n't believe it does .
i began campaigning 22 months ago .
at that time nobody thought i had a chance to win .
very few people knew who i was .
i came from a tiny town , as you know -- plains -- and did n't hold public office , did n't have very much money .
and my first organization was just four or five people plus my wife and my children , my three sons and their wives .
and we won the nomination by going out into the streets , barbershops , beauty parlors , restaurants , stores , in factory shift lines , also in farmers ' markets and livestock sale barns , and we talked a lot and we listened a lot , and we learned from the american people .
we built up an awareness among the voters of this country , particularly those in whose primaries i entered--30 of them , nobody has ever done that before -- about who i was and what i stood for .
now we have a very wide - ranging group of advisers who help me prepare for these debates and who teach me about international economics and foreign affairs , defense matters , health , education , welfare , government reorganization - i'd say several hundred of them , and they are very fine and very highly qualified .
the one major decision that i have made since acquiring the nomination - and i share this with president ford -- is the choice of the vice president .
i think this would be indicative of the kind of leaders that i would choose to help me if i am elected .
i chose senator walter mondale .
and the only criterion that i have put forward in my own mind was , who among the several million people in this country would be the best person qualified to be president if something should happen to me and to join me in being vice president if i should serve out my term ?
and i 'm convinced now , more than i was when i got the nomination , that walter mondale was the right choice .
and i believe this is a good indication of the kind of people that i would choose in the future .
mr. ford has had that same choice to make .
i do n't want to say anything critical of senator dole , but i have never heard mr. ford say that that was his primary consideration -- who is the best person i could choose in this country to be president of the united states .
i feel completely at ease knowing that some day senator mondale might very well be president .
in the last five vice - presidential nominees , incumbents , three of them have become president .
but i think this is indicative of what i would do .
well , i might say i think the league of conservation voters is absolutely right .
this administration 's record of environment is very bad .
i think it 's accurate to say that the strip mining law , which was passed twice by the congress and only lacked two votes , i believe , of being overridden , would have been good for the country .
the claim that it would have put 140,000 miners out of work is hard to believe when at the time mr. ford vetoed it , the united mine workers was supporting the bill .
and i do n't think they would have supported the bill had they known that they would lose 140,000 jobs .
there has been a consistent policy on the part of this administration to lower or to delay enforcement of air pollution standards and water pollution standards .
and under both presidents nixon and ford , moneys have been impounded that would have gone to cities and others to control water pollution .
we have no energy policy .
we , i think , are the only developed nation in the world that has no comprehensive energy policy to permit us to plan , in an orderly way , how to shift from increasing the scarce energy forms -- oil -- and have research and development concentrated on the increased use of coal , which i strongly favor -- the research and development to be used primarily to make the coal burning be clean .
we need a heritage trust program , similar to the one we had in georgia , to set aside additional lands that have geological and archeological importance , natural areas for enjoyment .
the lands that mr. ford brags about having approved are in alaska , and they are enormous in size , but as far as the accessibility of them by the american people , is very far in the future .
we have taken no strong position in the control of pollution of our oceans .
and i would say the worst threat to the environment of all is nuclear proliferation .
and this administration , having been in office now for 2 years or more , has still not taken a strong and bold action to stop the proliferation of nuclear waste around the world , particularly plutonium .
those are some brief remarks about the failures of this administration .
i would do the opposite in every respect .
yes , i would be glad to .
in the first place , as is the case with the environmental policy and energy policy that i just described , and the policy for nonproliferation of nuclear waste , this administration has no urban policy .
it 's impossible for mayors or governors to cooperate with the president , because they ca n't anticipate what is going to happen next .
a mayor of a city like new york , for example , needs to know 18 months or 2 years ahead of time what responsibility the city will have in administration and in financing , in things like housing , pollution control , crime control , education , welfare and health .
this has not been done , unfortunately .
i remember the headline in the daily news that said , " ford to new york -- drop dead."i think it 's very important that our cities know that they have a partner in the federal government .
quite often , congress has passed laws in the past designed to help people with the ownership of homes and with the control of crime and with adequate health care and better education programs and so forth .
those programs were designed to help those who need it most , and quite often this has been in the very poor people and neighborhoods in the downtown urban centers .
because of the greatly advantaged persons who live in the suburbs -- better education , better organization , more articulate , more aware of what the laws are -- quite often this money has been channeled out of the downtown centers where it 's needed .
also , i favor all revenue sharing money being used for local governments and also to remove the prohibitions in the use of revenue sharing money , so that it can be used to improve education and health care .
we have now , for instance , only 7 percent of the total education costs being financed by the federal government .
when the nixon - ford administration started , this was 10 percent .
that 's a 30-percent reduction in the portion that the federal government contributes to education in just 8 years and , as you know , the education costs have gone up tremendously .
the last point is that the major thrust has got to be to put people back to work .
we 've got an extraordinarily high unemployment rate among downtown , urban ghetto areas ; particularly among the very poor and particularly among minority groups , sometimes 50 or 60 percent .
and the concentration of employment opportunities in those areas would help greatly not only to reestablish the tax base , but also to help reduce the extraordinary welfare costs .
one of the major responsibilities on the shoulders of new york city is to finance welfare .
and i favor the shifting of the welfare cost away from the local governments altogether and , over a longer period of time , let the federal government begin to absorb part of it that is now paid by the state government .
those things would help a great deal with the cities , but we still have a very serious problem there .
the description just made of this administration 's record is hard to recognize .
i think it is accurate to say that mr. ford voted against the voting rights acts and against the civil rights acts in their debative stage .
i think once it was assured they were going to pass , he finally voted for it .
this country changed drastically in 1969 when the terms of john kennedy and lyndon johnson were over , and richard nixon and gerald ford became the presidents .
there was a time when there was hope for those who were poor and downtrodden and who were elderly or who were ill or who were in minority groups .
that time has been gone .
i think the greatest thing that ever happened to the south was the passage of the civil rights acts and the opening up of opportunities to black people , to have a chance to vote , to hold a job , to buy a house , to go to school , and to participate in public affairs .
it not only liberated black people but it also liberated the whites .
we have seen in many instances in recent years a minority affairs section of a small loan administration , small business administration , lend a black entrepreneur just enough money to get started , and then to go bankrupt .
the bankruptcies have gone up an extraordinary degree .
the fha , which used to be a very responsible agency that everyone looked to to help own a home , lost $ 600 million last year .
there have been over 1,300 indictments in hud , over 800 convictions relating just to home loans .
and now the federal government has become the world 's greatest slum landlord .
we 've got a 30-percent or 40-percent unemployment rate among minority young people .
and there has been no concerted effort given to the needs of those who are both poor and black , or poor and who speak a foreign language .
and that 's where there has been a great generation of despair and ill - health and lack of education and lack of purposefulness and a lack of hope for the future .
but it does n't take just a quiet , dormant , minimum enforcement of the law .
it requires an aggressive searching out and reaching out to help people who especially need it .
and that 's been lacking in the last 8 years .
i would not work hard to support any of those .
we have always had , i think , a lot of constitutional amendments proposed but the passage of them has been fairly slow and few and far between .
in the 200-year history , there has been a very cautious approach to this .
quite often we have a transient problem .
i am strongly against abortion .
i think abortion is wrong .
i do n't think the government ought to do anything to encourage abortion , but i do n't favor a constitutional amendment on the subject .
but short of a constitutional amendment , and within the confines of a supreme court ruling , i will do everything i can to minimize the need for abortions with better sex education , family planning , with better adoptive procedures .
i personally do n't believe that the federal government ought to finance abortions , but i draw the line and do n't support a constitutional amendment .
however , i honor the right of people to seek the constitutional amendments on school busing , on prayer in the schools , and on abortion , but among those you named , i wo n't actively work for the passage of any of them .
i think it 's accurate to say that mr. ford 's position on gun control has changed .
earlier , mr. levi , his attorney general , put forward a gun control proposal which mr. ford later , i believe , espoused that called for the prohibition against the sale of the so - called " saturday night specials . "
it would have put very strict control over who owned a handgun .
i have been a hunter all my life and happen to own both shotguns , rifles , and a handgun .
and the only purpose that i would see in registering handguns and not long guns of any kind would be to prohibit the ownership of those guns by those who have used them in the commission of a crime or who have been proven to be mentally incompetent to own a gun .
i believe that limited approach to the question would be advisable , and i think adequate , but that 's as far as i would go with it .
while i was governor of georgia , although i am not a lawyer , we had complete reform of the georgia court system .
we streamlined the structure of the courts , put in administrative offices , put a unified court system in , and required that all severe sentences be reviewed for uniformity ; and , in addition to that , put forward a proposal that was adopted and used throughout my own term of office -- selection of all judges and district attorneys , prosecuting attorneys , on the basis of merit .
every time i had a vacancy on the georgia supreme court -- and i filled five of those vacancies out of seven total , and about half of the court of appeals judges , about 35 percent of the trial judges -- i was given from an objective panel the five most highly qualified persons in georgia , and from those five i always chose the first or second one .
so , merit selection of judges is the most important single criterion .
and i would institute the same kind of procedure as president , not only in judicial appointments but also in diplomatic appointments .
secondly , i think that the burger court has fairly well confirmed the major and most far - reaching and most controversial decisions of the warren court .
civil rights has been confirmed by the burger court .
it has n't been reversed .
and i do n't think there is any inclination to reverse those basic decisions -- of the one man - one vote rule , which is a very important one that struck down the unwarranted influence in the legislature of sparsely populated areas of the states .
the right of indigent or very poor accused persons to legal counsel -- i think the burger court has confirmed that basic and very controversial decision of the warren court .
also , the protection of an arrested person against unwarranted persecution in trying to get a false confession .
but now , i think there have been a couple of instances where the burger court has made technical rulings where an obviously guilty person was later found to be guilty .
and i think that in that case some of the more liberal members of the so - called warren court agreed with those decisions .
but the only thing that i have pointed out was what i 've just said , and that there was a need to clarify the technicalities so that you could n't be forced to release a person who is obviously guilty just because of a small technicality in the law .
and that 's a reversal of position by the burger court with which i do agree .
okay , i thought i answered it by saying that it would be on the basis of merit .
once the search and analysis procedure had been completed , and once i am given a list of the 5 or 7 or 10 best qualified persons in the country , i would make a selection from among those persons .
if the list was in my opinion fairly uniform , if there was no outstanding person , then i would undoubtedly choose someone who would most accurately reflect my own basic political philosophy , as best as i could determine it , which would be to continue the progress that has been made under the last two courts -- the warren court and the burger court .
i would also like to completely revise our criminal justice system to do some of the things at the federal level and court reform that i just described , as has been done in georgia and other states .
and i would like to appoint people who would be interested in helping with that .
i know chief justice burger is .
he has n't had help yet from the administration and from the congress to carry this out .
the emphasis , i think , of the court system should be to interpret the constitution and the laws equally between property protection and personal protection .
but when there is a very narrow decision -- which quite often is one that reaches the supreme court -- i think the choice should be with human rights , and that would be another factor that i would follow .
i think the answer as to the kind of person that i would select is obvious .
i had one opportunity to nominate an individual to the supreme court , and i selected the circuit court of appeals judge from illinois , john paul stevens .
i selected him because of his outstanding record as a circuit court of appeals judge .
and i was very pleased that an overwhelmingly democratic united states senate , after going into his background , came to the conclusion that he was fit and should serve , and the vote in his behalf was overwhelming .
so , i would say somebody in the format of justice stevens would be the kind of an individual that i would select in the future , as i did him in the past .
i believe , however , a comment ought to be made about the direction of the burger court vis - a - vis the court that preceded it .
it seems to me that the miranda case was a case that really made it very , very difficult for the police , the law enforcement people in this country , to do what they could to make certain that the victim of a crime was protected and that those that commit crimes were properly handled and sent to jail .
the miranda case , the burger court is gradually changing .
and i am pleased to see that there are some steps being made by the burger court to modify the so - called miranda decision .
i might make a correction of what governor carter said , speaking of gun control .
yes , it is true , i believe that the sale of saturday night specials should be cut out , but he wants the registration of handguns .
> 













  well , with all due respect to president ford , i think he ought to be ashamed of making that statement because we have the highest unemployment rate now than we had at any time between the great depression , caused by herbert hoover , and the time president ford took office .
we have got 7 1/2 million people out of jobs .
since he has been in office , 2 ?
million more american people have lost their jobs .
in the last 4 months alone , 500,000 americans have gone on the unemployment rolls .
in the last month , we 've had a net loss of 163,000 jobs .
anybody who says that the inflation rate is in good shape now ought to talk to the housewives .
one of the overwhelming results that i have seen in places is people feel that you ca n't plan any more , there is no way to make a prediction that my family might be able to own a home or to put my kids through college .
saving accounts are losing money instead of gaining money .
inflation is robbing us .
under the present administrations -- nixon 's and ford's -- we have had three times the inflation rate that we experienced under president johnson and president kennedy .
the economic growth is less than half today what it was at the beginning of this year .
and housing starts -- he compares the housing starts with last year , i do n't blame him because in 1975 we had fewer housing starts in this country , fewer homes built than any year since 1940 .
that 's 35 years .
and we 've got a 35-percent unemployment rate in many areas of this country among construction workers .
and mr. ford has n't done anything about it .
and i think this shows a callous indifference to the families that have suffered so much .
he has vetoed bills passed by congress within the congressional budget guidelines -- job opportunities for 2 million americans .
we will never have a balanced budget , we will never meet the needs of our people , we will never control the inflationary spiral as long as we have 7 ?
or 8 million people out of work who are looking for jobs .
and we have probably got 2 ?
more million people who are not looking for jobs any more because they 've given up hope .
that is a very serious indictment of this administration .
it 's probably the worst one of all .
well , that 's not exactly an accurate description of what happened .
when i was that far ahead it was immediately following the democratic convention and before the republican convention .
at that time 25 or 30 percent of the reagan supporters said that they would not support president ford , but as occurred at the end of the democratic convention , the republican party unified itself , and i think immediately following the republican convention there was about a 10-point spread .
i believe that to be accurate .
i had 49 percent ; president ford had 39 percent .
the polls are good indications of fluctuations , but they vary widely one from another , and the only poll i 've ever followed is the one that , you know , is taken on election day .
i was in 30 primaries in the spring and at first it was obvious that i did n't have any standing in the polls .
as a matter of fact , i think when gallup ran their first poll in december 1975 , they did n't even put my name on the list .
they had 35 people on the list -- my name was n't even there .
at the beginning of the year , i had about 2 percent .
so the polls , to me , are interesting , but they do n't determine my hopes or my despair .
i campaign among people .
i have never depended on powerful political figures to put me in office .
i have a direct relationship with hundreds of thousands of people around the country who actively campaign for me .
in georgia alone , for instance , i got 84 percent of the vote , and i think there were 14 people in addition to myself on the ballot , and governor wallace had been very strong in georgia .
that is an overwhelming support from my own people who know me best .
and today we have about 500 georgians at their own expense , just working people who believe in me , spread around the country involved in the political campaign .
so the polls are interesting , but i do n't know how to explain the fluctuations .
i think a lot of it depends on current events -- sometimes foreign affairs , sometimes domestic affairs .
but i think our core of support among those who are crucial to the election has been fairly steady .
and my success in the primary season was , i think , notable for a newcomer , from someone who 's outside of washington , who never has been a part of the washington establishment .
and i think that we will have a good result on november 2 for myself and i hope for the country .
the major purpose of an election for president is to choose a leader , someone who can analyze the depths of feeling in our country , to set a standard for our people to follow , to inspire people to reach for greatness , to correct our defects , to answer difficulties , to bind ourselves together in a spirit of unity .
i do n't believe the present administration has done that .
we have been discouraged and we 've been alienated , sometimes we 've been embarrassed , sometimes we 've been ashamed .
our people are out of work , and there is a sense of withdrawal .
but our country is innately very strong .
mr. ford is a good and decent man , but he has been in office now more than 800 days , approaching almost as long as john kennedy was in office .
i would like to ask the american people what has been accomplished .
a lot remains to be done .
my own background is different from his .
i was a school board member and a library board member , i served on a hospital authority , and i was in the state senate , and i was governor and i am an engineer , a naval officer , a farmer , a businessman .
i believe we require someone who can work harmoniously with the congress and can work closely with the people of this country , and who can bring a new image and a new spirit to washington .
our tax structure is a disgrace and needs to be reformed , i was governor of georgia for 4 years .
we never increased sales taxes or income tax or property taxes .
as a matter of fact , the year before we went out of office we gave a $ 50 million refund to the property taxpayers of georgia .
we spend $ 600 per person in this country -- every man , woman , and child - for health care .
we still rank 15th among all of the nations in the world in infant mortality , and our cancer rate is higher than any country in the world .
we do n't have good health care .
we could have it .
employment ought to be restored to our people .
we have become almost a welfare state .
we spend now 700 percent more on unemployment compensation than we did 8 years ago when the republicans took over the white house .
our people want to go back to work .
our education system can be improved .
secrecy ought to be stripped away from government , and a maximum of personal privacy ought to be maintained .
our housing programs have gone bad .
it used to be that the average family could own a house , but now less than a third of our people can afford to buy their own homes .
the budget was more grossly out of balance last year than ever before in the history of our country--$65 billion -- primarily because our people are not at work .
inflation is robbing us , as we 've already discussed , and the government bureaucracy is just a horrible mess .
this does n't have to be .
i do n't know all of the answers .
nobody could .
but i do know that if the president of the united states and the congress of the united states and the people of the united states said , " i believe our nation is greater than what we are now , " i believe that if we are inspired , if we can achieve a degree of unity , if we can set our goals high enough and work toward recognized goals with industry and labor and agriculture along with government at all levels , we can achieve great things .
we might have to do it slowly .
there are no magic answers to it , but i believe together we can make great progress , we can correct our difficult mistakes and answer those very tough questions .
i believe in the greatness of our country , and i believe the american people are ready for a change in washington .
we have been drifting too long .
we have been dormant too long .
we have been discouraged too long .
and we have not set an example for our own people , but i believe that we can now establish in the white house a good relationship with congress , a good relationship with our people , set very high goals for our country , and with inspiration and hard work we can achieve great things and let the world know -- that 's very important , but more importantly , let the people in our own country realize -- that we still live in the greatest nation on earth .
thank you very much .

, moderator of the second of the historic debates of the 1976 campaign between gerald r. ford of michigan , republican candidate for president , and jimmy carter of georgia , democratic candidate for president .
thank you , president ford , and thank you , governor carter , for being with us tonight .
the debate takes place before an audience in the palace of fine arts theatre in san francisco .
an estimated 100 million americans are watching on television as well .
san francisco was the site of the signing of the united nations charter 31 years ago .
thus , it is an appropriate place to hold this debate , the subject of which is foreign and defense issues .
the questioners tonight are max frankel , associate editor of the new york times , henry l. trewhitt , diplomatic correspondent of the baltimore sun , and richard valeriani , diplomatic correspondent of nbc news .
the ground rules tonight are basically the same as they were for the first debate 2 weeks ago .
the questions will be alternated between candidates .
by the toss of a coin , governor carter will take the first question .
each question sequence will be as follows : the question will be asked , and the candidate will have up to 3 minutes to answer .
his opponent will have up to 2 minutes to respond .
and prior to the response , the questioner may ask a follow - up question to clarify the candidate 's answer , when necessary , with up to 2 minutes to reply .
each candidate will have 3 minutes for a closing statement at the end .
president ford and governor carter do not have notes or prepared remarks with them this evening , but they may take notes during the debate and refer to them .
mr. frankel , you have the first question for governor carter .
> 



  well , i think this republican administration has been almost all style and spectacular and not substance .
we 've got a chance tonight to talk about , first of all , leadership , the character of our country , and a vision of the future .
in every one of these instances , the ford administration has failed .
and i hope tonight that i and mr. ford will have a chance to discuss the reason for those failures .
our country is not strong any more ; we 're not respected any more .
we can only be strong overseas if we 're strong at home , and when i become president , we 'll not only be strong in those areas but also in defense -- a defense capability second to none .
we 've lost , in our foreign policy , the character of the american people .
we 've ignored or excluded the american people and the congress from participation in the shaping of our foreign policy .
it 's been one of secrecy and exclusion .
in addition to that , we 've had a chance to become now , contrary to our long - standing beliefs and principles , the arms merchant of the whole world .
we 've tried to buy success from our enemies , and at the same time we 've excluded from the process the normal friendship of our allies .
in addition to that , we 've become fearful to compete with the soviet union on an equal basis .
we talk about detente .
the soviet union knows what they want in detente , and they 've been getting it .
we have not known what we 've wanted , and we 've been out - traded in almost every instance .
the other point i want to make is about our defense .
we 've got to be a nation blessed with the defense capability that 's efficient , tough , capable , well organized , narrowly focused fighting capability .
the ability to fight if necessary is the best way to avoid the chance for or the requirement to fight .
and the last point i want to make is this : mr. ford , mr. kissinger have continued on with the policies and failures of richard nixon .
even the republican platform has criticized the lack of leadership in mr. ford , and they 've criticized the foreign policy of this administration .
this is one instance where i agree with the republican platform .
i might say this in closing , and that is , that as far as foreign policy goes , mr. kissinger has been the president of this country .
mr. ford has shown an absence of leadership and an absence of a grasp of what this country is and what it ought to be .
that 's got to be changed , and that is one of the major issues in this campaign of 1976 .
well , mr. ford , unfortunately , has just made a statement that 's not true .
i have never advocated a communist government for italy ; that would , obviously , be a ridiculous thing for anyone to do who wanted to be president of the country .
i think that this is an instance for deliberate distortion , and this has occurred also in the question about defense .
as a matter of fact , i 've never advocated any cut of $ 15 billion in our defense budget .
as a matter of fact , mr. ford has made a political football out of the defense budget .
about a year ago , he cut the pentagon budget $ 6.8 billion .
after he fired james schlesinger the political heat got so great that he added back about $ 3 billion .
when ronald reagan won the texas primary election , mr. ford added back another $ 1 1/2 billion .
immediately before the kansas city convention he added back another $ 1.8 billion in the defense budget .
and his own office of management and budget testified that he had a $ 3 billion cut insurance added to the defense budget under the pressure from the pentagon .
obviously , this is another indication of trying to use the defense budget for political purposes , which he 's trying to do tonight .
now , we went into south africa late , after great britain , rhodesia , the black nations had been trying to solve this problem for many , many years .
we did n't go in until right before the election , similar to what was taking place in 1972 , when mr. kissinger announced peace is at hand just before the election at that time .
and we have weakened our position in nato , because the other countries in europe supported the democratic forces in portugal long before we did .
we stuck to the portugal dictatorships much longer than other democracies did in this world .
well , i 'm not going to name my cabinet before i get elected ; i 've got a little ways to go before i start doing that .
but i have an adequate background , i believe .
i am a graduate of the u. s. naval academy , the first military graduate since eisenhower .
i 've served as governor of georgia and have traveled extensively in foreign countries -- in south america , central america , europe , the middle east , and in japan .
i 've traveled the last 21 months among the people of this country .
i 've talked to them , and i 've listened .
and i 've seen at firsthand , in a very vivid way , the deep hurt that 's come to this country in the aftermath of vietnam and cambodia and chile and pakistan and angola and watergate , cia revelations .
what we were formerly so proud of -- the strength of our country , its moral integrity , the representation in foreign affairs of what our people are , what our constitution stands for -- has been gone .
and in the secrecy that has surrounded our foreign policy in the last few years , the american people and the congress have been excluded .
i believe i know what this country ought to be .
i 've been one who 's loved my nation , as many americans do .
and i believe that there is no limit placed on what we can be in the future if we can harness the tremendous resources -- militarily , economically -- and the stature of our people , the meaning of our constitution in the future .
every time we 've made a serious mistake in foreign affairs , it 's been because the american people have been excluded from the process .
if we can just tap the intelligence and ability , the sound commonsense , and the good judgment of the american people , we can once again have a foreign policy to make us proud instead of ashamed .
and i 'm not going to exclude the american people from that process in the future , as mr. ford and kissinger have done .
this is what it takes to have a sound foreign policy : strong at home , strong defense , permanent commitments , not betray the principles of our country , and involve the american people and the congress in the shaping of our foreign policy .
every time mr. ford speaks from a position of secrecy -- in negotiations and secret treaties that have been pursued and achieved , in supporting dictatorships , in ignoring human rights -- we are weak and the rest of the world knows it .
so these are the ways that we can restore the strength of our country .
and they do n't require long experience in foreign policy -- nobody has that except a president who served a long time or a secretary of state .
but my background , my experience , my knowledge of the people of this country , my commitment to our principles that do n't change -- those are the best bases to correct the horrible mistakes of this administration and restore our own country to a position of leadership in the world .
first of all , i would quit conducting the decisionmaking process in secret , as has been a characteristic of mr. kissinger and mr. ford .
in many instances we 've made agreements , like in vietnam , that have been revealed later on to our embarrassment .
recently , ian smith , the president of rhodesia , announced that he had unequivocal commitments from mr. kissinger that he could not reveal .
the american people do n't know what those commitments are .
we 've seen in the past a destruction of elected governments , like in chile , and the strong support of military dictatorship there .
these kinds of things have hurt us very much .
i would restore the concept of the fireside chat , which was an integral part of the administration of franklin roosevelt .
and i would also restore the involvement of the congress .
when harry truman was president , he was not afraid to have a strong secretary of defense -- dean acheson , george marshall were strong secretaries of state -- excuse me , state .
but he also made sure that there was a bipartisan support .
the members of congress , arthur vandenburg , walter george , were part of the process .
and before our nation made a secret agreement and before we made a bluffing statement , we were sure that we had the backing not only of the president and the secretary of state but also of the congress and the people .
this is a responsibility of the president , and i think it 's very damaging to our country for mr. ford to have turned over this responsibility to the secretary of state .
well , in the first place , i am not criticizing his holiness the pope .
i was talking about mr. ford .
the fact is that secrecy has surrounded the decisions made by the ford administration .
in the case of the helsinki agreement , it may have been a good agreement at the beginning , but we have failed to enforce the so - called basket 3 part , which ensures the right of people to migrate , to join their families , to be free to speak out .
the soviet union is still jamming radio free europe .
radio free europe is being jammed .
we 've also seen a very serious problem with the so - called sonnenfeldt document which , apparently , mr. ford has just endorsed , which said that there is an organic linkage between the eastern european countries and the soviet union .
and i would like to see mr. ford convince the polish americans and the czech americans and the hungarian americans in this county that those countries do n't live under the domination and supervision of the soviet union behind the iron curtain .
we also have seen mr. ford exclude himself from access to the public .
he has n't had a tough , cross - examination - type press conference in over 30 days .
one press conference he had without sound .
he 's also shown a weakness in yielding to pressure .
the soviet union , for instance , put pressure on mr. ford , and he refused to see a symbol of human freedom recognized around the world -- alexander solzhenitsyn .
the arabs have put pressure on mr. ford , and he 's yielded , and he has permitted a boycott by the arab countries of american businesses who trade with israel , who have american jews owning or taking part in the management of american companies .
his own secretary of commerce had to be subpenaed by the congress to reveal the names of businesses who were subject to this boycott .
they did n't volunteer the information ; he had to be subpenaed .
and the last thing i 'd like to say is this : this grain deal with the soviet union in ' 72 was terrible , and mr. ford made up for it with three embargoes -- one against our own ally in japan .
that 's not the way to run our foreign policy , including international trade .
i would never single out food as a trade embargo item .
if i ever decided to impose an embargo because of a crisis in international relationships , it would include all shipments of all equipment .
for instance , if the arab countries ever again declare an embargo against our nation on oil , i would consider that not a military but an economic declaration of war .
and i would respond instantly and in kind .
i would not ship that arab country anything -- no weapons , no spare parts for weapons , no oil - drilling rigs , no oil pipe , no nothing .
i would n't single out just food .
another thing i 'd like to say is this : in our international trade , as i said in my opening statement , we have become the arms merchant of the world .
when this republican administration came into office , we were shipping about $ 1 billion worth of arms overseas ; now $ 10 to $ 12 billion worth of arms overseas to countries that quite often use these weapons to fight each other .
the shift in emphasis has been very disturbing to me , speaking about the middle east .
under the last democratic administration 60 percent of all weapons that went into the middle east were for israel .
nowadays--75 percent were for israel before -- now 60 percent go to the arab countries , and this does not include iran .
if you include iran , our present shipment of weapons to the middle east -- only 20 percent goes to israel .
this is a deviation from idealism ; it 's a deviation from a commitment to our major ally in the middle east , which is israel ; it 's a yielding to economic pressure on the part of the arabs on the oil issue ; and it 's also a tremendous indication that under the ford administration , we have not addressed the energy policy adequately .
we still have no comprehensive energy policy in this country , and it 's an overall sign of weakness .
when we are weak at home economically -- high unemployment , high inflation , a confused government , a wasteful defense establishment - this encourages the kind of pressure that 's been put on us successfully .
it would have been inconceivable 10 , 15 years ago for us to be brought to our knees with an arab oil embargo .
but it was done 3 years ago and they 're still putting pressure on us from the arab countries to our discredit around the world .
these are the weaknesses that i see , and i believe it 's not just a matter of idealism .
it 's a matter of being tough .
it 's a matter of being strong .
it 's a matter of being consistent .
our priorities ought to be , first of all , to meet our own military needs ; secondly , to meet the needs of our allies and friends , and only then should we ship military equipment to foreign countries .
as a matter of fact , iran is going to get 80 f-14 's before we even meet our own air force orders for f-14 's , and the shipment of spruance class destroyers to iran are much more highly sophisticated than the spruance class destroyers that are presently being delivered to our own navy .
this is ridiculous , and it ought to be changed .
if -- iran is not an arab country , as you know , it 's a moslem country .
but if saudi arabia should declare an oil embargo against us , then i would consider that an economic declaration of war .
and i would make sure that the saudis understood this ahead of time , so there would be no doubt in their mind .
i think under those circumstances , they would refrain from pushing us to our knees as they did in 1973 with the previous oil embargo .
i 'd like to go back just one moment to the previous question , where mr. ford , i think , confused the issue by trying to say that we 're shipping israel 40 percent of our aid .
as a matter of fact , during this current year , we are shipping iran -- or have contracted to ship to iran -- about $ 7 ?
billion worth of arms and also to saudi arabia about $ 7 ?
billion worth of arms .
also , in 1975 we almost brought israel to their knees after the yom kippur war by the so - called reassessment of our relationship to israel .
we , in effect , tried to make israel the scapegoat for the problems in the middle east .
and this weakened our relationship with israel a great deal and put a cloud on the total commitment that our people feel toward the israelis .
there ought to be a clear , unequivocal commitment without change to israel .
in the far east i think we need to continue to be strong , and i would certainly pursue the normalization of relationships with the people 's republic of china .
we opened up a great opportunity in 1972 - -which has pretty well been frittered away under mr. ford -- that ought to be a constant inclination toward friendship .
but i would never let that friendship with the people 's republic of china stand in the way of the preservation of the independence and freedom of the people on taiwan .
well , always in the past we have had an ability to have a strong defense and also to have a strong domestic economy and also to be strong in our reputation and influence within the community of nations .
these characteristics of our country have been endangered under mr. ford .
we are no longer respected .
in a showdown vote in the united nations or in any other international council we are lucky to get 20 percent of the other nations to vote with us .
our allies feel that we 've neglected them .
the so - called nixon shocks against japan have weakened our relationships there .
under this administration we have also had an inclination to keep separate the european countries , thinking that if they are separate , then we can dominate them and proceed with our secret lone ranger - type diplomatic efforts .
i would also like to point out that we in this country have let our economy go down the drain -- the worst inflation since the great depression , the highest unemployment of any developed nation of the world .
we have a higher unemployment rate in this country than great britain , than west germany ; our unemployment rate is twice as high as it is in italy ; it 's three or four times as high as it is in japan .
and that terrible circumstance in this country is exported overseas .
we comprise about 30 percent of the world 's economic trade power influence .
and when we are weak at home , weaker than all our allies , that weakness weakens the whole free world .
so , strong economy is very important .
another thing that we need to do is to reestablish the good relationships that we ought to have between the united states and our natural allies and friends - they have felt neglected .
and using that base of strength , and using the idealism , the honesty , the predictability , the commitment , the integrity of our own country -- that 's where our strength lies .
and that would permit us to deal with the developing nations in a position of strength .
under this administration , we 've bad a continuation of a so - called " balance of power politics " where everything is looked on as a struggle between us on the one side and the soviet union on the other .
our allies , the smaller countries , get trampled in the rush .
what we need is to try to seek individualized , bilateral relationships with countries regardless of their size and to establish world order politics , which means we want to preserve peace through strength .
we also want to revert back to the stature and the respect that our country had in previous administrations .
now , i ca n't say when this can come , but i can guarantee it will not come if gerald ford is reelected and this present policy is continued .
it will come if i am elected .
let me say very quickly that under president johnson , in spite of the massive investment in the vietnam war , he turned over a balanced budget to mr. nixon .
the unemployment rate was less than 4 percent .
the inflation rate under kennedy and johnson was about 2 percent -- out - third what it is under this administration .
so , we did have at that time , with good management , the ability to do both .
i do n't think anybody can say that johnson and kennedy neglected the poor and the destitute people in this country or around the world .
but i can say this : the number one responsibility of any president , above all else , is to guarantee the security of our nation , an ability to be free of the threat of attack or blackmail and to carry out our obligations to our allies and friends and to carry out a legitimate foreign policy .
they must go hand in hand .
but the security of this nation has got to come first .
rabin said that our relations were never better .
> 













  well , mr. ford acts like he is running for president for the first time .
he has been in office 2 years , and there has been absolutely no progress made toward a new salt agreement .
he has learned the date of the expiration of salt i , apparently .
we have seen in this world a development of a tremendous threat to us .
as a nuclear engineer myself , i know the limitations and capabilities of atomic power .
i also know that as far as the human beings on this earth are concerned , that the nonproliferation of atomic weapons is number one .
only in the last few days , with the election approaching , has mr. ford taken any interest in a nonproliferation movement .
i advocated last may , in a speech at the united nations , that we move immediately as a nation to declare a complete moratorium on the testing of all nuclear devices , both weapons and peaceful devices , that we not ship any more atomic fuel to a country that refuses to comply with strict controls over the waste which can be reprocessed into explosives .
i 've also advocated that we stop the sale by germany and france of reprocessing plants to pakistan and brazil .
mr. ford has n't moved on this .
we also need to provide an adequate supply of enriched uranium .
mr. ford again , under pressure from the atomic energy lobby , has insisted that this reprocessing or rather reenrichment be done by private industry and not by the existing government plants .
this kind of confusion and absence of leadership has let us drift now for 2 years with the constantly increasing threat of atomic weapons throughout the world .
we now have five nations that have atomic bombs that we know about .
if we continue under mr. ford 's policy , by 1985 or ' 90 we will have 20 nations that have the capability of exploding atomic weapons .
this has got to be stopped .
that is one of the major challenges and major undertakings that i will assume as the next president .
no , it 's not just campaign rhetoric .
i think that militarily we are as strong as any nation on earth .
i think we 've got to stay that way and continue to increase our capabilities to meet any potential threat .
but as far as strength derived from commitment to principles ; as far as strength derived from the unity within our country ; as far as strength derived from the people , the congress , the secretary of state , the president , sharing in the evolution and carrying out of a foreign policy ; as far as strength derived from the respect of our own allies and friends , their assurance that we will be staunch in our commitment , that we will not deviate , and we will give them adequate attention ; as far as strength derived from doing what is right , caring for the poor , providing food , becoming the breadbasket of the world instead of the arms merchant of the world -- in those respects we are not strong .
also , we will never be strong again overseas unless we are strong at home .
and with our economy in such terrible disarray , and getting worse by the month -- we have got 500,000 more americans unemployed today than we had 3 months ago ; we have got 2 1/2 million more americans out of work now than we had when mr. ford took office -- this kind of deterioration in our economic strength is bound to weaken us around the world .
and we not only have problems at home but we export those problems overseas .
so , as far as the respect of our own people toward our own government , as far as participation in the shaping of concepts and commitments , as far as a trust of our country among the nations of the world , as far as dependence of our country in meeting the needs and obligations that we 've expressed to our allies , as far as the respect of our country , even among our potential adversaries , we are weak .
potentially , we are strong .
under this administration that strength has not been realized .
i noticed that mr. ford did n't comment on the prisons in chile .
this is a typical example , maybe of many others , where this administration overthrew an elected government and helped to establish a military dictatorship .
this has not been an ancient history story .
last year , under mr. ford , of all the food for peace that went to south america , 85 percent went to the military dictatorship in chile .
another point i want to make is this : he says we have to move from one area of the world to another .
that is one of the problems with this administration 's so - called shuttle diplomacy .
while the secretary of state is in one country , there are almost 150 others that are wondering what we are going to do next , what will be the next secret agreement .
we do n't have a comprehensive , understandable foreign policy that deals with world problems or even regional problems .
another thing that concerned me was what mr. ford said about unemployment , that insinuating that under johnson and kennedy that unemployment could only be held down when this country is at war .
karl marx said that the free enterprise system in a democracy can only continue to exist when they are at war or preparing for war .
karl marx was the grandfather of communism .
i do n't agree with that statement ; i hope mr. ford does n't , either .
he has put pressure on the congress -- and i do n't believe mr. ford would even deny this -- to hold up on nonproliferation legislation until the congress agreed for an $ 8 billion program for private industry to start producing enriched uranium .
and the last thing i want to make is this : he talks about peace , and i am thankful for peace .
we were peaceful when mr. ford went into office , but he and mr. kissinger and others tried to start a new vietnam in angola .
and it was only the outcry of the american people and the congress when this secret deal was discovered that prevented our renewed involvement in that conflagration which was taking place there .
well , here again , the panamanian question is one that has been confused by mr. ford .
he had directed his diplomatic representative to yield to the panamanians full sovereignty over the panama canal zone at the end of a certain period of time .
when mr. reagan raised this question in florida , mr. ford not only disavowed his instructions but he also even dropped , parenthetically , the use of the word " detente."i would never give up complete control or practical control of the panama canal zone , but i would continue to negotiate with the panamanians .
when the original treaty was signed back in the early 1900 's , when theodore roosevelt was president , panama retained sovereignty over the panama canal zone .
we retained control as though we had sovereignty .
now , i would be willing to go ahead with negotiations .
i believe that we could share more fully responsibilities for the panama canal zone with panama .
i would be willing to continue to raise the payment for shipment of goods through the panama canal zone .
i might even be willing to reduce to some degree our military emplacements in the panama canal zone , but i would not relinquish practical control of the panama canal zone any time in the foreseeable future .
accounting office has just put out a report suggesting that you shot from the hip in the mayaguez rescue mission and that you ignored diplomatic messages saying that a peaceful solution was in prospect .
why did n't you do more diplomatically at the time ?
and a related question : did the white i -- house try to prevent the release of that report ?
> 



  governor carter .
> 

  well , i am reluctant to comment on the recent report .
i have n't read it .
i think the american people have only one requirement -- that the facts about mayaguez be given to them accurately and completely .
mr. ford has been there for 18 months .
he had the facts that were released today immediately after the mayaguez incident .
i understand that the report today is accurate .
mr. ford has said , i believe , that it was accurate and that the white house made no attempt to block the issuing of that report .
i do n't know if that is exactly accurate or not .
i understand that both the department of state and the defense department have approved the accuracy of today 's report , or yesterday 's report , and also the national security agency .
i do n't know what was right or what was wrong or what was done .
the only thing i believe is that whatever the knowledge was that mr. ford had should have been given to the american people 18 months ago , immediately after the mayaguez incident occurred .
this is what the american people want .
when something happens that endangers our security , or when something happens that threatens our stature in the world , or when american people are endangered by the actions of a foreign country , just 40 sailors on the mayaguez , we obviously have to move aggressively and quickly to rescue them .
but then , after the immediate action is taken , i believe the president has an obligation to tell the american people the truth and not wait 18 months later for the report to be issued .
i believe that the boycott of american businesses by the arab countries , because those businesses trade with israel or because they have american jews who are owners or directors in the company , is an absolute disgrace .
this is the first time that i remember in the history of our country when we 've let a foreign country circumvent or change our bill of rights .
i will do everything i can as president to stop the boycott of american businesses by the arab countries .
it 's not a matter of diplomacy or trade with me ; it 's a matter of morality .
and i do n't believe that the arab countries will pursue it when we have a strong president who will protect the integrity of our country , the commitment of our constitution and bill of rights , and protect people in this country who happen to be jews -- it may later be catholics , it may later be baptists -- who are threatened by some foreign country .
but we ought to stand staunch .
and i think it is a disgrace that so far mr. ford 's administration has blocked the passage of legislation that would have revealed by law every instance of the boycott , and it would have prevented the boycott from continuing .
one of the most embarrassing failures of the ford administration , and one that touches specifically on human rights , is his refusal to appoint a presidential commission to go to vietnam , to go to laos , to go to cambodia and try to trade for the release of information about those who are missing in action in those wars .
this is what the families of mia 's want .
so far , mr. ford has not done it .
we have had several fragmentary efforts by members of the congress and by private citizens .
several months ago the vietnam government said we are ready to sit down and negotiate for release of information on mia 's .
so far , mr. ford has not responded .
i also would never formalize relationships with vietnam nor permit them to join the united nations until they have taken this action .
but that is not enough .
we need to have an active and aggressive action on the part of the president , the leader of this country , to seek out every possible way to get that information which has kept the mia families in despair and doubt , and mr. ford has just not done it .
the purpose of this debate and the outcome of the election will determine three basic things -- leadership , upholding the principles of our country , and proper priorities and commitments for the future .
this election will also determine what kind of world we leave our children .
will it be a nightmare world , threatened with the proliferation of atomic bombs , not just in five major countries , but dozens of smaller countries that have been permitted to develop atomic weapons because of a failure of our top leadership to stop proliferation ?
will we have a world of hunger and barred , and will we be living in an armed camp , stripped of our friendships and allies , hiding behind a tight defense that has been drawn in around us because we are fearful of the outside world ?
will we have a government of secrecy that excludes the american people from participation in making basic decisions and therefore covers up mistakes and makes it possible for our government -- our government -- to depart from the principles of our constitution and bill of rights ?
or will we have a world of peace with the threat of atomic weapons eliminated , with full trade , with our people at work , inflation controlled , openness in government , our people proud once again ; congress , citizens , president , secretary of state , working in harmony and unity toward a common future , a world where people have enough to cat , arid a world where we care about those who do n't ?
can we become a breadbasket of the world , instead of the arms merchant of the world ?
i believe we can and we ought to .
now , we have been hurt in recent years in this country , in the aftermath of vietnam , cambodia , chile , pakistan , angola , watergate , cia .
we have been hurt .
our people feel that we have lost something precious .
that 's not necessary .
i want to see our nation return to a posture and an image and a standard to make us proud once again .
i remember the world of nato and the world of point four and the world of the marshall plan and a world of the peace corps .
why ca n't we have that once again?we ought to be a beacon for nations who search for peace and who search for freedom , who search for individual liberty , who search for basic human rights .
we have n't been lately .
we can be once again .
we will never have that world leadership until we are strong at home , and we can have that strength if we return to the basic principles .
it ought not to be a strength of bombast and threats .
it ought to be a quiet strength based on the integrity of our people , the vision of the constitution , and an innate strong will and purpose that god has given us in the greatest nation on earth , the united states .

good morning .
i have two brief statements to make , and then i 'll be glad to answer questions .
i 've sent to congress this morning , a youth employment package which will consist of about $ 1/2 billion , part of the economic stimulus package .
i 've been particularly concerned in my own campaign trips around the country the last 2 years with the extraordinarily high unemployment rate among young people .
more than half the total unemployed are less than 24 years old .
and among those , say , from 16 to 19 years old , we have over 18-percent unemployment , and in some of the minority groups in urban areas more than 40 percent .
so , we 're going to try a heavy concentration of effort in several of the major departments of government to cut down unemployment among our young people .
we have , for instance , a youth conservation corps similar to what we had during the depression years known as a civilian conservation corps , the ccc .
this will be administered by the departments of agriculture and interior in the open spaces of our country .
we 'll have a youth community conservation corps in the urban areas and a heavy emphasis on training for young people leading to employment .
including existing programs , this will be about a million jobs on a permanent basis plus another million jobs during the summer .
i hope that the congress will act quickly on this proposal .
i might say that many of the members of congress have been equally concerned and have done a great deal of work on this subject even before i became president .
the other item that i 'd like to mention is one that 's already been reported to some degree .
i have long been concerned about our own nation 's stance in prohibiting american citizens to travel to foreign countries .
we also are quite eagerly assessing our own nation 's policies that violate human rights as defined by the helsinki agreement .
later on this year we 'll go to belgrade to assess the component parts of the helsinki agreement .
and i want to be sure that we do n't violate those rights .
so i 've instructed the secretary of state to remove any travel restrictions on american citizens who want to go to vietnam , to north korea , to cuba , and to cambodia .
and these restrictions will be lifted as of the 18th day of march .
i would like to point out that we still do n't have diplomatic relationships with these countries .
that 's a doubtful prospect at this time .
so , there will be some necessary precautions that ought to be taken by citizens who go there , since we do n't have our own diplomats in those countries to protect them if they should have difficulty .
i 'd be glad to answer any questions that you might have .
ms. thomas .
well , i do n't know which delegate this is or what his concerns are .
but we are still concerned about deprivation of human rights in many of the countries of the world .
i think chile would be one of those where concern has been expressed .
and i want to be sure that the american people understand that this is a very sensitive issue .
we 've tried to be broad - based in our expression of concern and , also , responsible .
at first , our policy was interpreted , i think , improperly , to deal exclusively with the soviet union .
i 've just pointed out how our own country has been at fault in some instances .
torture has been reported to us from some of the nations of the world .
we are presenting these items to the congress as required by law .
but throughout the entire world , in latin america , in our own country , in the communist nations in eastern europe , and in the soviet union , we are very much aware of the concern about human rights .
i think it 's entirely appropriate for our own country to take the leadership role and let the world say that the focal point for the preservation and protection of human rights is in the united states of america .
i 'm proud of this .
and i intend to adhere to it with the deepest possible personal commitment , and i believe i speak accurately for the american people on this subject .
i think that the remarks made by the delegate concerning our past involvement in ' chilean political affairs was inappropriate .
i did n't know about it ahead of time .
it was a personal expression of opinion by that delegate .
i think that the church committee in the senate has not found any evidence that the united states was involved in the overthrow of the allende government in chile .
there were some allegations made , i think , perhaps accurate , that we did have financial aid and other -- i think financial aid to be restrictive -- to political elements in chile that may have contributed to the change in government .
but i do n't think there has been any proof of illegalities there .
and the statements made by our delegate were his own personal statements , not representing our government 's .
no , this is within the overall economic stimulus package already presented to the congress .
the defensible border phrase , the secure borders phrase , obviously , are just semantics .
i think it 's a relatively significant development in the description of possible settlement in the middle east to talk about these things as a distinction .
the recognized borders have to be mutual .
the arab nations , the israeli nation , has to agree on permanent and recognized borders , where sovereignty is legal as mutually agreed .
defense lines may or may not conform in the foreseeable future to those legal borders .
there may be extensions of israeli defense capability beyond the permanent and recognized borders .
i think this distinction is one that is now recognized by israeli leaders .
the definition of borders on a geographical basis is one that remains to be determined .
but i think that it is important for the world to begin to see , and for the interested parties to begin to see , that there can be a distinction between the two ; the ability of israel to defend herself by international agreement or by the some .
time placement of israeli forces themselves or by monitoring stations , as has been the case in the sinai , beyond the actual sovereignty borders as mutually agreed by israel and her neighbors .
international zones could very well be part of an agreement .
and i think that i can see in a growing way , a step - by - step process where there might be a mutual agreement that the ultimate settlement , even including the border delineations , would be at a certain described point .
in an interim state , maybe 2 years , 4 years , 8 years , or more , there would be a mutual demonstration of friendship and an end to the declaration or state of war .
i think that what israel would like to have is what we would like to have : a termination of belligerence toward israel by her neighbors , a recognition of israel 's right to exist , the right to exist in peace , the opening up of borders with free trade , tourist travel , cultural exchange between israel and her neighbors ; in other words , a stabilization of the situation in the middle east without a constant threat to israel 's existence by her neighbors .
this would involve substantial withdrawal of israel 's present control over territories .
now , where that withdrawal might end , i do n't know .
i would guess it would be some minor adjustments in the 1967 borders .
but that still remains to be negotiated .
but i think this is going to be a long , tedious process .
we 're going to mount a major effort in our own government in 1977 , to bring the parties to geneva .
obviously , any agreement has to be between the parties concerned .
we will act as an intermediary when our good offices will serve well .
but i 'm not trying to predispose our own nation 's attitudes towards what might be the ultimate details of the agreement that can mean so much to world peace .
yes .
my commitment to withdraw american ground troops from korea has not changed .
i 'll be meeting this afternoon with the foreign minister of south korea .
this will be one of the matters that i will discuss .
i 've also talked to general vessey , who is in charge of our armed forces in south korea .
i think that the time period as i described in the campaign months , a 4-or 5-year time period , is appropriate .
the schedule for withdrawal of american ground troops would have to be worked out very carefully with the south korean government .
it would also have to be done with the full understanding and , perhaps , participation of japan .
i would want to leave in place in south korea , adequate ground forces owned by and controlled by the south korean government to protect themselves against any intrusion from north korea .
i would envision a continuation of american air cover for south korea over a long period of time .
but these are the basic elements , and i 'm very determined that over a period of time , as described just then , that our ground troops would be withdrawn .
i do n't think i would use the word minor withdrawals .
i think there might be minor adjustments to the 1967 , pre-1967 borders .
but that 's a matter for israel and her neighbors to decide between themselves .
i believe that we will know by , i 'd say , the middle of may , much more clearly the positions of the interested parties .
i 've not yet met nor talked to the leaders in lebanon , syria , jordan , egypt - saudi arabia , to a lesser direct participation degree .
i will meet with all these leaders between now and the middle of may. and i do n't want to try to define in any specific terms the exact delineation of borders , but i think this is obviously one of the most serious problems .
there are three basic elements : one is an ultimate commitment to complete peace in the middle east ; second , border determinations which are highly controversial and not yet been defined by either side ; and , third , dealing with the palestinian question .
and i 'm not trying to act as the one to lay down an ultimate settlement .
i do n't know what an ultimate settlement will be .
but these matters will be freely and openly debated within our own country and within the countries involved .
and i think i 've described as best i can my own position .
well , this was a subject that was well discussed during the campaign , as you remember .
i think that the 1975 housing act , i believe it was 1975 , clearly describes a requirement that communities that request federal help in establishing housing have to put forward a positive proposal to ensure a mixture of housing in the entire community without regard to race , and without regard to the economic level of the families involved .
this does not mean that every individual city block or suburban block has to ' have all different kinds of housing in it .
it does mean that the overall package , as proposed to the federal government , has to provide for a wide distribution of housing opportunities for those in minority groups or those who have a low income .
and i believe that secretary harris ' statement is compatible with that law requirement .
well , my own interest would be to minimize the use of any criminal penalties for disclosure of information .
there are other penalties that can be used without criminal charges , and i think that vice president mondale drew that distinction .
i do n't know yet what procedure we will follow .
my own hope would be that we could prevent the disclosure of intelligence information that might be damaging to our national security , rather than trying to control that problem by the imposition of legal criminal penalties .
well , i think , first of all , is a tighter control over the number of people who have access to material that 's highly sensitive , that might damage the relationship between our own country and our friends and allies .
we 've already initiated steps to that degree and we 'll be pursuing it .
as you know , admiral turner has only recently been confirmed .
he 's just now getting his presence felt in the defense communities .
i 'll be going out to the cia headquarters this afternoon to see the oath of office administered to him .
but we 'll make sure that the public knows what new policies we impose .
but the one that 's easiest to describe , and also very difficult to do , is to make sure that we do n't have too many people knowing about matters that they do n't need to know and , also , that we can protect the legitimate confidentiality of agreements between ourselves and our allies .
now , i would never permit anything that was either illegal or improper .
and we 've got a very good arrangement that was primarily set up by president ford to prevent abuses .
the intelligence oversight board is made up of three distinguished men appointed by president ford , who have complete access to any operation conducted by the intelligence forces .
senator inouye 's committee in the senate and , i think , six committees in the house also have access to this information .
of course , i 'm monitoring it myself .
and i think admiral turner 's integrity is also a guarantee that there will be no future abuses .
but that does n't mean that everything that we do in gathering intelligence on which our security might very well depend has to be revealed to the public .
and drawing of that distinction is one that 's my responsibility , and i think i can handle that .
i do n't believe that the exact vote in the senate on mr. warnke 's confirmation will have a major effect on future negotiations with the soviet union on salt .
the obvious impression that concerns me is a demonstration of lack of confidence of the senate in my own ability and attitudes as a chief negotiator .
obviously , as president , any decisions made with the russians on reduction of atomic weapons would have to be approved by me .
i have promised the joint chiefs of staff , who in the past perhaps have been bypassed in the process , that they will always know ahead of time what our position will be at the negotiating table .
i 've not promised the joint chiefs of staff that they would have the right to approve or disapprove every individual item in negotiations .
but i hope that the senate will give mr. warnke a strong vote .
i think many of the people that oppose mr. warnke just do not want to see any substantial reductions in atomic weapons , even though they are agreed to mutually by us and the soviet union or even if they are designed to reduce the threat of nuclear destruction of the world .
i feel very deeply that we ought to pursue with every possible means , an agreement with the soviet union for substantial reductions in atomic weapons .
i think mr. warnke agrees ; most of the senators agree .
so , there are a wide range of reasons for not voting for mr. warnke .
i have complete confidence in him .
and i might say there is one more very significant guard against any error that i and mr. warnke and the secretary of state and others might make .
the senate has to approve , by a two - thirds vote after complete open debate , any agreements signed with the soviet union .
so , i think that the attacks on mr. warnke are primarily by those who do n't want to see substantial reductions in nuclear weapons in the world .
i have not been asked for any documents .
and the helms case has not come to my attention , either officially or even indirectly from any of the people involved .
whether or not to proceed with the case will be the exclusive right of the justice department .
the revelation of any documents that affect our national security will be my own judgment , in this or other cases .
i ca n't respond any further than that , because that 's all i know about the subject .
well , the prosecution of the case has nothing to do with me ; that will be a judgment made by the justice department .
the actual revelation to a grand jury , or in case of a trial , if it should ever evolve , of confidential or secret material , would have to be judged by me .
it may or may not .
at that point , the responsibility for making a judgment and the responsibility for the consequences of an inaccurate judgment , if it should occur , would be my own .
i would be opposed to mass arrests , and i would be opposed to preventive detention as a general policy and even as a specific policy , unless it was an extreme case .
obviously , in a 600-page report there would be things with which we would agree and things with which we would disagree .
i 've not seen the report .
i 'm not familiar with it .
but i think the abuses in the past have in many cases exacerbated the disharmonies that brought about demonstrations , and i think the arrest of large numbers of people without warrant or preventive detention is contrary to our own best system of government .
question on the helms case , he asked you if documents have been requested .
> 

  they have not .
if they have asked for it , it has not come to my attention .
i ca n't say that somewhere in the pipeline from the justice department , the state department , the cia , or even my own counsel , that requests have been made .
but i have not been aware of them .
i 've not received any request from mr. lipshutz .
obviously , when something gets to the white house it takes time for them to staff it and give me the options i have to address and , since i 'm not an attorney , to give me some opinion on the legalities of .
but it has not come to my attention at all .
i do not know .
yes , i am .
the request was made to me to talk to mr. moore as a precondition for his releasing the police officer who now has been held about 24 hours .
i replied that i would be glad to talk to mr. moore after the police officer was released .
it is perhaps a dangerous precedent to establish .
i weighed that factor before i made my own decision .
i understand that mr. moore has promised to release the police officer after this news conference , regardless of any comments that i might make on it .
and i hope that the police officer will be released .
but if he should be released , i will talk to mr. moore .
well , you added a great deal to what i said .
in the first place , i did n't mention any particular parts of the geography around israel .
and i did n't confine the defense capability to israeli forces .
these might very well be international forces .
it might very well be a line that 's fairly broad , say , 20 kilometers or more , where demilitarization is guaranteed on both sides .
it might very well consist of outposts , electronics or , perhaps , personnel outposts as were established in the sinai region as a result of the egypt and israeli agreement .
i 'm not going to try to get more specific in saying what will or will not be the case .
but that is a possibility that might lead to the alleviation of tension there , and it 's one about which i will be discussing this matter with the representatives from the arab countries when they come .
we 've not addressed that question yet .
how to encourage , or perhaps even to force the end of wasting natural gas just for the generation of heat at central power plant stations is something that we 'll have to address .
it may be done by legislation ; it may be done by economic penalties ; it may be done by an appeal to the stationary heat producers to shift on a patriotic basis .
i ca n't yet say which of the proposals will be mandatory and which will be voluntary .
the soviet union , so far as i know , still would like to include the cruise missile question in the present negotiations .
they do n't want to discuss backfire bomber at all .
and my hope has been and is that by the exclusion of both those controversial items , which will require long and tedious negotiations , that we might move to a rapid agreement at salt ii and immediately begin to discuss , for instance , the backfire bombers , the cruise missiles in subsequent negotiations .
but i do not have any indication yet that the soviets have changed their position on that issue .
again , i think you have two approaches to the question .
i have proposed both directly and indirectly to the soviet union , publicly and privately , that we try to identify those items on which there is relatively close agreement -- not completely yet , because details are very difficult on occasion .
but i have , for instance , suggested that we forgo the opportunity to arm satellite bodies and also to forgo the opportunity to destroy observation satellites .
we 've also proposed that the indian ocean be completely demilitarized , that a comprehensive test ban be put into effect , that prior notification of test missile launchings be exchanged .
and i would like to see any of these items on which the soviets will agree quickly , be concluded , and then get down to the much more difficult negotiations on much more drastic , overall commitments to atomic weapons , leading ultimately to the complete elimination of atomic weapons from the face of the earth .
this is going to be a long , slow , tedious process .
but i think if we and the soviets could agree on the easier items -- and none of them are very easy -- quickly , it would show good faith .
i think it would let the world know that we are serious in stopping once and for all what has been a continuous and rapid escalation in atomic weapon capabilities since they were first evolved .
thank you very much .

