first , let me thank you , mr. president , and vice president kagame , and your wives for making hillary and me and our delegation feel so welcome .
i 'd also like to thank the young students who met us and the musicians , the dancers who were outside .
i thank especially the survivors of the genocide and those who are working to rebuild your country for spending a little time with us before we came in here .
i have a great delegation of americans with me , leaders of our government , leaders of our congress , distinguished american citizens .
we 're all very grateful to be here .
we thank the diplomatic corps for being here , and the members of the rwandan government , and especially the citizens .
i have come today to pay the respects of my nation to all who suffered and all who perished in the rwandan genocide .
it is my hope that through this trip , in every corner of the world today and tomorrow , their story will be told ; that 4 years ago in this beautiful , green , lovely land , a clear and conscious decision was made by those then in power that the peoples of this country would not live side by side in peace .
during the 90 days that began on april 6 , in 1994 , rwanda experienced the most extensive slaughter in this blood - filled century we are about to leave -- families murdered in their homes , people hunted down as they fled by soldiers and militia , through farmland and woods as if they were animals .
from kibuye in the west to kibungo in the east , people gathered seeking refuge in churches by the thousands , in hospitals , in schools .
and when they were found , the old and the sick , the women and children alike , they were killed -- killed because their identity card said they were tutsi or because they had a tutsi parent or because someone thought they looked like a tutsi or slain , like thousands of hutus , because they protected tutsis or would not countenance a policy that sought to wipe out people who just the day before , and for years before , had been their friends and neighbors .
the government - led effort to exterminate rwanda 's tutsi and moderate hutus , as you know better than me , took at last a million lives .
scholars of these sorts of events say that the killers , armed mostly with machetes and clubs , nonetheless did their work 5 times as fast as the mechanized gas chambers used by the nazis .
it is important that the world know that these killings were not spontaneous or accidental .
it is important that the world hear what your president just said : they were most certainly not the result of ancient tribal struggles .
indeed , these people had lived together for centuries before the events the president described began to unfold .
these events grew from a policy aimed at the systematic destruction of a people .
the ground for violence was carefully prepared , the airwaves poisoned with hate , casting the tutsis as scapegoats for the problems of rwanda , denying their humanity .
all of this was done , clearly , to make it easy for otherwise reluctant people to participate in wholesale slaughter .
lists of victims , name by name , were actually drawn up in advance .
today , the images of all that , haunt us all : the dead choking the kigara river , floating to lake victoria .
in their fate , we are reminded of the capacity for people everywhere , not just in rwanda , and certainly not just in africa but the capacity for people everywhere , to slip into pure evil .
we can not abolish that capacity , but we must never accept it .
and we know it can be overcome .
the international community , together with nations in africa , must bear its share of responsibility for this tragedy , as well .
we did not act quickly enough after the killing began .
we should not have allowed the refugee camps to become safe havens for the killers .
we did not immediately call these crimes by their rightful name : genocide .
we can not change the past , but we can and must do everything in our power to help you build a future without fear and full of hope .
we owe to those who died and to those who survived who loved them , our every effort to increase our vigilance and strengthen our stand against those who would commit such atrocities in the future , here or elsewhere .
indeed , we owe to all the peoples of the world who are at risk because each bloodletting hastens the next as the value of human life is degraded and violence becomes tolerated , the unimaginable becomes more conceivable -- we owe to all the people in the world our best efforts to organize ourselves so that we can maximize the chances of preventing these events .
and where they can not be prevented , we can move more quickly to minimize the horror .
so let us challenge ourselves to build a world in which no branch of humanity , because of national , racial , ethnic , or religious origin , is again threatened with destruction because of those characteristics of which people should rightly be proud .
let us work together as a community of civilized nations to strengthen our ability to prevent and , if necessary , to stop genocide .
to that end , i am directing my administration to improve , with the international community , our system for identifying and spotlighting nations in danger of genocidal violence , so that we can assure worldwide awareness of impending threats .
it may seem strange to you here , especially the many of you who lost members of your family , but all over the world there were people like me sitting in offices , day after day after day , who did not fully appreciate the depth and the speed with which you were being engulfed by this unimaginable terror .
we have seen , too -- and i want to say again -- that genocide can occur anywhere .
it is not an african phenomenon and must never be viewed as such .
we have seen it in industrialized europe ; we have seen it in asia .
we must have global vigilance .
and never again must we be shy in the face of the evidence .
secondly , we must , as an international community , have the ability to act when genocide threatens .
we are working to create that capacity here in the great lakes region , where the memory is still fresh .
this afternoon in entebbe leaders from central and eastern africa will meet with me to launch an effort to build a coalition to prevent genocide in this region .
i thank the leaders who have stepped forward to make this commitment .
we hope the effort can be a model for all the world , because our sacred task is to work to banish this greatest crime against humanity .
events here show how urgent the work is .
in the northwest part of your country , attacks by those responsible for the slaughter in 1994 continue today .
we must work as partners with rwanda to end this violence and allow your people to go on rebuilding your lives and your nation .
third , we must work now to remedy the consequences of genocide .
the united states has provided assistance to rwanda to settle the uprooted and restart its economy , but we must do more .
i am pleased that america will become the first nation to contribute to the new genocide survivors fund .
we will contribute this year $ 2 million , continue our support in the years to come , and urge other nations to do the same , so that survivors and their communities can find the care they need and the help they must have .
mr. president , to you , and to you , mr. vice president , you have shown great vision in your efforts to create a single nation in which all citizens can live freely and securely .
as you pointed out , rwanda was a single nation before the european powers met in berlin to carve up africa .
america stands with you , and will continue helping the people of rwanda to rebuild their lives and society .
you spoke passionately this morning in our private meeting about the need for grassroots efforts , for the development projects which are bridging divisions and clearing a path to a better future .
we will join with you to strengthen democratic institutions , to broaden participation , to give all rwandans a greater voice in their own governance .
the challenges you face are great , but your commitment to lasting reconciliation and inclusion is firm .
fourth , to help ensure that those who survived , in the generations to come , never again suffer genocidal violence , nothing is more vital than establishing the rule of law .
there can be no place in rwanda that lasts without a justice system that is recognized as such .
we applaud the efforts of the rwandan government to strengthen civilian and military justice systems .
i am pleased that our great lakes justice initiative will invest $ 30 million to help create throughout the region judicial systems that are impartial , credible , and effective .
in rwanda these funds will help to support courts , prosecutors , and police , military justice , and cooperation at the local level .
we will also continue to pursue justice through our strong backing for the international criminal tribunal for rwanda .
the united states is the largest contributor to this tribunal .
we are frustrated , as you are , by the delays in the tribunal 's work .
as we know , we must do better .
now that administrative improvements have begun , however , the tribunal should expedite cases through group trials and fulfill its historic mission .
we are prepared to help , among other things , with witness relocation , so that those who still fear can speak the truth in safety .
and we will support the war crimes tribunal for as long as it is needed to do its work , until the truth is clear and justice is rendered .
fifth , we must make it clear to all those who would commit such acts in the future that they too must answer for their acts , and they will .
in rwanda , we must hold accountable all those who may abuse human rights , whether insurgents or soldiers .
internationally , as we meet here , talks are underway at the united nations to establish a permanent international criminal court .
rwanda and the difficulties we have had with this special tribunal underscores the need for such a court .
and the united states will work to see that it is created .
i know that in the face of all you have endured , optimism can not come easily to any of you .
yet i have just spoken , as i said , with several rwandans who survived the atrocities , and just listening to them gave me reason for hope .
you see countless stories of courage around you every day as you go about your business here , men and women who survived and go on , children who recover the light in their eyes remind us that at the dawn of a new millennium there is only one crucial division among the peoples of the earth .
and believe me , after over 5 years of dealing with these problems , i know it is not the divisions between hutu and tutsi or serb or croatian ; and muslim and bosnian or arab and jew ; or catholic and protestant in ireland , or black and white .
it is really the line between those who embrace the common humanity we all share and those who reject it .
it is the line between those who find meaning in life through respect and cooperation and who , therefore , embrace someone to look down on , someone to trample , someone to punish and , therefore , embrace war .
it is the line between those who look to the future and those who cling to the past .
it is the line between those who give up their resentment and those who believe they will absolutely die if they have to release one bit grievance .
it is the line between those who confront every day with a clenched fist and those who confront every day with an open hand .
that is the only line that really counts when all is said and done .
to those who believe that god made each of us in his own image , how could we choose the darker road ?
when you look at those children who greeted us as we got off that plane today , how could anyone say they did not want those children to have a chance to have their own children , to experience the joy of another morning sunrise , to learn the normal lessons of life , to give something back to their people ?
when you strip it all away , whether we 're talking about rwanda or some other distant troubled spot , the world is divided according to how people believe they draw meaning from life .
and so i say to you , though the road is hard and uncertain and there are many difficulties ahead , and like every other person who wishes to help , i doubltless will not be able to do everything i would like to do , there are things we can do .
and if we set about the business of doing them together , you can overcome the awful burden that you have endured .
you can put a smile on the face of every child in this country , and you can make people once again believe that they should live as people were living who were singing to us and dancing for us today .
that 's what we have to believe .
that is what i came here to say .
and that is what i wish for you .
thank you , and god bless you .

thank you , jim , and thank you to the people of hartford , our hosts .
i want to begin by saying again how much i respect senator dole and his record of public service , and how hard i will try to make this campaign and this debate one of ideas , not insults .
four years ago i ran for president at a time of high unemployment and rising frustration .
i wanted to turn this country around with a program of opportunity for all , responsibility from all , and an american community where everybody has a role to play .
i wanted a government that was smaller and less bureaucratic to help people have the tools to make the most of their own lives .
four years ago you took me on faith .
now there 's a record : 10 million more jobs , rising incomes , falling crime rates and welfare rolls , a strong america at peace .
we are better off than we were four years ago .
let 's keep it going .
we cut the deficit by 60 percent .
now let 's balance the budget and protect medicare , medicaid , education , and the environment .
we cut taxes for 15 million working americans .
now let 's pass the tax cuts for education and childrearing , help with medical emergencies and buying a home .
we passed family and medical leave .
now let 's expand it so more people can succeed as parents and in the work force .
we passed the 100,000 police , the assault weapons ban , the brady bill .
now let 's keep going by finishing the work of putting the police on the street and tackling juvenile gangs .
we passed welfare reform .
now let 's move a million people from welfare to work .
and most important , let 's make education our highest priority so that every 8-year - old will be able to read , every 12-year - old can log on to the internet , every 18-year - old can go to college .
we can build that bridge to the 21st century , and i look forward to discussing exactly how we 're going to do it .
well , jim , i believe that the federal government should give people the tools and try to establish the conditions in which they can make the most of their own lives .
that , to me , is the key .
and that leads me to some different conclusions from senator dole .
for example , we have reduced the size of the federal government to its smallest size in 30 years .
we 've reduced more regulations , eliminated more programs than my two republican predecessors .
but i have worked hard for things like the family and medical leave law , the brady bill , the assault weapons ban , the program to put 100,000 police on the street .
all of these are programs that senator dole opposed , that i supported because i felt they were a legitimate effort to help people make the most of their own lives .
i 've worked hard to help families impart values to their own children .
i supported the v - chip so that parents would be able to control what their kids watch on television when they 're young , along with the ratings system for television and educational television .
i supported strong action against the tobacco companies to stop the marketing , advertising , and sale of tobacco to young people .
i supported a big increase in the safe and drug - free schools program .
these were areas on which senator dole and i differed , but i believed that they were the right areas for america to be acting together as one country to help individuals and families make the most of their own lives and raise their kids with good values and a good future .
i trust the people .
we 've done a lot to give the people more powers to make their own decisions over their own lives .
but i do think we are right when we try to , for example , give mothers and newborns 48 hours before they can be kicked out of the hospital , ending these drive - by deliveries .
i think we were right to pass the kassebaum - kennedy bill , which states you ca n't lose your health insurance just because you change jobs or because someone in your family has been sick .
our government is smaller and less bureaucratic and has given more authority to the states than its two predecessors under republican presidents .
but i do believe we have to help our people get ready to succeed in the 21st century .
state of the nation 



  > 

  i agree with that .
that 's right .
i do n't know , i look at the slowest growth in a century .
he inherited a growth of 4.7 , 4.8 percent ; now it 's down to about 2.4 percent .
we 're going to pass a million bankruptcies this year for the first time in history .
we 've got stagnant wages ; in fact , women 's wages have dropped 2.2 percent .
men 's wages have n't gone up , gone down .
so we have stagnation .
we have the highest foreign debt in history .
and it seems to me that if you take a look -- are you better off ?
well , i guess some may be better off .
saddam hussein is probably better off than he was four years ago .
rene preval is probably better off than he was four years ago .
but are the american people ?
they 're working harder and harder and paying more taxes .
for the first time in history , you pay about 40 percent of what you earn , more than you spend for food , clothing , and shelter combined , for taxes under this administration .
so some may be better off .
they talk about family income being up .
that 's not true in connecticut ; family income is down .
and it 's up in some cases because both parents are working ; one works for the family , and one works to pay taxes for the government .
we 're going to give them a tax cut so they can spend more time with their children , maybe even take a vacation .
that 's what america is all about .
> 



  well , let me say , first of all , in february , senator dole acknowledged that the american economy was in the best shape it 's been in in 30 years .
we have 10 million more jobs , a faster job growth rate than under any republican administration since the 1920s .
wages are going up for the first time in a decade .
we have record number of new small businesses .
we had the biggest drop in the number of people in poverty in 27 years .
all groups of people are growing -- we had the biggest drop in income inequality in 27 years in 1995 .
the average family 's income has gone up over $ 1,600 just since our economic plan passed .
so i think it 's clear that we 're better off than we were four years ago .
now we need to focus on , what do we need to do to be better off still ?
how can we help people -- as we are -- to get their retirements when they work for small businesses , to be able to afford health insurance , to be able to educate their children ?
that 's what i want to focus on .
but we 're clearly better off than we were four years ago , as senator dole acknowledged this year .
absolutely not .
let 's look at the position .
first of all , remember that in this campaign season , since senator dole has been a candidate , he has bragged about the fact that he voted against medicare in the beginning , in 1965 , one of only 12 members .
he said he did the right thing then ; he knew it would n't work at the time .
that 's what he said .
then his budget , that he passed along with speaker gingrich , cut medicare $ 270 billion , more than was necessary to repair the medicare trust fund .
it would have charged seniors more for out - of - pocket costs , as well as more in premiums , because doctors could have charged them more .
the american hospital association , the nurses association , the catholic hospital association all said hundreds of hospitals could close and people would be hurt badly under the dole - gingrich medicare plan that i vetoed .
and now , with this risky $ 550 billion tax scheme of senator dole 's , even his own friends -- his campaign cochair , senator d'amato , says that they ca n't possibly pay for it without cutting medicare more and cutting social security as well , according to him .
now , my balanced budget plan adds 10 years to the life of the medicare trust fund -- 10 years .
and we 'll have time to deal with the long - term problems of the baby boomers .
but it was simply wrong to finance their last scheme to cut medicare $ 270 billion , to run the risk of it withering on the vine .
we always have to reform it over the years , but we need someone who believes in it to reform it .
well , let me say first of all , i 'd be happy to have a commission deal with this , and i appreciate what senator dole did on the ' 83 social security commission .
but it wo n't be possible to do if his tax scheme passes , because even his own campaign co - chair , senator d'amato , says he 'll have to cut medicare even more than was cut in the bill that i vetoed .
i vetoed that bill because it cut more medicare and basically ran the risk of breaking up the system .
my balanced budget plan puts 10 years onto medicare .
we ought to do that ; then we can have a commission .
but senator dole 's plans are not good for the country .
senator dole 's tax cut proposal 



  > 

  me too ?
> 

  that 's good .
i need it .
and it 's also regulatory reform .
so it 's a good package , mr. president , and we 'd like to have your support .
> 



  well , here 's the problem with it .
it sounds very good , but there 's a reason that 500 economists , including seven nobel prize winners , and business periodicals like business week and even senator dole 's friend senator warren rudman , former republican senator from new hampshire , says it is not a practical program .
it 's a $ 550 billion tax scheme that will cause a big hole in the deficit , which will raise interest rates and slow down the economy and cause people to pay more for home mortgages , car payments , credit card payments , college loans , and small business loans .
it 's not good to raise the deficit ; we 've worked too hard to lower it .
it will actually raise taxes on 9 million people .
and in addition to that , it will force bigger cuts in medicare , medicaid , education , and the environment than the ones that he and mr. gingrich passed that i vetoed last year .
so it sounds great .
but our targeted tax cut for education , childrearing , health care , and homebuying , which is paid for in my balanced budget plan -- something that he has not done -- certified by the congressional budget office , that 's the right way to go .
well , i try to articulate my positions as clearly as possible , tell people what i stand for , and let them decide whether they 're going to support me or not .
the senator mentioned the trial lawyers .
in the case of the product liability bill , which they passed and i vetoed -- i think that 's what he 's talking about -- i actually wanted to sign that bill , and i told the people exactly what -- the congress -- exactly what kind of bill i would sign .
now , a lot of the trial lawyers did n't want me to sign any bill at all , but i thought we ought to do what we could to cut frivolous lawsuits .
but they would n't make some of the changes that i thought should be made .
and let me just give you an example .
i had a person in the oval office who lost a child in a schoolbus accident where a drunk driver caused the accident directly , but there were problems with the schoolbus .
the drunk driver had no money .
under the new bill , if i had signed it , a person like that could never have had any recovery .
i thought that was wrong .
so i gave four or five specific examples to the congress , and i said , " prove to me that these people could recover , but we 're going to eliminate frivolous lawsuits ; i 'll sign the bill . "
but generally , i believe that a president has to be willing to do what he thinks is right .
i 've done a lot of things that were controversial : my economic plan , my trade position , bosnia , haiti , taking on the nra for the first time , taking on the tobacco companies for the first time .
sometimes you just have to do that because you know it 's right for the country over the long run .
that 's what i 've tried to do , and that 's what i will continue to do as president .
let me say , first of all , i signed a tort reform bill that dealt with civilian aviation a couple of years ago .
i 've proved that i will sign reasonable tort reform .
secondly , senator dole has had some pretty harsh comments about special interest money , but it was n't me who opposed what we tried to do to save the lives of children who are subject to tobacco and then went to the tobacco growers and bragged about standing up to the federal government when we tried to stop the advertising , marketing , and sales of tobacco to children .
and it was n't me that let the polluters actually come into the halls of congress , into the rooms , and rewrite the environmental laws .
that 's what speaker gingrich and senator dole did , not me .
so i believe that we should take a different approach to this and talk about how we stand on the issues instead of trying to characterize each other 's motivations .
i think senator dole and i just honestly disagree .
mr. lehrer , i hope we 'll have a chance to discuss drugs later in the program , but let me respond to what you said .
i agree that too many incumbent politicians in washington in both parties have consistently opposed campaign finance reform .
that was certainly the case from the minute i got there .
so after speaker gingrich and senator dole took over the congress , i went to new hampshire and a man suggested -- a gentleman that , unfortunately , just passed away a couple of days ago suggested that we appoint a commission .
and i shook hands with him on it , and i appointed my members , and the commission never met .
and then senator dole 's ardent supporter senator mccain , who is out there today , along with senator feingold , supported -- sponsored a campaign finance reform proposal .
i strongly supported it , and members of senator dole 's own party in the senate killed it .
and he was not out there urging them to vote for the mccain - feingold bill .
so i think the american people , including the perot supporters , know that i 've had a consistent record in favor of campaign finance reform , and i will continue to have .
and i hope we can finally get it in the next session of congress , because we need it badly .
i agree .
teenage drug use 



  well , jim , i think every american in any position of responsibility should be concerned about what 's happened .
i am .
but let 's look at the overall record .
overall in america , cocaine use has dropped 30 percent in the last four years , casual drug use down 13 percent .
the tragedy is that our young people are still increasing their use of drugs , up to about 11 percent total with marijuana .
and i regret it .
let me tell you what i 've tried to do about it .
i appointed a four - star general who led our efforts south of the border to keep drugs from coming into the country as our nation 's drug czar , the most heavily decorated soldier in uniform when he retired .
we submitted the biggest drug budget ever .
we have dramatically increased control and enforcement at the border .
we supported a crime bill that had 60 death penalties , including the death penalty for drug kingpins .
and i supported a big expansion in the safe and drug - free schools program to support things like the d. a.r. e. program , because i thought all those things were very important .
do i think that i bear some responsibility for the fact that too many of our children still do n't understand drugs are wrong , drugs can kill you , even though i have consistently opposed the legalization of drugs all my public life and worked hard against them ?
i think we all do .
and i hope we can do better .
i do n't think this issue should be politicized , because my record is clear and i do n't think senator dole supports using drugs .
i think we just have to continue to work on this until those who think it is n't dangerous and wo n't kill them and wo n't destroy their lives get the message and change .
let me say again , we did have a drug czar in arkansas , but he answered to the governor , just like this one answers to the president .
that 's what i thought we ought to do .
secondly , senator dole , you voted against the crime bill that had the death penalty for drug kingpins in it , and you voted to cut services to 23 million school children under the safe and drug - free schools act .
i do n't think that means you 're soft on drugs .
we just have a different approach .
but let me remind you that my family has suffered from drug abuse .
i know what it 's like to see somebody you love nearly lose their lives , and i hate drugs , senator .
we need to do this together , and we can .
gun control 







  the president .
let me say , first of all , senator dole has gone back and forth about whether he 'd be for repealing the brady bill or repealing the assault weapons ban , and i think his present position is that he would not do so .
and if that 's true , i 'm grateful for it .
but let 's look at the facts here .
the brady bill has kept at least 60,000 felons , fugitives , and stalkers from getting handguns .
senator dole led the fight against the brady bill .
he tried to keep it from coming to my desk .
he did n't succeed , and i signed it , and i 'm glad i did .
then when we had the assault weapons ban in the senate , senator dole fought it bitterly and opposed the entire crime bill and almost brought the entire crime bill down because the national rifle association did n't want the assault weapons ban , just like they did n't want the brady bill .
but two years later , nobody has lost their handguns , i mean , their rifles .
we 've expanded the brady bill to cover people who beat up their spouses and their kids .
and this is a safer country .
so i 'm glad i took on that fight .
and i believe , with all respect , i was right , and he was wrong .
if that 's what he said , he 's not right about that .
look at where we are today .
the united states is still the indispensable nation in the aftermath of the cold war and on the brink of the 21st century .
i have worked to support our country as the world 's strongest force for peace and freedom , prosperity and security .
we have done the following things : number one , we 've managed the aftermath of the cold war , supporting a big drop in nuclear weapons in russia , the removal of russian troops from the baltics , the integration of central and eastern european democracies into a new partnership with nato and , i might add , with a democratic russia .
there are no nuclear missiles pointed at the children of the united states tonight and have not been in our administration for the first time since the dawn of the nuclear age .
we have worked hard for peace and freedom .
when i took office , haiti was governed by a dictator that had defied the united states .
when i took office , the worst war in europe was waging in bosnia .
now there is a democratically elected president in haiti , peace in bosnia .
we have just had elections there .
we have made progress in northern ireland and the middle east .
we 've also stood up to the new threats of terrorism , the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction , organized crime .
and we have worked hard to expand america 's economic presence around the world with the biggest increase in trade , with the largest number of new trade agreements in history .
that 's one of the reasons america is number one in auto production again .
first of all , i take full responsibility for what happened in somalia , but the american people must remember that those soldiers were under an american commander when that happened .
i believe they did the best they could under the circumstances .
and let 's not forget that hundreds of thousands of lives were saved there .
secondly , in haiti , political violence is much , much smaller than it was .
thirdly , in bosnia it 's a virtual miracle that there has been no return to war .
and at least there has now been an election , and the institutions are beginning to function .
in northern ireland and the middle east we are better off than we were four years ago .
there will always be problems in this old world , but if we 're moving in the right direction and america is leading , we 're better off .
our military is the strongest military in the world .
it is the strongest , best prepared , best equipped it has ever been .
there is very little difference in the budget that i have proposed and the republican budget over the next six - year period .
we are spending a lot of money to modernize our weapons system .
i have proposed a lot of new investments to improve the quality of life for our soldiers , for our men and women in uniform , for their families , for their training .
that is my solemn obligation .
you asked , when do you decide to deploy them ?
the interests of the american people must be at stake ; our values must be at stake ; we have to be able to make a difference .
and frankly , we have to consider what the risks are to our young men and women in uniform .
but i believe the evidence is that our deployments have been successful , in haiti , in bosnia , when we moved to kuwait to repel saddam hussein 's threatened invasion of kuwait , when i have sent the fleet into the taiwan straits , when we 've worked hard to end the north korean nuclear threat .
i believe the united states is at peace tonight in part because of the disciplined , careful , effective deployment of our military resources .
well , first of all , for the last four years we have worked hard to put more and more pressure on the castro government to bring about more openness and a move toward democracy .
in 1992 , before i became president , congress passed the cuba democracy act , and i enforced it vigorously .
we made the embargo tougher , but we increased contacts , people to people , with the cubans , including direct telephone service , which was largely supported by the cuban - american community .
then cuba shot down two of our planes and murdered four people in international airspace .
they were completely beyond the pale of the law , and i signed the helms - burton legislation .
senator dole is correct .
i did give about six months before the effective date of the act before lawsuits can actually be filed , even though they 're effective now and can be legally binding , because i want to change cuba .
and the united states needs help from other countries .
nobody in the world agrees with our policy on cuba now .
but this law can be used as leverage to get other countries to help us to move cuba to democracy .
every single country in latin america , central america , and the caribbean is a democracy tonight but cuba .
and if we stay firm and strong , we will be able to bring cuba around as well .
there were several off - the - subject whoppers in that litany .
let me just mention , senator dole voted for $ 900 billion in tax increases .
his runningmate , jack kemp , once said that bob dole never met a tax he did n't hike .
and everybody knows , including the wall street journal , hardly a friend of the democratic party or this administration , that the ' 82 tax increase he sponsored , in inflation - adjusted dollars was the biggest tax increase in american history .
so we ought to at least get the facts out here on the table so we can know where to go from here .
health care reform 





  well , that sounds very good , but it 's very wrong .
senator dole remembers well that we actually offered not to even put in a health care bill in 1994 but instead to work with the senate republicans and write a joint bill .
and they said no , because they got a memo from one of their political advisers saying that instead they should characterize whatever we did as big government and make sure nothing was done to aid health care before the ' 94 elections so they could make that claim .
well , maybe we bit off more than we could chew .
but we 're pursuing a step - by - step reform now .
the kennedy - kassebaum bill that i signed will make it possible for 25 million people to keep their health insurance when they change jobs or when somebody in their family has been sick .
i signed a bill to stop these drive - by deliveries where insurance companies can force people out of the hospital after 24 hours .
and i vetoed senator dole 's medicare plan that would have forced a lot of seniors into managed care and taken a lot more money out of their pockets and led to medicare withering on the vine .
iraq > 



  well , i believe that we did the appropriate thing under the circumstances .
saddam hussein is under a u. n. resolution not to threaten his neighbors or repress his own citizens .
unfortunately , a lot of people have never been as concerned about the kurds as the united states has tried to be , and we 've been flying an operation to protect them out of turkey for many years now .
what happened was , one of the kurdish leaders invited him to go up north .
but we felt , since the whole world community had told him not to do it , that once he did it we had to do something .
we did not feel that i could commit -- i certainly did n't feel i should commit american troops to throw him out of where he had gone , and that was the only way to do that .
so the appropriate thing strategically to do was to reduce his ability to threaten his neighbors .
we did that by expanding what 's called the no - fly zone , by increasing our allies ' control of the airspace , now from the kuwait border to the suburbs of baghdad .
was it the right thing to do ?
i believe it was .
is it fully effective ?
did it make him withdraw from the north ?
well , he has a little bit , and i hope he will continue .
we have learned that if you give him an inch he 'll take a mile .
we had to do something .
and even though not all of our allies supported it at first , i think most of them now believe that what we did was an appropriate thing to do .
senator dole has , two or three times before tonight , criticized me for working with the u. n. now i 'm being criticized for not working with the u. n. 



  sometimes the united states has to act alone , or at least has to act first .
sometimes we can not let other countries have a veto on our foreign policy .
i could not send soldiers into the north of iraq ; that would have been wrong .
i could reduce saddam hussein 's ability to threaten kuwait and his other neighbors again .
that 's what i did ; i still believe it was the right thing to do .
middle east peace process 







  -- started again today .
but again , it 's almost like an ad hoc foreign policy .
it 's ad hoc .
it 's sort of , " well , we get up in the morning and read the papers and what country 's in trouble , we 'll have a meeting . "
to me , that 's not the strategy that i think that people expect from america .
i think we have lost credibility .
and i say this very honestly , without any partisanship .
we 've lost credibility around the world .
our allies do n't -- they 're not certain what we 're going to do , what our reaction , what our response is going to be .
nobody suggested sending troops to iraq , if that was the hint there from the president .
but i do think that saddam hussein is stronger than he was , and i do believe that we did n't gain a great deal in the mideast by bringing three of the four leaders -- one refused to come -- to washington , dc .
> 

  we have a very consistent policy in the middle east : it is to support the peace process , to support the security of israel , and to support those who are prepared to take risks for peace .
it is a very difficult environment .
the feelings are very strong .
there are extremists in all parts of the middle east who want to kill that peace process .
prime minister rabin gave his life because someone in his own country literally hated him for trying to bring peace .
i would liked to have had a big , organized summit , but those people were killing each other rapidly .
innocent arab children , innocent israeli people -- they were dying .
so much trust has broken down in the aftermath of the change of government .
i felt that if i could just get the parties together to say , let 's stop the violence , start talking , commit to the negotiations , that would be a plus .
now , today the secretary of state is in the middle east , and they 've started negotiations .
and all of those leaders promised me they would not quit until they resolved the issues between them and got the peace process going forward again .
well , i 'm saying that senator dole said in his fine speech in san diego that he wanted to build a bridge to the past .
and i think i know what he meant by that .
he is troubled , as i am , by some of the things that go on today .
but i believe america is the greatest country in human history because we have maintained freedom and increasing prosperity by relentlessly pushing the barriers of knowledge , the barriers of the present , always moving into the future .
that 's why when i became president i was determined to kind of move beyond this old , stale debate that had gone on in washington for too long , to get this country moving again .
and that 's why we 've got a country with 10 million more jobs and record numbers of new businesses and rising incomes and falling crime rates and welfare roll rates .
that 's why we 're moving in the right direction .
and i 'm trying to emphasize that what i want to do is to continue to do that .
that 's why my balanced budget plan will still invest and grow this economy .
that 's why i want a tax cut for education and childrearing , but it 's got to be paid for .
that 's why i want to continue the work we have done , over partisan opposition , to work with communities to bring that crime rate down until our streets are all safe again .
these are my commitments .
i am very oriented toward the future .
i think this election has to be geared toward the future .
i think america 's best days are still ahead .
but we 've got to build the right bridge .
i do not for a moment think i 'm entitled to all the credit for the good things that have happened in america .
but where i have moved to work with the american people to help them have the tools to make the most of their own lives , i think i should get some credit for that .
i also personally took responsibility tonight when senator dole asked me about the drug problem .
but you know , i think my ideas are better for the future .
senator dole voted against student loans , against head start , against creating the department of education .
if he gets elected president , we 'll start the new century without anyone in the cabinet of the president representing education and our children .
i personally do n't think that 's the right kind of future for america , and i think we ought to take a different tack .
education 





  let me say , first of all , i 'm all for students having more choices .
we 've worked hard to expand public school choice .
in my balanced budget bill there are funds for 3,000 new schools , created by teachers and parents , sometimes by business people , called charter schools that have no rules .
they 're free of bureaucracy and can only stay in existence if they perform and teach children .
the ones that are out there are doing well .
what i 'm against is senator dole 's plan to take money away from all of the children we now help with limited federal funds and help far fewer .
if we 're going to have a private voucher plan , that ought to be done at the local level or the state level .
but senator dole has consistently opposed federal help to education .
he voted against student loans , he voted against my improved student loan plan , he voted against the national service bill , against the head start bill .
he voted against our efforts in safe and drug - free schools .
he has voted against these programs .
he does not believe it .
that 's the issue .
ninety percent of our kids are out there in those public schools , and we need to lift their standards and move them forward with the programs like those i 've outlined in this campaign .
i support school choice .
i support school choice .
i have advocated expansions of public school choice alternatives and , i said , the creation of 3,000 new schools that we are going to help the states to finance .
but if you 're going to have a private voucher plan , that ought to be determined by states and localities where they 're raising and spending most of the money .
i simply think it 's wrong to take money away from programs that are helping build basic skills for kids -- 90 percent of them are in the public schools -- to take money away from programs that are helping fund the school lunch program , that are helping to fund the other programs that are helping our schools to improve their standards .
our schools are getting better .
and our schools can be made to be even better still with the right kind of community leadership and partnership at the school level .
i have been a strong force for reform .
and senator , i remind you that a few years ago , when i supported a teacher testing law in my home state , i was pretty well lambasted by the teachers association .
i just do n't believe we ought to be out there running down teachers and attacking them the way you did at the republican convention .
i think we ought to be lifting them up and moving our children forward .
and let me just say , that budget you passed that i vetoed would have cut 50,000 kids out of head start .
it would have eliminated the americorps plan .
and it would have cut back on student loans and scholarships .
now , it would have ; that 's a fact .
that 's one of the big reasons i vetoed it .
we need to be doing more in education , not less .
first of all , senator dole , let 's set the record straight .
i was able , for two years when i was a very young boy , to go to a catholic school , but i basically went to public schools all my life .
and i 've worked hard for a long time to make them better .
ninety percent of our kids are there .
it 's amazing to me -- you are all for having more responsibility at the local level for everything except schools , where we do n't have very much money at the federal level to spend on education .
we ought to spend it helping the 90 percent of the kids that we can help .
if a local school district in cleveland or anyplace else wants to have a private school choice plan like milwaukee did , let them have at it .
i might say , the results are highly ambiguous .
but i want to get out there and give a better education opportunity to all of our children .
and that 's why i vetoed the budget that you passed with $ 30 billion in education cuts .
it was wrong , and my plan for the future is better .
political philosophy 





  when senator dole made that remark about all the elitists , young elitists in the administration , one of the young men who works for me who grew up in a house trailer looked at me and said , " mr. president , i know how you grew up .
who is he talking about ? "
and you know , this liberal charge , that 's what their party always drags out when they get in a tight race .
it 's sort of their golden oldie , you know , it 's a record they think they can play that everybody loves to hear .
and i just do n't think that dog will hunt this time .
the american people should make up their own mind .
here 's the record : we cut the deficit four years in a row for the first time since before the civil war -- i mean , before world war ii -- and maybe before the civil war , too .
we 've got 10 million new jobs .
we 've got record numbers of new small businesses .
we made every one of them eligible for a tax cut .
we 've got declining crime rates , two million fewer people on welfare rolls before welfare reform passed , and a 50 percent increase in child support , and a crime bill with 60 death penalties , 100,000 police , and the assault weapons ban .
the american people can make up their mind about whether that 's a liberal record or a record that 's good for america .
liberal , conservative , you put whatever label you want on it .
i believe that the purpose of politics is to give people the tools to make the most of their own lives , to reinforce the values of opportunity and responsibility , and to build a sense of community so we 're all working together .
i do n't believe in discrimination .
i believe you can protect the environment and grow the economy .
i believe that we have to do these things with a government that 's smaller and less bureaucratic but that we have to do them nonetheless .
it 's inconvenient for senator dole , but the truth is i 've reduced the size of government more than my republican predecessors .
and i did stop them , i admit that ; i sure stopped their budget .
their budget cut enforcement for the environmental protection agency by a third .
it cut funds to clean up toxic waste dumps -- with 10 million of our kids still living within four miles of a toxic waste dump -- by a third .
it ended the principle of the polluters should pay for those toxic waste dumps unless it was very recent .
their budget weakened our support for education $ 30 billion , even cut funds for scholarships and college loans .
their budget cut $ 270 billion in medicare .
and finally , their budget withdrew the national guarantee of health care to poor children , families with children with handicaps , the elderly in nursing homes , poor pregnant women .
it was wrong for the country , and calling it conservative wo n't make it right .
it was a bad decision for america and would have been bad for our future if i had n't stopped it .
the way to get a better america is to balance the budget and protect medicare , medicaid , education , and the environment ; to give a targeted tax cut -- and let me talk about the education tax cut -- to let people have a $ 10,000 deduction for the cost of college tuition in any year , any kind of college tuition ; to give families a tax credit , a dollar - for - dollar reduction in their taxes for the cost of a typical community college so we can open that to everybody , and then to let people save in an ira and withdraw from it without a tax penalty for education , homebuying , or medical expenses .
that 's the right way to go into the 21st century , balance the budget and cut taxes , not balloon with this $ 550 billion tax scheme .
personal differences 







  i think he 's a bit taller than i am .
but i think there are personal differences .
i mean , i do n't like to get into personal matters .
as far as i 'm concerned , this is a campaign about issues .
it 's about my vision for america and about his liberal vision for america , and not about personal things .
and i think his liberal vision is a thing of the past .
i know he wants to disown it .
i would n't want to be a liberal either , mr. president , but you 're stuck with it because that 's your record .
it 's your record in arkansas , the biggest tax increase in history , the biggest crime increase in history , biggest drug increase in history in arkansas .
> 



  well , just for the record , when i was a governor , we had the lowest -- second lowest tax burden of any state in the country , the highest job growth rate of any state when i ran for president , and were widely recognized for a lot of other advances .
but the important thing is , what are we going to do now ?
i think a targeted tax cut is better for our future , targeted to education and childrearing , with the rest of the education plan -- hooking up all of our classrooms to the internet by the year 2000 , making sure we 've got an army of reading volunteers , trained people to teach with parents and teachers so that our 8-year - olds can learn to read ; investing in our environment , cleaning up two - thirds of the worst toxic waste dumps .
those plans are better than this $ 550 billion tax scheme .
now , remember , folks , even senator dole 's campaign cochair , senator d'amato , says he 's got to cut medicare to pay for this .
everybody who has looked at it , 500 economists , seven nobel prize winners , say it 's bad for the economy .
it 's going to blow a hole in the deficit , raise taxes on nine million people , and require bigger cuts than the one i vetoed .
our plan is better .
it will take us into the future with a growing economy and healthier families .
you did n't even have tax cuts in your budget , mr. president , the first two years you were president .
it was n't until we had a republican congress that you even thought about -- you talked about tax cuts .
and getting back to personal differences , i think , jim , if you 're a little more specific , but i think the president could clarify one thing tonight , and that 's the question of pardons .
i know you talked about it with jim lehrer on the pbs show .
and i 've never discussed whitewater , as i 've told you personally ; i 'm not discussing whitewater now .
but i am discussing a power the president has to grant pardons , and hopefully in the next segment you could lay that to rest .
> 



  well , first of all , he made that remark about senator d'amato .
he 's arranged for me to spend a lot more time with senator d'amato in the last couple of years , and so i 'm more familiar with his comments than i used to be .
let me say what i 've said already about this pardon issue .
this is an issue they brought up .
there has been no consideration of it , no discussion of it .
i 'll tell you this : i will not give anyone special treatment , and i will strictly adhere to the law .
and that is what every president has done , as far as i know in the past .
but whatever other presidents have done , this is something i take seriously , and that 's my position .
but he 's not my general chairman , he 's a friend of mine .
and so is senator kennedy a friend of yours ... > 

  you bet .
one of your liberal friends .
> 

  that 's right .
thank you .
no comment .
i 'd like the american people to know that i have worked very hard to be on their side and to move this country forward , and we 're better off than we were four years ago .
but the most important thing is my plan for the 21st century is a better plan : a targeted tax cut ; a real commitment to educational reform ; a deep commitment to making welfare reform work , with incentives to the private sector to move people from welfare to work -- now we have to create those jobs , now that we 're requiring people to go to work ; a commitment to step - by - step health care reform , with the next step helping people who are between jobs to access health care and not lose it just because they 're out of work for a while ; a commitment to grow the economy while protecting the environment .
that 's what i 'd like them to know about me , that i 've gotten up every day and worked for the american people and worked so that their children could have their dreams come true .
and i believe we 've got the results to show we 're on the right track .
the most important thing is i believe we 've got the right ideas for the future .
and like senator dole -- i like senator dole .
you can probably tell we like each other .
we just see the world in different ways , and you folks out there are going to have to choose who you think is right .
let 's look at that .
when i ran for president , i said we 'd cut the deficit in half in four years ; we 've cut it by 60 percent .
i said that our economic plan would produce eight million jobs ; we have 10 million new jobs .
we 're number one in autos again , record numbers of new small businesses .
i said we 'd pass a crime bill that would put 100,000 police on the street , ban assault weapons , and deal with the problems that ought to be dealt with with capital punishment , including capital punishment for drug kingpins .
and we did that .
i said we would change the way welfare works .
and even before the bill passed , we had moved nearly two million people from welfare to work , working with states and communities .
i said we 'd get tougher on child support , and child support enforcement is up 50 percent .
i said that i would work for tax relief for middle - class americans .
the deficit was bigger than i thought it was going to be , and i think they 're better off , all of us are , that we got those interest rates down and the deficit down .
the republicans talk about it , but we 're the first administration in anybody 's lifetime looking at this program to bring that deficit down four years in a row .
we still gave tax cuts to 15 million working americans .
and now i 've got a plan that has been out there for two years -- it could have been passed already , but instead the republicans shut the government down to try to force their budget and their plan on me , and i could n't take that .
but we 'll get the rest of that tax relief .
and so i think when you can look at those results , you know that the plan i have laid out for the future has a very good chance of being enacted if you 'll give me a chance to build that bridge to the 21st century .
i think a lot of people deserve credit , and i 've tried to give it to them .
but i believe that my plan is better than senator dole 's ill - advised , $ 550 billion scheme , which i will say again will blow a hole in the deficit .
our plan will balance the budget and grow the economy , preserve the environment , and invest in education .
we have the right approach for the future .
and look at the results : it is not midnight in america , senator .
we are better off than we were four years ago .
well , first , jim , let me thank you , and thank you , senator dole , and thank you , ladies and gentlemen , all of you listening tonight , for the chance you 've given us to appear .
i want to say in the beginning that i am profoundly grateful for the chance that you have given me to serve as president for the last four years .
i never could have dreamed anything like this would come my way in life , and i 've done my best to be faithful to the charge you 've given me .
i 'm proud of the fact that america is stronger and more prosperous and more secure than we were four years ago .
i 'm glad we 're going in the right direction .
and i 've done my best tonight to lay out my plans for going forward to an even better future in the next century .
i 'd like to leave you with the thought that the things i do as president are basically driven by the people whose lives i have seen affected by what does or does n't happen in this country : the autoworker in toledo who was unemployed when i was elected and now has a great job , because we 're number one in auto production again ; all the people i 've met who used to be on welfare who are now working and raising their children -- and i think what others could do for our country and for themselves if we did the welfare reform thing in the proper way .
i think of the man who grabbed me by the shoulder once with tears in his eyes and said his daughter was dying of cancer , and he thanked me for giving him a chance to spend some time with her without losing his job , because of the family and medical leave act .
i think of all the people that i grew up with and went to school with whom i stay in touch with and who never let me forget how what we do in washington affects all of you out there in america .
folks , we can build that bridge to the 21st century , big enough and strong enough for all of us to walk across .
and i hope that you will help me build it .
http://www .
dolekemp96.org .
thank you .
god bless america .
>
it is wonderful to be back in new orleans and in louisiana and to have the first chance i 've had since the election to thank you for your support , your electoral votes , and the education you gave me on my many trips here during the campaign last year .
i 'm glad to be back on this campus .
i want to thank your student body president , robert styron .
i thought he gave a good speech .
i think he 's got a future in politics , do n't you ?
and chancellor o'brien .
i want to thank senator breaux for his kind remarks and for his leadership of the democratic leadership council .
i want to acknowledge the presence here of senator johnston and many members of the louisiana house and many other members of the united states congress , along with many others who are here with the democratic leadership council , including my good friend and former colleague , the governor of new mexico , bruce king , who 's here .
there are two members of my cabinet here , the secretary of education , dick riley , and the secretary of agriculture , mike espy , also a dlc vice chair .
i want to thank all the people who are here representing volunteer organizations .
i met with some young people just before i came in here who are scattered around near me from benjamin franklin high school just across the way .
absolutely no enthusiasm in that place .
from the delta service corps . ,
from vista , from summerbridge , from teach for america , we also have some students here , apart from all of you from uno , we have some students here who have worked in service projects at xavier university and at tulane .
we also have people here who have been involved in service for a long time from action , from the older americans volunteer program , from the national association of senior companions and foster grandparents and the national association of retired senior volunteers .
all these people i am very grateful to .
i 'd like to just acknowledge in general the people who are here from law enforcement organizations and firefighters ' organizations and public employees and teachers ' groups who have helped us on this national service project .
and i want to say a special word of thanks to three other people .
first of all , gen. david jones , a former chairman of the joint chiefs of staff who has worked very hard helping us put together this program , who is here .
general jones , thank you for being here .
secondly , a remarkable gentleman from new jersey , an immensely successful businessman who retired early and is devoting his entire life to community service to rebuild the lives and the neighborhoods of the people in his community in new jersey and now helping others around the country , a founding member of the points of light foundation , mr. ray chambers , who is here .
and i 'd like to pay a little special attention to two members of congress who are not here and to one who is , for their long work on the whole idea of national service .
the two in the senate who are not here are senator harris wofford from pennsylvania and senator sam nunn from georgia .
and then representative dave mccurdy from oklahoma , thank you for all of the work you 've done on this over the years .
i am glad to be here .
you know , when i come down here i always sort of relax .
i do n't know why that is .
i timed it just in time for the jazz festival , but i left my saxophone at the white house .
this is the 100th day of my administration .
in washington , some say it marks a milestone .
but in many ways it 's just another day at the office for what we 're trying to do in changing america .
in the last 99 days we have worked relentlessly to address the pressing and long - ignored needs of the american people and to bring to the government something it has not seen in a long time : an acknowledgment that bold action is needed , and needed now , to secure and enlarge america 's future , and that in order to do it we not only have to change programs , we have to change the way the government works and engage the energies of the american people in the process .
in the last 100 days i think we have begun to change the direction in which our country has been going for a long time , and to go toward a new direction more like the one the american people demanded last november .
we 've also started an unprecedented debate in our nation 's capital about big ideas and better lives across our nation , ideas that in many cases were shaped and nurtured by some of the people who are here today , as senator breaux said earlier , the members of the democratic leadership council , of which i am proud to be a founding member .
unlike most organizations , the dlc has done more than just talk about the problems in our country .
it has made an honest effort to develop real ideas about how to restore the american economy , and make the government work , and rebuild the confidence and the link that exists between the american people and their government when things are at their best here .
and it 's been a laboratory for experimentation and solutions .
during my years with the dlc we really tried to refine our philosophy of what it would mean to take not only the democratic party but the united states of america in a new direction , to make our country work again and to reward work and family , to encourage education and enterprise , to establish what i have often called a new covenant with the american people : creating opportunity but demanding responsibility from all so that once again we could be a true american community where we know and believe and live as if we 're all in this together .
this group has conceived many of the ideas that i 've advocated since i 've been in washington from setting a limit on welfare and putting people to work to police reform and community policing to rewarding work of low - income working people by having an earned - income tax credit that would lift the working poor with children out of poverty .
so we could say if you work 40 hours a week in this country , you have a child in the house , you ought not to be poor .
these are the kinds of things that this organization has done .
they helped to develop the idea i want to talk to you today about that has so much to do with the future of the young people here and throughout our country : national service .
this is an organization about ideas .
now in washington , as you might imagine , we do n't always agree with one another .
and that is good -- that 's why we 've got a system where the government 's divided up and we have two parties and we have people fighting all the time -- as long as it 's about ideas .
but too often we 've seen that the debate over big ideas gets mired in petty politics .
i know one thing : the american people are tired of gridlock and petty politics .
if we 're going to fight , they want us to fight over ideas and the future of this country .
in the past 99 days we tried to address the problems the american people told me they wanted to be addressed .
we focused more than anything else on the economy , passing the outline of a budget that will reduce the deficit by more than $ 500 billion , increase investment in education and technologies and the things that will create the economy of the 21st century that all of you need so that you 'll have good and decent jobs and a decent future laying the groundwork for a more prosperous tomorrow .
just in 100 days we 've announced a policy to help to convert the defense cutbacks and the economic opportunities for people who are losing their jobs because of the military cutbacks ; to take a new direction in technology to create more opportunities for our people ; to be more aggressive in preserving the environment , but do it in a way that creates jobs , not a way that costs jobs ; to have a trade policy that will really reflect our common interest with other nations and expanding jobs and opportunities everywhere .
we 've begun the long - overdue renovation of the american economic base .
the question now , unlike 100 days ago , the question is now not whether we 're going to reduce the deficit but how and how much .
the question now is not whether the government will have a new partnership with the private sector to shape the economy but exactly what the details will be and how much our part will be .
we 've also taken on the issue of health care , something million of americans cried out for last year .
i got a letter today from a young woman i shook hands with whose -- literally , her life is on the line , and she can not get health insurance .
it is wrong that in this nation -- we are the only advanced country in the world with 34 million people without health insurance .
it is wrong that millions of americans can not change their jobs without losing their health insurance because they or a child or a spouse has been sick .
it is wrong that the price of health care goes up 2.5 times the rate of inflation every year .
and it is wrong that we spend 30 percent more of our income than any other country on earth on health care and have less to show for it .
but it is also wrong to assume that there is some magic , quick answer .
that 's why we 've been working with a task force headed by the first lady and over 400 people from all aspects of health care to do something about this .
but now , for the american people the issue is no longer whether we 're going to address the health care crisis , whether we 're going to provide security to hard - working middle class americans , whether we 're going to cover the people who are n't covered , whether we 're going to control costs , but how are we going to do it and how fast and when are we going to begin .
i hope the answer is soon .
and not too soon is soon enough for me .
there was a lot of discussion last year about how bad the government was , and it did n't work , and it was bloated , it needed a change .
look at the last 100 days : i 've tried to set an example by offering a budget to reduce the white house staff by 25 percent ; by putting the lid on and reducing the federal bureaucratic expenses , the administrative expenses of the federal government by over $ 10 billion ; by moving dramatically to reduce the influence of special interests on executive branch appointments by having the toughest ethics laws and restrictions on people becoming lobbyists for other interests when they leave the payroll of the president of the united states ; by asking the vice president to share the most sweeping review of the way the federal government works in a generation , with a promise of real reform and reinventing government , something else this organization has long believed in .
we are moving .
and the congress is moving to join .
the congress has voted to cut the administrative costs of running the congress , something many of you never thought you would see happen .
they did that .
the house of representatives voted yesterday to give the president of the united states a modified line - item veto , and i hope the senate will follow their lead .
i hope soon they will send to my desk the motor voter bill which will make it easier for young people and other people to vote and participate in their country 's political process .
and there will be campaign finance reform and lobby reform legislation and a crime bill that will put more police on the street and give us the capacity we need to take our communities back .
these things are going on .
the question is no longer whether we 're going to reform the way government works but how fast and how much and how well .
and those are the right questions , my fellow americans , good questions to ask .
and now i come to the last , and in many ways the most important issue that we have tried to address -- the economy , yes ; health care , yes ; reform in the way the government works , yes -- but also what about the american people .
how can each american make a contribution ?
how can each american do the work that all americans must , taking responsibility for himself or herself and growing up into a vibrant community ?
we have tried to address those issues as well .
the buzz word now people use is empowerment .
i used to call it responsibility .
i often have said , and i want to reiterate today , the united states government can not create an opportunity for anyone who will not be responsible enough to seize it .
opportunity is a two - way street and requires responsibility .
that is the only way we 'll ever rebuild the american community .
in the days and months ahead , you will see the secretary of education talk about his remarkable education program to provide tougher national standards in education but also to give people at the grass roots level more flexibility in making public education work .
you will see the secretary of agriculture and the secretary of housing and urban development talk about how we can empower even the poorest americans to start their own businesses , save their own money , and take control of their own future .
you will see other people talking about how we can reform the welfare system .
all of these things are at the core of the notion that we ought to make it possible for every american to live up to the fullest of his or her godgiven ability .
and that is what in the end national service is all about : helping ourselves and helping each other at the same time .
on this 100th day of my administration i want to recommit myself and those who work with me to the values that have made our nation without peer in all human history , those of opportunity , responsibility , community , and respect for one another .
today i want to propose applying those values to a revolution of opportunity for our hard - pressed families and for those who have been left out .
as a first step we 're going to ease the terms of college loans , helping students from middle and lower - middle income families to clear a major path to the american dream , the path of higher education .
in return we 'll demand responsibility from young people .
we 'll make it easier to borrow money and much easier to pay it off , but this time you have to pay it off .
you ca n't just default on the loan .
and we will also offer the young people of america the opportunity of paying their loans back by serving their communities in a new program of national service .
in just a few days i will send to the congress two bills containing our proposals , first to strengthen college opportunity and to establish national service .
together they will revive america 's commitment to community and make affordable the cost of a college education for every american .
it 's no secret that over the last 10 or 12 years the cost of a college education is about the only essential think that 's gone up even more rapidly than health care costs .
and middle class parents , and even upper middle class parents , not to mention lower income people , have borne the burden , paying now about five percent of median income just to put one child through a 4 year in - state public college .
it costs an average of over $ 5,200 a year for that education .
that means families are depleting savings and many students are faced with cutting back to a part - time course load or having to drop out simply because of the cost of a college education .
a college dropout is now more than twice the high school dropout rate .
we can not afford that , and we can do better .
i propose a new way to finance college for millions of students who seek loans every year .
we call it an excel account .
with it , students can repay the loans they take out not with a percentage of the loan they borrowed but with a percentage of their actual earnings .
now think about that .
for students driven by debt into careers with high pay and low satisfaction this can be very liberating .
take a student torn , for example , between pursuing a career in teaching and corporate law .
this student now can at least make the career choice based on what he or she wants to do and not the size of the outstanding student loan , because we propose to let everybody have the option of paying the student loan back based on how much they earn not just how much they owe .
that is an incredible incentive .
however , under the current system , as many of you know , students faced with big bills or just inconvenient responsibilities have too often taken the irresponsible route and defaulted on their loans or have been found in default because they could n't find a job .
often times there 's no serious effort to collect the loan because the government guarantees 90 percent of it .
so if the bank makes the loan , it costs more than 10 percent to go collect it .
what 's the result ?
the taxpayers every year pay about $ 3 billion on other people 's loans , money that could be spent on your education , on the schools here , on the future of the children here , just for bad loans .
it is n't right .
under our system , the department of education would engage the internal revenue service .
we would have the payroll records .
and you would n't be able to beat the bill because you would have to pay the loan back as a percentage of your income , if you choose , but you 'd have to pay it because you pay taxes and because we have your records and because you wo n't be able to get out of it .
and that is the right thing to do .
but these excel accounts are just the beginning .
we hope they will lead more and more americans not only to seize the opportunity of a college education and to exert a stronger sense of responsibility but also to seek to serve their communities through a program of national service .
it was thomas jefferson who first told the american people in essence that the more you know , the more you owe .
in his words , and i quote , " a debt of service is due from every man to his country proportioned to the bounties which nature and fortune have measured to him . "
this statement reminds us that values never go out of fashion , that civic responsibility is as good for democracy today as it was when thomas jefferson said that , and that if you really want to be the best citizen of your country , you have to give something back to your country .
with national service , we can literally open a new world to a new generation of americans where higher learning goes hand - in - hand with the higher purpose of addressing our unmet needs , our educational , our social , our environmental needs , to secure the future that we all will share .
national service will mark the start of a new era for america in which every citizen , every one of you , can become an agent of change armed with the knowledge and experience that a college education brings , and ready to transform the world in which we live , city by city , community by community , block by block .
i say to you , we need you .
you know , there 's a lot of talk in america today , and i spend hours every week worrying about the effect that automation and technology is having on employment .
indeed , as we see the productivity of american enterprises rise , their need for workers goes down because they can do more with computes that they used to do with people .
so people ask me all the time , where will we find the jobs for this new generation of americans ?
how can we drive this unemployment rate down ?
but if you look around this country at all the human problems , all the homeless people , all the environmental waste dumps in our cities and our rural areas , all the problems that we 've got in every community in america , and see all the kids that are in trouble -- 15 million of them at risk and needing somebody to pay attention to -- you know where the work needs to be .
late last night when i was preparing to come down here , i took a little time off at my desk and i read the letters that my staff had given me .
and i got a letter from a woman who grew up with me .
i 've known here since we were in grade school .
in this letter she said , " you know , someone asked me a couple of days ago : how are we going to save all these kids in this country that are in trouble ? "
and she said , " without even thinking , i blurted out , the same way we lost them , one at a time . "
and so today my fellow americans , i issue a call to national service , to americans young and old , democrats and republicans , white , black , hispanic , asian and you name it , all of us that make up this great nation .
i call you to national service because it is only that together we can advance a tradition rooted in our people 's history , helping our people to help themselves .
and with national service we can rejoin the citizens in communities of this country , bonding each to the other with the glue of common purpose and real patriotism .
we have many young people here today , students of this place of higher learning where we 're gathered .
in you i know i see the builders of tomorrow .
and i say to you , as good as the education is here and at the other great institutions represented here today and all across america , the power of academic learning is incomplete unless every american can share in it .
that is the only way we can lift our whole country up .
i say to you further that our country needs you .
we need your knowledge and your initiative and your energy .
we need you because you are still stripped and free of the cynicism that has paralyzed too many of your parents and your grandparents , and led us to spend too much time talking about what we ca n't do instead of seizing what we can .
you are not afflicted by that , and i pray you never will be .
we need to make sure that we can use your energies and your talents .
one way is by making sure that the low wages that public service often offers wo n't be a route to the poorhouse for someone with college loans .
as i said , we 're going to make it easier for you to pay off your college loan .
but also , if you engage in national service , we 'll make it easier for you to pay off a college debt or to earn credits toward it before you go to college , or while you 're in college .
for each term of service , 1 or 2 years , participants in national service programs will receive benefits that can be used toward past , present , or future obligations , whether for college or advanced job training .
you can get a college education and , in addition , through service , perhaps the best experience of your life .
that 's a pretty good investment .
i 've talked a lot about the students here .
and they do play a large part in this plan , but they 're not alone .
here in new orleans many of you already know what it means to make a difference in your community because you 've just been doing that for a long time .
and i 'm very proud , as i said .
i 'm going to get another cheer about this , but one of the models that i had a little something to do with is the delta service corps , and i appreciate what they 're doing .
there are people here working to restore housing .
there are people here working in other ways .
i just want to mention three : lawrence williams , a team leader in the corps who has helped to restore housing for low - income people with the local habitat for humanity project ; jane sullivan , a retired public schoolteacher and a former vista volunteer who helps rural communities gain better access to health care , housing , and other assistance ; and a young person i met just a few moments ago , parris moore - brown , who works with parents in housing programs for drug awareness outreach and now plans to work with the physically challenged .
she says that she has no tolerance for self - pity , and she lives what she preaches .
she has n't been slowed by what her birth dealt her , a brittle bone disorder that has left her as an adult , and by her own measure , 4 feet , 2 1/4 inches tall .
where are you ?
stand up on here so we can see you .
after my meeting with her and the other young people today , i 'd say she stands about 10 feet tall in america today .
there are tens of thousands of people like parris and jane and lawrence and those of you who are here with these service programs who are dying to be called to a new season of service , and we want to do that .
another part of our plan is to build on the national and community service act that was passed in 1990 , and the already flourishing programs that are started and up and going in every state in this country .
national service is not going to be a federal bureaucracy ; it 's going to operate at the grass roots with the real problems of real people and with the programs that work today .
it will be locally driven because i trust the communities in this country to make decisions for themselves .
i also want to say that while we want very much to have young people in this program who are working toward earning credits for college or paying their college loans off through national service , we need so many other people in service projects .
we need our older people who never will go back to college but have a lifetime of experience and energy to give to the young people of this country .
we need young people who may not be old enough to drive a car or to qualify for this program but can have a dramatic impact on fellow students by helping them learn better study habits or just keeping them out of trouble .
i 've learned already that , as the parent of a teenager , that the peers can have a big impact on the shape and quality of a child 's life .
even a child can serve in programs that now begin as early as kindergarten .
we have no upper age limit in america , or lower age limit for being a good public servant .
to be successful , this national program will need the broad - based support of all the american people .
parents and children , churches and synagogues , colleges and universities and the potential providers and the beneficiaries of our services .
in this vision of national service , everyone is a partner .
and that includes , of course , the business community in this country .
we need businesses to contribute to the effort , to match federal money and local programs and to contribute at the national level , helping to make sure that the programs we choose are good ones indeed .
what will set this legislation apart from other similar efforts in the past that rewarded service to our country is that it will totally eliminate the federal government bureaucracy .
and believe me , no one will miss that .
we 're going to set up a national service corporation that will run like a big venture capital outfit not like a bureaucracy .
and communities , as i said , will have the flexibility to make their own programs work .
i think that i 've seen enough today and i 've heard enough of your applause to know that the american people are hungry for a chance to serve their country and to reap the rewards of civic pride and education in the process .
in answering this call our people are following a proud history .
more than a century ago president abraham lincoln signed the homestead act , and the frontier of this country was settled by countless families who took up the challenge in exchange for 100 acres to call their own .
in the 1930 's president roosevelt enlisted millions of young people to restore the environment through the civilian conservation corps .
fdr gave others a chance to support themselves through the buildings made possible by the works project administration .
i was in the united states justice department just yesterday , a building built in 1934 by people who were giving service to their country , and it 's still a beautiful monument to the legacy of that kind of service .
the parents of the baby boom had the gi bill , which was one of the best investments our government ever made .
a generation ago , the young people of my generation saw suffering in latin america , asia , and africa , and many rushed to the challenge laid down by president kennedy when he created the peace corps , which became our country 's greatest ambassador , building bridges of understanding to far off cultures .
and now , three decades later , a challenge has been presented to all of you , a new challenge and an old one , as old as america and as new as your future .
a year ago when the democratic leadership council met in new orleans , i asked the following question : i said , i want you to think about what kind of citizens you 're going to be --   -- administration that this was the day the american people were empowered to renew their nation and their communities , to seize a better future for themselves , and to help all of us to be what the --   -- out of helping our fellow citizens and ourselves to become what we ought to be , this country will be all right .
thank you very much , and god bless you all .

thank you .
you know , when i was a boy growing up in arkansas , i thought it highly --   -- i thought it highly unlikely that i would ever become president of the united states .
perhaps the only thing even more unlikely was that i should ever have the opportunity to be cheered at the university of texas .
i must say i am very grateful for both of them .
president berdahl , chancellor cunningham , dean olson ; to the texas longhorn band , thank you for playing " hail to the chief . "
you were magnificent .
to my longtime friend of nearly 25 years now , bernard rapoport , thank you for your statement and your inspiration and your life of generous giving to this great university and so many other good causes .
all the distinguished guests in the audience -- i hesitate to start , but i thank my friend and your fellow texan henry cisneros for coming down here with me and for his magnificent work as secretary of hud .
i thank your congressman , lloyd doggett , and his wife , libby , for flying down with me .
and i 'm glad to see my dear friend congressman jake pickle here ; i miss you .
your attorney general , dan morales ; the land commissioner , garry mauro , i thank all of them for being here .
thank you , luci johnson , for being here , and please give my regards to your wonderful mother .
i have not seen her here -- there she is .
and i have to recognize and thank your former congresswoman and now distinguished professor , barbara jordan , for the magnificent job you did on the immigration issue .
thank you so much .
thank you .
thank you .
my wife told me about coming here so much , i wanted to come and see for myself .
i also know , as all of you do , that there is no such thing as saying no to liz carpenter .
i drug it out as long as i could just to hear a few more jokes .
my fellow americans , i want to begin by telling you that i am hopeful about america .
when i looked at nikole bell up here introducing me and i shook hands with these other young students , i looked into their eyes , i saw the americorps button on that gentleman 's shirt , i was reminded , as i talk about this thorny subject of race today , i was reminded of what winston churchill said about the united states when president roosevelt was trying to pass the lend - lease act so that we could help britain in their war against nazi germany before we , ourselves , were involved .
and for a good while the issue was hanging fire , and it was unclear whether the congress would permit us to help britain , who at that time was the only bulwark against tyranny in europe .
and winston churchill said , " i have great confidence in the judgment and the common sense of the american people and their leaders .
they invariably do the right thing after they have examined every other alternative . "
so i say to you , let me begin by saying that i can see in the eyes of these students and in the spirit of this moment , we will do the right thing .
in recent weeks , every one of us has been made aware of a simple truth : white americans and black americans often see the same world in drastically different ways , ways that go beyond and beneath the simpson trial and its aftermath , which brought these perceptions so starkly into the open .
the rift we see before us that is tearing at the heart of america exists in spite of the remarkable progress black americans have made in the last generation , since martin luther king swept america up in his dream and president johnson spoke so powerfully for the dignity of man and the destiny of democracy in demanding that congress guarantee full voting rights to blacks .
the rift between blacks and whites exists still in a very special way in america , in spite of the fact that we have become much more racially and ethnically diverse and that hispanic - americans , themselves no strangers to discrimination , are now almost 10 percent of our national population .
the reasons for this divide are many .
some are rooted in the awful history and stubborn persistence of racism .
some are rooted in the different ways we experience the threats of modern life to personal security , family values , and strong communities .
some are rooted in the fact that we still have n't learned to talk frankly , to listen carefully , and to work together across racial lines .
almost 30 years ago , dr. martin luther king took his last march with sanitation workers in memphis .
they marched for dignity , equality , and economic justice .
many carried placards that read simply , " i am a man . "
the throngs of men marching in washington today , almost all of them , are doing so for the same stated reason .
but there is a profound difference between this march today and those of 30 years ago .
thirty years ago , the marchers were demanding the dignity and opportunity they were due because in the face of terrible discrimination , they had worked hard , raised their children , paid their taxes , obeyed the laws , and fought our wars .
well , today 's march is also about pride and dignity and respect .
but after a generation of deepening social problems that disproportionately impact black americans , it is also about black men taking renewed responsibility for themselves , their families , and their communities .
it 's about saying no to crime and drugs and violence .
it 's about standing up for atonement and reconciliation .
it 's about insisting that others do the same and offering to help them .
it 's about the frank admission that unless black men shoulder their load , no one else can help them or their brothers , their sisters , and their children escape the hard , bleak lives that too many of them still face .
of course , some of those in the march do have a history that is far from its message of atonement and reconciliation .
one million men are right to be standing up for personal responsibility .
but one million men do not make right one man 's message of malice and division .
no good house was ever built on a bad foundation .
nothing good ever came of hate .
so let us pray today that all who march and all who speak will stand for atonement , for reconciliation , for responsibility .
let us pray that those who have spoken for hatred and division in the past will turn away from that past and give voice to the true message of those ordinary americans who march .
if that happens , the men and the women who are there with them will be marching into better lives for themselves and their families .
and they could be marching into a better future for america .
today we face a choice .
one way leads to further separation and bitterness and more lost futures .
the other way , the path of courage and wisdom , leads to unity , to reconciliation , to a rich opportunity for all americans to make the most of the lives god gave them .
this moment in which the racial divide is so clearly out in the open need not be a setback for us .
it presents us with a great opportunity , and we dare not let it pass us by .
in the past , when we 've had the courage to face the truth about our failure to live up to our own best ideals , we 've grown stronger , moved forward , and restored proud american optimism .
at such turning points , america moved to preserve the union and abolish slavery , to embrace women 's suffrage , to guarantee basic legal rights to america without regard to race , under the leadership of president johnson .
at each of these moments , we looked in the national mirror and were brave enough to say , this is not who we are ; we 're better than that .
abraham lincoln reminded us that a house divided against itself can not stand .
when divisions have threatened to bring our house down , somehow we have always moved together to shore it up .
my fellow americans , our house is the greatest democracy in all human history .
and with all its racial and ethnic diversity , it has beaten the odds of human history .
but we know that divisions remain , and we still have work to do .
the two worlds we see now each contain both truth and distortion .
both black and white americans must face this , for honesty is the only gateway to the many acts of reconciliation that will unite our worlds at last into one america .
white america must understand and acknowledge the roots of black pain .
it began with unequal treatment , first in law and later in fact .
african - americans indeed have lived too long with a justice system that in too many cases has been and continues to be less than just .
the record of abuses extends from lynchings and trumped up charges to false arrests and police brutality .
the tragedies of emmett till and rodney king are bloody markers on the very same road .
still today , too many of our police officers play by the rules of the bad old days .
it is beyond wrong when law - abiding black parents have to tell their law - abiding children to fear the police whose salaries are paid by their own taxes .
and blacks are right to think something is terribly wrong when african - american men are many times more likely to be victims of homicide than any other group in this country , when there are more african - american men in our corrections system than in our colleges , when almost one in three african - american men in their 20 's are either in jail , on parole , or otherwise under the supervision of the criminal justice system , nearly one in three .
and that is a disproportionate percentage in comparison to the percentage of blacks who use drugs in our society .
now , i would like every white person here and in america to take a moment to think how he or she would feel if one in three white men were in similar circumstances .
and there is still unacceptable economic disparity between blacks and whites .
it is so fashionable to talk today about african - americans as if they have been some sort of protected class .
many whites think blacks are getting more than their fair share in terms of jobs and promotions .
that is not true .
that is not true .
the truth is that african - americans still make on average about 60 percent of what white people do , that more than half of african - american children live in poverty .
and at the very time our young americans need access to college more than ever before , black college enrollment is dropping in america .
on the other hand , blacks must understand and acknowledge the roots of white fear in america .
there is a legitimate fear of the violence that is too prevalent in our urban areas .
and often , by experience or at least what people see on the news at night , violence for those white people too often has a black face .
it is n't racist for a parent to pull his or her child close when walking through a high - crime neighborhood or to wish to stay away from neighborhoods where innocent children can be shot in school or standing at bus stops by thugs driving by with assault weapons or toting handguns like old west desperadoes .
it is n't racist for parents to recoil in disgust when they read about a national survey of gang members saying that two - thirds of them feel justified in shooting someone simply for showing them disrespect .
it is n't racist for whites to say they do n't understand why people put up with gangs on the corner or in the projects or with drugs being sold in the schools or in the open .
it 's not racist for whites to assert that the culture of welfare dependency , out - of - wedlock pregnancy , and absent fatherhood can not be broken by social programs unless there is first more personal responsibility .
the great potential for this march today , beyond the black community , is that whites will come to see a larger truth : that blacks share their fears and embrace their convictions , openly assert that without changes in the black community and within individuals , real change for our society will not come .
this march could remind white people that most black people share their old - fashioned american values , for most black americans still do work hard , care for their families , pay their taxes , and obey the law , often under circumstances which are far more difficult than those their white counterparts face .
imagine how you would feel if you were a young parent in your 20 's with a young child living in a housing project , working somewhere for $ 5 an hour with no health insurance , passing every day people on the street selling drugs , making 100 times what you make .
those people are the real heroes of america today , and we should recognize that .
and white people too often forget that they are not immune to the problems black americans face , crime , drugs , domestic abuse , and teen pregnancy .
they are too prevalent among whites as well , and some of those problems are growing faster in our white population than in our minority population .
so we all have a stake in solving these common problems together .
it is therefore wrong for white americans to do what they have done too often , simply to move further away from the problems and support policies that will only make them worse .
finally , both sides seem to fear deep down inside that they 'll never quite be able to see each other as more than enemy faces , all of whom carry at least a sliver of bigotry in their hearts .
differences of opinion rooted in different experiences are healthy , indeed essential , for democracies .
but differences so great and so rooted in race threaten to divide the house mr. lincoln gave his life to save .
as dr. king said , " we must learn to live together as brothers , or we will perish as fools . "
recognizing one another 's real grievances is only the first step .
we must all take responsibility for ourselves , our conduct , and our attitudes .
america , we must clean our house of racism .
to our white citizens , i say , i know most of you every day do your very best by your own lights to live a life free of discrimination .
nevertheless , too many destructive ideas are gaining currency in our midst .
the taped voice of one policeman should fill you with outrage .
and so i say , we must clean the house of white america of racism .
americans who are in the white majority should be proud to stand up and be heard denouncing the sort of racist rhetoric we heard on that tape , so loudly and clearly denouncing it that our black fellow citizens can hear us .
white racism may be black people 's burden , but it 's white people 's problem .
we must clean our house .
to our black citizens , i honor the presence of hundreds of thousands of men in washington today committed to atonement and to personal responsibility and the commitment of millions of other men and women who are african - americans to this cause .
i call upon you to build on this effort , to share equally in the promise of america .
but to do that , your house , too , must be cleaned of racism .
there are too many today , white and black , on the left and the right , on the street corners and the radio waves , who seek to sow division for their own purposes .
to them i say , no more .
we must be one .
long before we were so diverse , our nation 's motto was e pluribus unum , out of many , we are one .
we must be one , as neighbors , as fellow citizens , not separate camps but family , white , black , latino , all of us , no matter how different , who share basic american values and are willing to live by them .
when a child is gunned down on a street in the bronx , no matter what our race , he is our american child .
when a woman dies from a beating , no matter what our race or hers , she is our american sister .
and every time drugs course through the vein of another child , it clouds the future of all our american children .
whether we like it or not , we are one nation , one family , indivisible .
and for us , divorce or separation are not options .
here in 1995 , on the edge of the 21st century , we dare not tolerate the existence of two americas .
under my watch , i will do everything i can to see that as soon as possible there is only one , one america under the rule of law , one social contract committed not to winner take all but to giving all americans a chance to win together , one america .
well , how do we get there ?
first , today i ask every governor , every mayor , every business leader , every church leader , every civic leader , every union steward , every student leader , most important , every citizen , in every workplace and learning place and meeting place all across america to take personal responsibility for reaching out to people of different races , for taking time to sit down and talk through this issue , to have the courage to speak honestly and frankly , and then to have the discipline to listen quietly with an open mind and an open heart , as others do the same .
this may seem like a simple request , but for tens of millions of americans , this has never been a reality .
they have never spoken , and they have never listened , not really , not really .
i am convinced , based on a rich lifetime of friendships and common endeavors with people of different races , that the american people will find out they have a lot more in common than they think they do .
the second thing we have to do is to defend and enhance real opportunity .
i 'm not talking about opportunity for black americans or opportunity for white americans ; i 'm talking about opportunity for all americans .
sooner or later , all our speaking , all our listening , all our caring has to lead to constructive action together for our words and our intentions to have meaning .
we can do this first by truly rewarding work and family in government policies , in employment policies , in community practices .
we also have to realize that there are some areas of our country , whether in urban areas or poor rural areas like south texas or eastern arkansas , where these problems are going to be more prevalent just because there is no opportunity .
there is only so much temptation some people can stand when they turn up against a brick wall day after day after day .
and if we can spread the benefits of education and free enterprise to those who have been denied them too long and who are isolated in enclaves in this country , then we have a moral obligation to do it .
it will be good for our country .
third and perhaps most important of all , we have to give every child in this country , and every adult who still needs it , the opportunity to get a good education .
president johnson understood that , and now that i am privileged to have this job and to look back across the whole sweep of american history , i can appreciate how truly historic his commitment to the simple idea that every child in this country ought to have an opportunity to get a good , safe , decent , fulfilling education was .
it was revolutionary then , and it is revolutionary today .
today that matters more than ever .
i 'm trying to do my part .
i am fighting hard against efforts to roll back family security , aid to distressed communities , and support for education .
i want it to be easier for poor children to get off to a good start in school , not harder .
i want it to be easier for everybody to go to college and stay there , not harder .
i want to mend affirmative action , but i do not think america is at a place today where we can end it .
the evidence of the last several weeks shows that .
but let us remember , the people marching in washington today are right about one fundamental thing : at its base , this issue of race is not about government or political leaders , it is about what is in the heart and minds and life of the american people .
there will be no progress in the absence of real responsibility on the part of all americans .
nowhere is that responsibility more important than in our efforts to promote public safety and preserve the rule of law .
law and order is the first responsibility of government .
our citizens must respect the law and those who enforce it .
police have a life - and - death responsibility never , never to abuse the power granted them by the people .
we know , by the way , what works in fighting crime also happens to improve relationships between the races .
what works in fighting crime is community policing .
we have seen it working all across america .
the crime rate is down , the murder rate is down where people relate to each other across the lines of police and community in an open , honest , respectful , supportive way .
we can lower crime and raise the state of race relations in america if we will remember this simple truth .
but if this is going to work , police departments have to be fair and engaged with , not estranged from , their communities .
i am committed to making this kind of community policing a reality all across our country .
but you must be committed to making it a reality in your communities .
we have to root out the remnants of racism in our police departments .
we 've got to get it out of our entire criminal justice system .
but just as the police have a sacred duty to protect the community fairly , all of our citizens have a sacred responsibility to respect the police , to teach our young people to respect them , and then to support them and work with them so that they can succeed in making us safer .
let 's not forget , most police officers of whatever race are honest people who love the law and put their lives on the lines so that the citizens they 're protecting can lead decent , secure lives and so that their children can grow up to do the same .
finally , i want to say , on the day of this march , a moment about a crucial area of responsibility , the responsibility of fatherhood .
the single biggest social problem in our society may be the growing absence of fathers from their children 's homes , because it contributes to so many other social problems .
one child in four grows up in a fatherless home .
without a father to help guide , without a father to care , without a father to teach boys to be men and to teach girls to expect respect from men , it 's harder .
there are a lot of mothers out there doing a magnificent job alone , a magnificent job alone , but it is harder .
it is harder .
this , of course , is not a black problem or a latino problem or a white problem , it is an american problem .
but it aggravates the conditions of the racial divide .
i know from my own life it is harder , because my own father died before i was born , and my stepfather 's battle with alcohol kept him from being the father he might have been .
but for all fathers , parenting is not easy , and every parent makes mistakes .
i know that , too , from my own experience .
the point is that we need people to be there for their children day after day .
building a family is the hardest job a man can do , but it 's also the most important .
for those who are neglecting their children , i say it is not too late ; your children still need you .
to those who only send money in the form of child support , i say keep sending the checks ; your kids count on them , and we 'll catch you and enforce the law if you stop .
but the message of this march today -- one message is that your money is no replacement for your guiding , your caring , your loving the children you brought into this world .
we can only build strong families when men and women respect each other , when they have partnerships , when men are as involved in the homeplace as women have become involved in the workplace .
it means , among other things , that we must keep working until we end domestic violence against women and children .
i hope those men in washington today pledge among other things to never , never raise their hand in violence against a woman .
so today , my fellow americans , i honor the black men marching in washington to demonstrate their commitment to themselves , their families , and their communities .
i honor the millions of men and women in america , the vast majority of every color , who without fanfare or recognition do what it takes to be good fathers and good mothers , good workers and good citizens .
they all deserve the thanks of america .
but when we leave here today , what are you going to do ?
what are you going to do ?
let all of us who want to stand up against racism do our part to roll back the divide .
begin by seeking out people in the workplace , the classroom , the community , the neighborhood across town , the places of worship to actually sit down and have those honest conversations i talked about , conversations where we speak openly and listen and understand how others view this world of ours .
make no mistake about it , we can bridge this great divide .
this is , after all , a very great country .
and we have become great by what we have overcome .
we have the world 's strongest economy , and it 's on the move .
but we 've really lasted because we have understood that our success could never be measured solely by the size of our gross national product .
i believe the march in washington today spawned such an outpouring because it is a reflection of something deeper and stronger that is running throughout our american community .
i believe that in millions and millions of different ways , our entire country is reasserting our commitment to the bedrock values that made our country great and that make life worth living .
the great divides of the past called for and were addressed by legal and legislative changes .
they were addressed by leaders like lyndon johnson , who passed the civil rights act and the voting rights act .
and to be sure , this great divide requires a public response by democratically elected leaders .
but today , we are really dealing , and we know it , with problems that grow in large measure out of the way all of us look at the world with our minds and the way we feel about the world with our hearts .
and therefore , while leaders and legislation may be important , this is work that has to be done by every single one of you .
and this is the ultimate test of our democracy , for today the house divided exists largely in the minds and hearts of the american people .
and it must be united there , in the minds and hearts of our people .
yes , there are some who would poison our progress by selling short the great character of our people and our enormous capacity to change and grow .
but they will not win the day ; we will win the day .
with your help , with your help , that day will come a lot sooner .
i will do my part , but you , my fellow citizens , must do yours .
thank you , and god bless you .

good morning , ladies and gentlemen , and let me thank you all for being here .
thank you , senator kyl and senator feinstein , for your ground - breaking work here .
thank you , senator exon ; my longtime friend senator heflin .
thank you , congressman frost , congressman stupak , congressman orton .
i thank all the representatives here of the victims community , the law enforcement community .
i thank the attorney general and john schmidt and aileen adams and bonnie campbell for doing such a fine job at the justice department on all criminal justice issues .
i thank the vice president and , especially , i want to thank roberta roper and the other members of the national movement for victims ' advocacy .
mr. roper , thank you for coming .
thank you , john and pat byron ; thank you , mark klaas ; and thank you , pam mcclain .
and especially , john walsh , thank you for spending all of these years to bring these issues to america 's attention .
thank you , sir .
i 'd also like to say a special word of thanks to the person who did more than any other person in the united states to talk me through all the legal and practical matters that have to be resolved in order for the president to advocate amending our constitution : former prosecutor and a former colleague of mine , governor bob miller of nevada .
thank you , sir , for your work here .
for years , we have worked to make our criminal justice system more effective , more fair , more even - handed , more vigilant in the protection of the innocent .
today , the system bends over backwards to protect those who may be innocent , and that is as it should be .
but it too often ignores the millions and millions of people who are completely innocent because they 're victims , and that is wrong .
that is what we are trying to correct today .
when someone is a victim , he or she should be at the center of the criminal justice process , not on the outside looking in .
participation in all forms of government is the essence of democracy .
victims should be guaranteed the right to participate in proceedings related to crimes committed against them .
people accused of crimes have explicit constitutional rights .
ordinary citizens have a constitutional right to participate in criminal trials by serving on a jury .
the press has a constitutional right to attend trials .
all of this is as it should be .
it is only the victims of crime who have no constitutional right to participate , and that is not the way it should be .
having carefully studied all the alternatives , i am now convinced that the only way to fully safeguard the rights of victims in america is to amend our constitution and guarantee these basic rights : to be told about public court proceedings and to attend them ; to make a statement to the court about bail , about sentencing , about accepting a plea if the victim is present ; to be told about parole hearings to attend and to speak ; notice when the defendant or convict escapes or is released ; restitution from the defendant ; reasonable protection from the defendant ; and notice of these rights .
if you have ever been a victim of a violent crime -- it probably would n't even occur to you that these rights could be denied if you 've never been a victim .
but actually , it happens time and time again .
it happens in spite of the fact that the victims ' rights movement in america has been an active force for about 20 years now .
the wife of a murdered state trooper in maryland is left crying outside the courtroom for the entire trial of her husband 's killers , because the defense subpoenaed her as a witness just to keep her out and never even called her .
a rape victim in florida is n't notified when her rapist is released on parole .
he finds her and kills her .
last year in new jersey , 8-year - old jakiyah mcclain was sexually assaulted and brutally murdered .
she had gone to visit a friend and never came home .
police found her in the closet of an abandoned apartment ; now , her mother wants to use a new jersey law that gives the murder victims ' survivors the right to address a jury deciding on the death penalty .
she wants the jury to know more about this fine young girl than the crime scene reports .
she wants them to know that jakiyah was accepted into a school for gifted children the day before she died .
but a new jersey judge decided she ca n't testify even though the state law gave her the right to do so .
he ruled that the defendant 's constitutional right to a fair trial required him to strike the law down .
well , jakiyah 's mother had the courage to overcome her pain to be with us today .
we have to change this for her and for other victims in america .
thank you , and god bless you .
the only way to give victims equal and due consideration is to amend the constitution .
for nearly 20 years i have been involved in the fight for victims ' rights since i was attorney general in my home state .
we passed laws then to guarantee victims ' rights to attend trials and to get restitutions and later to get notice and to participate in parole hearings .
over all those years , i learned what every victim of crime knows too well : as long as the rights of the accused are protected but the rights of victims are not , time and again , the victims will lose .
when a judge balances defendants ' rights in the federal constitution against victims ' rights in a statute or a state constitution , the defendants ' rights almost always prevail .
that 's just how the law works today .
we want to level the playing field .
this is not about depriving people accused of crimes of their legitimate rights , including the presumption of innocence ; this is about simple fairness .
when a judge balances the rights of the accused and the rights of the victim , we want the rights of the victim to get equal weight .
when a plea bargain is entered in public , a criminal is sentenced , a defendant is let out on bail , the victim ought to know about it and ought to have a say .
i want to work with the congressional leadership , the house and senate judiciary committees , including senators kyl and feinstein and chairman hyde and law enforcement officials , to craft the best possible amendment .
it should guarantee victims ' rights in every court in the land , federal , state , juvenile , and military .
it should be self - executing so that it takes effect as soon as it 's ratified without additional legislation .
congress will take responsibility to enforce victims ' rights in federal courts , and the states will keep responsibility to enforce them in state courts , but we need the amendment .
i also want to say , just before i go forward , again i want to thank senators kyl and feinstein and the others who have approached this in a totally bipartisan manner .
this is a cause for all americans .
when people are victimized , the criminal almost never asks before you 're robbed or beaten or raped or murdered : are you a republican or a democrat ?
this is a matter of national security just as much as the national security issues beyond our borders on which we try to achieve a bipartisan consensus .
and i applaud the nonpolitical and patriotic way in which this manner has been approached in the congress , just like it 's approached every day in the country , and we ought to do our best to keep it that way .
we know that there can be , with any good effort , unforeseen consequences .
we think we know what they would likely be , and we believe we know how to guard against them .
we certainly do n't want to make it harder for prosecutors to convict violent criminals .
we sure do n't want to give criminals like gang members , who may be victims of their associates , any way to take advantage of these rights just to slow the criminal justice process down .
we want to protect victims , not accidentally help criminals .
but we can solve these problems .
the problems are not an excuse for inaction .
we still have to go forward .
of course , amending the constitution can take a long time .
it may take years .
and while we work to amend it , we must do everything in our power to enhance the protection of victims ' rights now .
today i 'm directing the attorney general to hold the federal system to a higher standard than ever before , to guarantee maximum participation by victims under existing law and to review existing legislation to see what further changes we ought to make .
i 'll give you an example .
there ought to be , i believe , in every law , federal and state , a protection for victims who participate in the criminal justice process not to be discriminated against on the job because they have to take time off .
that protection today is accorded to jury members ; it certainly ought to extend to people who are victims who need to be in the criminal justice process .
and we should n't wait for that kind of thing to be done .
i want investigators and prosecutors to take the strongest steps to include victims .
i want work to begin immediately to launch a computerized system so victims get information about new developments in a case , in changes in the status or the location of a defendant or a convict .
i do not support amending the constitution lightly .
it is sacred .
it should be changed only with great caution and after much consideration .
but i reject the idea that it should never be changed .
change it lightly , and you risk its distinction .
but never change it , and you risk its vitality .
i have supported the goals of many constitutional amendments since i took office , but in each amendment that has been proposed during my tenure as president , i have opposed the amendment either because it was not appropriate or not necessary .
but this is different .
i want to balance the budget , for example , but the constitution already gives us the power to do that .
what we need is the will and to work together to do that .
i want young people to be able to express their religious convictions in an appropriate manner wherever they are , even in a school , but the constitution protects people 's rights to express their faith .
but this is different .
this is not an attempt to put legislative responsibilities in the constitution or to guarantee a right that is already guaranteed .
amending the constitution here is simply the only way to guarantee that victims ' rights are weighted equally with defendants ' rights in every courtroom in america .
two hundred twenty years ago , our founding fathers were concerned , justifiably , that government never , never trample on the rights of people just because they are accused of a crime .
today , it 's time for us to make sure that while we continue to protect the rights of the accused , government does not trample on the rights of the victims .
until these rights are also enshrined in our constitution , the people who have been hurt most by crime will continue to be denied equal justice under law .
that 's what this country is really all about , equal justice under law .
and crime victims deserve that as much as any group of citizens in the united states ever will .
thank you , god bless you , and god bless america .

my fellow citizens , tonight is my last opportunity to speak to you from the oval office as your president .
i am profoundly grateful to you for twice giving me the honor to serve , to work for you and with you to prepare our nation for the 21st century .
and i 'm grateful to vice president gore , to my cabinet secretaries , and to all those who have served with me for the last eight years .
this has been a time of dramatic transformation , and you have risen to every new challenge .
you have made our social fabric stronger , our families healthier and safer , our people more prosperous .
you , the american people , have made our passage into the global information age an era of great american renewal .
in all the work i have done as president -- every decision i have made , every executive action i have taken , every bill i have proposed and signed -- i 've tried to give all americans the tools and conditions to build the future of our dreams in a good society with a strong economy , a cleaner environment , and a freer , safer , more prosperous world .
i have steered my course by our enduring values : opportunity for all , responsibility from all , a community of all americans .
i have sought to give america a new kind of government , smaller , more modern , more effective , full of ideas and policies appropriate to this new time , always putting people first , always focusing on the future .
working together , america has done well .
our economy is breaking records with more than 22 million new jobs , the lowest unemployment in 30 years , the highest homeownership ever , the longest expansion in history .
our families and communities are stronger .
thirty - five million americans have used the family leave law ; 8 million have moved off welfare .
crime is at a 25-year low .
over 10 million americans receive more college aid , and more people than ever are going to college .
our schools are better .
higher standards , greater accountability , and larger investments have brought higher test scores and higher graduation rates .
more than 3 million children have health insurance now , and more than 7 million americans have been lifted out of poverty .
incomes are rising across the board .
our air and water are cleaner .
our food and drinking water are safer .
and more of our precious land has been preserved in the continental united states than at any time in a 100 years .
america has been a force for peace and prosperity in every corner of the globe .
i 'm very grateful to be able to turn over the reins of leadership to a new president with america in such a strong position to meet the challenges of the future .
tonight i want to leave you with three thoughts about our future .
first , america must maintain our record of fiscal responsibility .
through our last four budgets we 've turned record deficits to record surpluses , and we 've been able to pay down $ 600 billion of our national debt -- on track to be debt - free by the end of the decade for the first time since 1835 .
staying on that course will bring lower interest rates , greater prosperity , and the opportunity to meet our big challenges .
if we choose wisely , we can pay down the debt , deal with the retirement of the baby boomers , invest more in our future , and provide tax relief .
second , because the world is more connected every day , in every way , america 's security and prosperity require us to continue to lead in the world .
at this remarkable moment in history , more people live in freedom than ever before .
our alliances are stronger than ever .
people all around the world look to america to be a force for peace and prosperity , freedom and security .
the global economy is giving more of our own people and billions around the world the chance to work and live and raise their families with dignity .
but the forces of integration that have created these good opportunities also make us more subject to global forces of destruction , to terrorism , organized crime and narcotrafficking , the spread of deadly weapons and disease , the degradation of the global environment .
the expansion of trade has n't fully closed the gap between those of us who live on the cutting edge of the global economy and the billions around the world who live on the knife 's edge of survival .
this global gap requires more than compassion ; it requires action .
global poverty is a powder keg that could be ignited by our indifference .
in his first inaugural address , thomas jefferson warned of entangling alliances .
but in our times , america can not and must not disentangle itself from the world .
if we want the world to embody our shared values , then we must assume a shared responsibility .
if the wars of the 20th century , especially the recent ones in kosovo and bosnia , have taught us anything , it is that we achieve our aims by defending our values and leading the forces of freedom and peace .
we must embrace boldly and resolutely that duty to lead - to stand with our allies in word and deed and to put a human face on the global economy , so that expanded trade benefits all peoples in all nations , lifting lives and hopes all across the world .
third , we must remember that america can not lead in the world unless here at home we weave the threads of our coat of many colors into the fabric of one america .
as we become ever more diverse , we must work harder to unite around our common values and our common humanity .
we must work harder to overcome our differences , in our hearts and in our laws .
we must treat all our people with fairness and dignity , regardless of their race , religion , gender , or sexual orientation , and regardless of when they arrived in our country -- always moving toward the more perfect union of our founders ' dreams .
hillary , chelsea , and i join all americans in wishing our very best to the next president , george w. bush , to his family and his administration , in meeting these challenges , and in leading freedom 's march in this new century .
as for me , i 'll leave the presidency more idealistic , more full of hope than the day i arrived , and more confident than ever that america 's best days lie ahead .
my days in this office are nearly through , but my days of service , i hope , are not .
in the years ahead , i will never hold a position higher or a covenant more sacred than that of president of the united states .
but there is no title i will wear more proudly than that of citizens .
thank you .
god bless you , and god bless america .

prime minister rabin , chairman arafat , foreign minister peres , mr. abbas , president carter , president bush , distinguished guests .
on behalf of the united states and russia , cosponsors of the middle east peace process , welcome to this great occasion of history and hope .
today we bear witness to an extraordinary act in one of history 's defining dramas , a drama that began in the time of our ancestors when the word went forth from a sliver of land between tide fiver jordan and the mediterranean sea .
that hallowed piece of earth , that land of light and revelation is the home to the memories and dreams of jews , muslims , and christians throughout the world .
as we all know , devotion to that land has also been the source of conflict and bloodshed for too long .
throughout this century , bitterness between the palestinian and jewish people has robbed the entire region of its resources , its potential , and too many of its sons and daughters .
the land has been so drenched in warfare and hatred , the conflicting claims of history etched so deeply in the souls of the combatants there , that many believed the past would always have the upper hand .
then , 14 years ago , the past began to give way when , at this place and upon this desk , three men of great vision signed their names to the camp david accords .
today we honor the memories of menachem begin and anwar sadat , and we salute the wise leadership of president jimmy carter .
then , as now , we heard from those who said that conflict would come again soon .
but the peace between egypt and israel has endured .
just so , this bold new venture today , this brave gamble that the future can be better than the past , must endure .
two years ago in madrid , another president took a major step on the road to peace by bringing israel and all her neighbors together to launch direct negotiations .
and today we also express our deep thanks for the skillful leadership of president george bush .
ever since harry truman first recognized israel , every american president , democrat and republican , has worked for peace between israel and her neighbors .
now the efforts of all who have labored before us bring us to this moment , a moment when we dare to pledge what for so long seemed difficult even to imagine : that the security of the israeli people will be reconciled with the hopes of the palestinian people and there will be more security and more hope for all .
today the leadership of israel and the palestine liberation organization will sign a declaration of principles on interim palestinian self - government .
it charts a course toward reconciliation between two peoples who have both known the bitterness of exile .
now both pledge to put old sorrows and antagonisms behind them and to work for a shared future shaped by the values of the torah , the koran , and the bible .
let us salute also today the government of norway for its remarkable role in nurturing this agreement .
but above all , let us today pay tribute to the leaders who had the courage to lead their people toward peace , away from the scars of battle , the wounds and the losses of the past , toward a brighter tomorrow .
the word today thanks prime minister rabin , foreign minister peres , and chairman arafat .
their tenacity and vision has given us the promise of a new beginning .
what these leaders have done now must be done by others .
their achievement must be a catalyst for progress in all aspects of the peace process .
and those of us who support them must be there to help in all aspects .
for the peace must render the people who make it more secure .
a peace of the brave is .
within our reach .
throughout the middle east , there is a great yearning for the quiet miracle of a normal life .
we know a difficult road lies ahead .
every peace has its enemies , those who still prefer the easy habits of hatred to the hard labors of reconciliation .
but prime minister rabin has reminded us that you do not have to make peace with your friends .
and the koran teaches that if the enemy inclines toward peace , do thou also incline toward peace .
therefore , let us resolve that this new mutual recognition will be a continuing process in which the parties transform the very way they see and understand each other .
let the skeptics of this peace recall what once existed among these people .
there was a time when the traffic of ideas and commerce and pilgrims flowed uninterrupted among the cities of the fertile crescent .
in spain and the middle east , muslims and jews once worked together to write brilliant chapters in the history of literature and science .
all this can come to pass again .
mr. prime minister , mr. chairman , i pledge the active support of the united states of america to the difficult work that lies ahead .
the united states is committed to ensuring that the people who are affected by this agreement will be made more secure by it and to leading the world in marshaling the resources necessary to implement the difficult details that will make real the principles to which you commit yourselves today .
together let us imagine what can be accomplished if all the energy and ability the israelis and the palestinians have invested into your struggle can now be channeled into cultivating the land and freshening the waters , into ending the boycotts and creating new industry , into building a land as bountiful and peaceful as it is holy .
above all , let us dedicate ourselves today to your region 's next generation .
in this entire assembly , no one is more important than the group of israeli and arab children who are seated here with us today .
mr. prime minister , mr. chairman , this day belongs to you .
and because of what you have done , tomorrow belongs to them .
we must not leave them prey to the politics of extremism and despair , to those who would derail this process because they can not overcome the fears and hatreds of the past .
we must not betray their future .
for too long , the young of the middle east have been caught in a web of hatred not of their own making .
for too long , they have been taught from the chronicles of war .
now we can give them the chance to know the season of peace .
for them we must realize the prophecy of isaiah that the cry of violence shall no more be heard in your land , nor wrack nor ruin within your borders .
the children of abraham , the descendants of isaac and ishmael , have embarked together on a bold journey .
together today , with all our hearts and all our souls , we bid them shalom , salaam , peace .

mr. president , mr. speaker , members of the house and the senate , distinguished americans here as visitors in this chamber , as am i. it is nice to have a fresh excuse for giving a long speech .
when presidents speak to congress and the nation from this podium , typically they comment on the full range in challenges and opportunities that face the united states .
but this is not an ordinary time , and for all the many tasks that require our attention , i believe tonight one calls on us to focus , to unite , and to act .
and that is our economy .
for more than anything else , our task tonight as americans is to make our economy thrive again .
let me begin by saying that it has been too long , at least three decades , since a president has come and challenged americans to join him on a great national journey , not merely to consume the bounty of today but to invest for a much greater one tomorrow .
like individuals , nations must ultimately decide how they wish to conduct themselves , how they wish to be thought of by those with whom they live , and later , how they wish to be judged by history .
like every individual man and woman , nations must decide whether they are prepared to rise to the occasions history presents them .
we have always been a people of youthful energy and daring spirit .
and at this historic moment , as communism has fallen , as freedom is spreading around the world , as a global economy is taking shape before our eyes , americans have called for change .
and now it is up to those of us in this room to deliver for them .
our nation needs a new direction .
tonight i present to you a comprehensive plan to set our nation on that new course .
i believe we will find our new direction in the basic old values that brought us here over the last two centuries : a commitment to opportunity , to individual responsibility , to community , to work , to family , and to faith .
we must now break the habits of both political parties and say there can be no more something for nothing and admit frankly that we are all in this together .
the conditions which brought us as a nation to this point are well - known : two decades of low productivity , growth , and stagnant wages ; persistent unemployment and underemployment ; years of huge government deficits and declining investment in our future ; exploding health care costs and lack of coverage for millions of americans ; legions of poor children ; education and job training opportunities inadequate to the demands of this tough , global economy .
for too long we have drifted without a strong sense of purpose or responsibility or community .
and our political system so often has seemed paralyzed by special interest groups , by partisan bickering , and by the sheer complexity of our problems .
i believe we can do better because we remain the greatest nation on earth , the world 's strongest economy , the world 's only military superpower .
if we have the vision , the will , and the heart to make the changes we must , we can still enter the 21st century with possibilities our parents could not even have imagined and enter it having secured the american dream for ourselves and for future generations .
i well remember 12 years ago president reagan stood at this very podium and told you and the american people that if our national debt were stacked in thousand - dollar bills , the stack would reach 67 miles into space .
well , today that stack would reach 267 miles .
i tell you this not to assign blame for this problem .
there is plenty of blame to go around in both branches of the government and both parties .
the time has come for the blame to end .
i did not seek this office to place blame .
i come here tonight to accept responsibility , and i want you to accept responsibility with me .
and if we do right by this country , i do not care who gets the credit for it .
the plan i offer you has four fundamental components .
first , it shifts our emphasis in public and private spending from consumption to investment , initially by jumpstarting the economy in the short term and investing in our people , their jobs , and their incomes over the long run .
second , it changes the rhetoric of the past into the actions of the present by honoring work and families in every part of our public decision - making .
third , it substantially reduces the federal deficit honestly and credibly by using in the beginning the most conservative estimates of government revenues , not , as the executive branch has done so often in the past , using the most optimistic ones .
and finally , it seeks to earn the trust of the american people by paying for these plans first with cuts in government waste and efficiency ; second , with cuts , not gimmicks , in government spending ; and by fairness , for a change , in the way additional burdens are borne .
tonight i want to talk with you about what government can do because i believe government must do more .
but let me say first that the real engine of economic growth in this country is the private sector , and second , that each of us must be an engine of growth and change .
the truth is that as government creates more opportunity in this new and different time , we must also demand more responsibility in turn .
our immediate priority must be to create jobs , create jobs now .
some people say , " well , we 're in a recovery , and we do n't have to do that . "
well , we all hope we 're in a recovery , but we 're sure not creating new jobs .
and there 's no recovery worth its salt that does n't put the american people back to work .
to create jobs and guarantee a strong recovery , i call on congress to enact an immediate package of jobs investments of over $ 30 billion to put people to work now , to create a half a million jobs : jobs to rebuild our highways and airports , to renovate housing , to bring new life to rural communities , and spread hope and opportunity among our nation 's youth .
especially i want to emphasize , after the events of last year in los angeles and the countless stories of despair in our cities and in our poor rural communities , this proposal will create almost 700,000 new summer jobs for displaced , unemployed young people alone this summer .
and tonight i invite america 's business leaders to join us in this effort so that together we can provide over one million summer jobs in cities and poor rural areas for our young people .
second , our plan looks beyond today 's business cycle because our aspirations extend into the next century .
the heart of this plan deals with the long term .
it is an investment program designed to increase public and private investment in areas critical to our economic future .
and it has a deficit reduction program that will increase the savings available for the private sector to invest , will lower interest rates , will decrease the percentage of the federal budget claimed by interest payments , and decrease the risk of financial market disruptions that could adversely affect our economy .
over the long run , all this will bring us a higher rate of economic growth , improved productivity , more high - quality jobs , and an improved economic competitive position in the world .
in order to accomplish both increased investment and deficit reduction , something no american government has ever been called upon to do at the same time before , spending must be cut and taxes must be raised .
the spending cuts i recommend were carefully thought through in a way to minimize any adverse economic impact , to capture the peace dividend for investment purposes , and to switch the balance in the budget from consumption to more investment .
the tax increases and the spending cuts were both designed to assure that the cost of this historic program to face and deal with our problems will be borne by those who could readily afford it the most .
our plan is designed , furthermore , and perhaps in some ways most importantly , to improve the health of american business through lower interest rates , more incentives to invest , and better trained workers .
because small business has created such a high percentage of all the new jobs in our nation over the last 10 or 15 years , our plan includes the boldest targeted incentives for small business in history .
we propose a permanent investment tax credit for the smallest firms in this country , with revenues of under $ 5 million .
that 's about 90 percent of the firms in america , employing about 40 percent of the work force but creating a big majority of the net new jobs for more than a decade .
and we propose new rewards for entrepreneurs who take new risks .
we propose to give small business access to all the new technologies of our time .
and we propose to attack this credit crunch which has denied small business the credit they need to flourish and prosper .
with a new network of community development banks and $ 1 billion to make the dream of enterprise zones real , we propose to bring new hope and new jobs to storefronts and factories from south boston to south texas to south central los angeles .
this plan invests in our roads , our bridges , our transit systems , in high - speed railways and high - tech information systems .
and it provides the most ambitious environmental cleanup in partnership with state and local government of our time , to put people to work and to preserve the environment for our future .
standing as we are on the edge of a new century , we know that economic growth depends as never before on opening up new markets overseas and expanding the volume of world trade .
and so , we will insist on fair trade rules in international markets as a part of a national economic strategy to expand trade , including the successful completion of the latest round of world trade talks and the successful completion of a north american free trade agreement with appropriate safeguards for our workers and for the environment .
at the same time -- and i say this to you in both parties and across america tonight , all the people who are listening -- it is not enough to pass a budget or even to have a trade agreement .
this world is changing so fast that we must have aggressive , targeted attempts to create the high - wage jobs of the future .
that 's what all our competitors are doing .
we must give special attention to those critical industries that are going to explode in the 21st century but that are in trouble in america today , like aerospace .
we must provide special assistance to areas and to workers displaced by cuts in the defense budget and by other unavoidable economic dislocations .
and again i will say we must do this together .
i pledge to you that i will do my best to see that business and labor and government work together for a change .
but all of our efforts to strengthen the economy will fail -- let me say this again ; i feel so strongly about this -- all of our efforts to strengthen the economy will fail unless we also take this year , not next year , not 5 years from now but this year , bold steps to reform our health care system .
in 1992 , we spent 14 percent of our income on health care , more than 30 percent more than any other country in the world , and yet we were the only advanced nation that did not provide a basic package of health care benefits to all of its citizens .
unless we change the present pattern , 50 percent of the growth in the deficit between now and the year 2000 will be in health care costs .
by the year 2000 almost 20 percent of our income will be in health care .
our families will never be secure , our businesses will never be strong , and our government will never again be fully solvent until we tackle the health care crisis .
we must do it this year .
the combination of the rising cost of care and the lack of care and the fear of losing care are endangering the security and the very lives of millions of our people .
and they are weakening our economy every day .
reducing health care costs can liberate literally hundreds of billions of dollars for new investment in growth and jobs .
bringing health costs in line with inflation would do more for the private sector in this country than any tax cut we could give and any spending program we could promote .
reforming health care over the long run is critically essential to reducing not only our deficit but to expanding investment in america .
later this spring , after the first lady and the many good people who are helping her all across the country complete their work , i will deliver to congress a comprehensive plan for health care reform that finally will bring costs under control and provide security to all of our families , so that no one will be denied the coverage they need but so that our economic future will not be compromised either .
we 'll have to root out fraud and overcharges and make sure that paperwork no longer chokes your doctor .
we 'll have to maintain the highest american standards and the right to choose in a system that is the world 's finest for all those who can access it .
but first we must make choices .
we must choose to give the american people the quality they demand and deserve with a system that will not bankrupt the country or further drive more americans into agony .
let me further say that i want to work with all of you on this .
i realize this is a complicated issue .
but we must address it .
and i believe if there is any chance that republicans and democrats who disagree on taxes and spending or anything else could agree on one thing , surely we can all look at these numbers and go home and tell our people the truth .
we can not continue these spending patterns in public or private dollars for health care for less and less and less every year .
we can do better .
and i will work to do better .
perhaps the most fundamental change the new direction i propose offers is its focus on the future and its investment which i seek in our children .
each day we delay really making a commitment to our children carries a dear cost .
half of the 2-year - olds in this country today do n't receive the immunizations they need against deadly diseases .
our plan will provide them for every eligible child .
and we know now that we will save $ 10 later for every $ 1 we spend by eliminating preventable childhood diseases .
that 's a good investment no matter how you measure it .
i recommend that the women , infants , and children 's nutrition program be expanded so that every expectant mother who needs the help gets it .
we all know that head start , a program that prepares children for school , is a success story .
we all know that it saves money .
but today it just reaches barely over one - third of all the eligible children .
under this plan , every eligible child will be able to get a head start .
this is not just the right thing to do ; it is the smart thing to do .
for every dollar we invest today , we 'll save $ 3 tomorrow .
we have to start thinking about tomorrow .
i 've heard that somewhere before .
we have to ask more in our schools of our students , our teachers , our principals , our parents .
yes , we must give them the resources they need to meet high standards , but we must also use the authority and the influence and the funding of the education department to promote strategies that really work in learning .
money alone is not enough .
we have to do what really works to increase learning in our schools .
we have to recognize that all of our high school graduates need some further education in order to be competitive in this global economy .
so we have to establish a partnership between businesses and education and the government for apprenticeship programs in every state in this country to give our people the skills they need .
lifelong learning must benefit not just young high school graduates but workers , too , throughout their career .
the average 18-year - old today will change jobs seven times in a lifetime .
we have done a lot in this country on worker training in the last few years , but the system is too fractured .
we must develop a unified , simplified , sensible , streamlined worker - training program so that workers receive the training they need regardless of why they lost their jobs or whether they simply need to learn something new to keep them .
we have got to do better on this .
and finally , i propose a program that got a great response from the american people all across this country last year : a program of national service to make college loans available to all americans and to challenge them at the same time to give something back to their country as teachers or police officers or community service workers ; to give them the option to pay the loans back , but at tax time so they ca n't beat the bill , but to encourage them instead to pay it back by making their country stronger and making their country better and giving us the benefit of their knowledge .
a generation ago when president kennedy proposed and the united states congress embraced the peace corps , it defined the character of a whole generation of americans committed to serving people around the world .
in this national service program , we will provide more than twice as many slots for people before they go to college to be in national service than ever served in the peace corps .
this program could do for this generation of members of congress what the land grant college act did and what the gi bill did for former congressmen .
in the future , historians who got their education through the national service loan will look back on you and thank you for giving america a new lease on life , if you meet this challenge .
if we believe in jobs and we believe in learning , we must believe in rewarding work .
if we believe in restoring the values that make america special , we must believe that there is dignity in all work , and there must be dignity for all workers .
to those who care for our sick , who tend our children , who do our most difficult and tiring jobs , the new direction i propose will make this solemn , simple commitment : by expanding the refundable earned - income tax credit , we will make history .
we will reward the work of millions of working poor americans by realizing the principle that if you work 40 hours a week and you 've got a child in the house , you will no longer be in poverty .
later this year , we will offer a plan to end welfare as we know it .
i have worked on this issue for the better part of a decade .
and i know from personal conversations with many people that no one , no one wants to change the welfare system as badly as those who are trapped in it .
i want to offer the people on welfare the education , the training , the child care , the health care they need to get back on their feet , but say after 2 years they must get back to work , too , in private business if possible , in public service if necessary .
we have to end welfare as a way of life and make it a path to independence and dignity .
our next great goal should be to strengthen our families .
i compliment the congress for passing the family and medical leave act as a good first step , but it is time to do more .
this plan will give this country the toughest child support enforcement system it has ever had .
it is time to demand that people take responsibility for the children they bring in this world .
and i ask you to help to protect our families against the violent crime which terrorizes our people and which tears our communities apart .
we must pass a tough crime bill .
i support not only the bill which did n't quite make it to the president 's desk last year but also an initiative to put 100,000 more police officers on the street , to provide boot camps for first - time nonviolent offenders for more space for the hardened criminals in jail .
and i support an initiative to do what we can to keep guns out of the hands of criminals .
let me say this .
i will make you this bargain : if you will pass the brady bill , i 'll sure sign it .
let me say now , we should move to the harder parts .
i think it is clear to every american , including every member of congress of both parties , that the confidence of the people who pay our bills in our institutions in washington is not high .
we must restore it .
we must begin again to make government work for ordinary taxpayers , not simply for organized interest groups .
and that beginning must start with real political reform .
i am asking the united states congress to pass a real campaign finance reform bill this year .
i ask you to increase the participation of the american people by passing the motor voter bill promptly .
i ask you to deal with the undue influence of special interests by passing a bill to end the tax deduction for lobbying and to act quickly to require all the people who lobby you to register as lobbyists by passing the lobbying registration bill .
believe me , they were cheering that last section at home .
i believe lobby reform and campaign finance reform are a sure path to increased popularity for republicans and democrats alike because it says to the voters back home , " this is your house .
this is your senate .
we 're your hired hands , and every penny we draw is your money . "
next , to revolutionize government we have to ensure that we live within our means , and that should start at the top and with the white house .
in the last few days i have announced a cut in the white house staff of 25 percent , saving approximately $ 10 million .
i have ordered administrative cuts in budgets of agencies and departments .
i have cut the federal bureaucracy , or will over the next 4 years , by approximately 100,000 positions , for a combined savings of $ 9 billion .
it is time for government to demonstrate , in the condition we 're in , that we can be as frugal as any household in america .
and that 's why i also want to congratulate the congress .
i noticed the announcement of the leadership today that congress is taking similar steps to cut its costs .
i think that is important .
i think it will send a very clear signal to the american people .
but if we really want to cut spending , we 're going to have to do more , and some of it will be difficult .
tonight i call for an across - the - board freeze in federal government salaries for one year .
and thereafter , during this 4-year period , i recommend that salaries rise at one point lower than the cost of living allowance normally involved in federal pay increases .
next , i recommend that we make 150 specific budget cuts , as you know , and that all those who say we should cut more be as specific as i have been .
finally , let me say to my friends on both sides of the aisle , it is not enough simply to cut government ; we have to rethink the whole way it works .
when i became president i was amazed at just the way the white house worked , in ways that added lots of money to what taxpayers had to pay , outmoded ways that did n't take maximum advantage of technology and did n't do things that any business would have done years ago to save taxpayers ' money .
so i want to bring a new spirit of innovation into every government department .
i want to push education reform , as i said , not just to spend more money but to really improve learning .
some things work , and some things do n't .
we ought to be subsidizing the things that work and discouraging the things that do n't .
i 'd like to use that superfund to clean up pollution for a change and not just pay lawyers .
in the aftermath of all the difficulties with the savings and loans , we must use federal bank regulators to protect the security and safety of our financial institutions , but they should not be used to continue the credit crunch and to stop people from making sensible loans .
i 'd like for us to not only have welfare reform but to reexamine the whole focus of all of our programs that help people , to shift them from entitlement programs to empowerment programs .
in the end we want people not to need us anymore .
i think that 's important .
but in the end we have to get back to the deficit .
for years there 's been a lot of talk about it but very few credible efforts to deal with it .
and now i understand why , having dealt with the real numbers for 4 weeks .
but i believe this plan does ; it tackles the budget deficit seriously and over the long term .
it puts in place one of the biggest deficit reductions and one of the biggest changes in federal priorities , from consumption to investment , in the history of this country at the same time over the next 4 years .
let me say to all the people watching us tonight who will ask me these questions beginning tomorrow as i go around the country and who 've asked it in the past : we 're not cutting the deficit just because experts say it 's the thing to do or because it has some intrinsic merit .
we have to cut the deficit because the more we spend paying off the debt , the less tax dollars we have to invest in jobs and education and the future of this country .
and the more money we take out of the pool of available savings , the harder it is for people in the private sector to borrow money at affordable interest rates for a college loan for their children , for a home mortgage , or to start a new business .
that 's why we 've got to reduce the debt , because it is crowding out other activities that we ought to be engaged in and that the american people ought to be engaged in .
we cut the deficit so that our children will be able to buy a home , so that our companies can invest in the future and in retraining their workers , so that our government can make the kinds of investments we need to be a stronger and smarter and safer nation .
if we do n't act now , you and i might not even recognize this government 10 years from now .
if we just stay with the same trends of the last 4 years , by the end of the decade the deficit will be $ 635 billion a year , almost 80 percent of our gross domestic product .
and paying interest on that debt will be the costliest government program of all .
we 'll still be the world 's largest debtor .
and when members of congress come here , they 'll be devoting over 20 cents on the dollar to interest payments , more than half of the budget to health care and to other entitlements .
and you 'll come here and deliberate and argue over 6 or 7 cents on the dollar , no matter what america 's problems are .
we will not be able to have the independence we need to chart the future that we must .
and we 'll be terribly dependent on foreign funds for a large portion of our investment .
this budget plan , by contrast , will by 1997 cut $ 140 billion in that year alone from the deficit , a real spending cut , a real revenue increase , a real deficit reduction , using the independent numbers of the congressional budget office .
well , you can laugh , my fellow republicans , but i 'll point out that the congressional budget office was normally more conservative in what was going to happen and closer to right than previous presidents have been .
i did this so that we could argue about priorities with the same set of numbers .
i did this so that no one could say i was estimating my way out of this difficulty .
i did this because if we can agree together on the most prudent revenues we 're likely to get if the recovery stays and we do right things economically , then it will turn out better for the american people than we say .
in the last 12 years , because there were differences over the revenue estimates , you and i know that both parties were given greater elbow room for irresponsibility .
this is tightening the rein on the democrats as well as the republicans .
let 's at least argue about the same set of numbers so the american people will think we 're shooting straight with them .
as i said earlier , my recommendation makes more than 150 difficult reductions to cut the federal spending by a total of $ 246 billion .
we are eliminating programs that are no longer needed , such as nuclear power research and development .
we 're slashing subsidies and canceling wasteful projects .
but many of these programs were justified in their time , and a lot of them are difficult for me to recommend reductions in , some really tough ones for me personally .
i recommend that we reduce interest subsidies to the rural electric administration .
that 's a difficult thing for me to recommend .
but i think that i can not exempt the things that exist in my state or in my experience , if i ask you to deal with things that are difficult for you to deal with .
we 're going to have to have no sacred cows except the fundamental abiding interest of the american people .
i have to say that we all know our government has been just great at building programs .
the time has come to show the american people that we can limit them too ; that we can not only start things , that we can actually stop things .
about the defense budget , i raise a hope and a caution .
as we restructure our military forces to meet the new threats of the post - cold - war world , it is true that we can responsibly reduce our defense budget .
and we may all doubt what that range of reductions is , but let me say that as long as i am president , i will do everything i can to make sure that the men and women who serve under the american flag will remain the best trained , the best prepared , the best equipped fighting force in the world .
and every one of you should make that solemn pledge .
we still have responsibilities around the world .
we are the world 's only superpower .
this is still a dangerous and uncertain time , and we owe it to the people in uniform to make sure that we adequately provide for the national defense and for their interests and needs .
backed by an effective national defense and a stronger economy , our nation will be prepared to lead a world challenged as it is everywhere by ethnic conflict , by the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction , by the global democratic revolution , and by challenges to the health of our global environment .
i know this economic plan is ambitious , but i honestly believe it is necessary for the continued greatness of the united states .
and i think it is paid for fairly , first by cutting government , then by asking the most of those who benefited the most in the past , and by asking more americans to contribute today so that all of us can prosper tomorrow .
for the wealthiest , those earning more than $ 180,000 per year , i ask you all who are listening tonight to support a raise in the top rate for federal income taxes from 31 to 36 percent .
we recommend a 10 percent surtax on incomes over $ 250,000 a year , and we recommend closing some loopholes that let some people get away without paying any tax at all .
for businesses with taxable incomes in excess of $ 10 million , we recommend a raise in the corporate tax rate , also to 36 percent , as well as a cut in the deduction for business entertainment expenses .
our plan seeks to attack tax subsidies that actually reward companies more for shutting their operations down here and moving them overseas than for staying here and reinvesting in america .
i say that as someone who believes that american companies should be free to invest around the world and as a former governor who actively sought investment of foreign companies in my state .
but the tax code should not express a preference to american companies for moving somewhere else , and it does in particular cases today .
we will seek to ensure that , through effective tax enforcement , foreign corporations who do make money in america simply pay the same taxes that american companies make on the same income .
to middle class americans who have paid a great deal for the last 12 years and from whom i ask a contribution tonight , i will say again as i did on monday night : you 're not going alone any more , you 're certainly not going first , and you 're not going to pay more for less as you have too often in the past .
i want to emphasize the facts about this plan : 98.8 percent of america 's families will have no increase in their income tax rates , only 1.2 percent at the top .
let me be clear : there will also be no new cuts in benefits for medicare .
as we move toward the 4th year , with the explosion in health care costs , as i said , projected to account for 50 percent of the growth of the deficit between now and the year 2000 , there must be planned cuts in payments to providers , to doctors , to hospitals , to labs , as a way of controlling health care costs .
but i see these only as a stopgap until we can reform the entire health care system .
if you 'll help me do that , we can be fair to the providers and to the consumers of health care .
let me repeat this , because i know it matters to a lot of you on both sides of the aisle .
this plan does not make a recommendation for new cuts in medicare benefits for any beneficiary .
secondly , the only change we are making in social security is one that has already been publicized .
the plan does ask older americans with higher incomes , who do not rely solely on social security to get by , to contribute more .
this plan will not affect the 80 percent of social security recipients who do not pay taxes on social security now .
those who do not pay tax on social security now will not be affected by this plan .
our plan does include a broad - based tax on energy , and i want to tell you why i selected this and why i think it 's a good idea .
i recommend that we adopt a btu tax on the heat content of energy as the best way to provide us with revenue to lower the deficit because it also combats pollution , promotes energy efficiency , promotes the independence , economically , of this country as well as helping to reduce the debt , and because it does not discriminate against any area .
unlike a carbon tax , that 's not too hard on the coal states ; unlike a gas tax , that 's not too tough on people who drive a long way to work ; unlike an ad valorem tax , it does n't increase just when the price of an energy source goes up .
and it is environmentally responsible .
it will help us in the future as well as in the present with the deficit .
taken together , these measures will cost an american family with an income of about $ 40,000 a year less than $ 17 a month .
it will cost american families with incomes under $ 30,000 nothing because of other programs we propose , principally those raising the earned - income tax credit .
because of our publicly stated determination to reduce the deficit , if we do these things , we will see the continuation of what 's happened just since the election .
just since the election , since the secretary of the treasury , the director of the office of management and budget , and others who have begun to speak out publicly in favor of a tough deficit reduction plan , interest rates have continued to fall long - term .
that means that for the middle class who will pay something more each month , if they had any credit needs or demands , their increased energy costs will be more than offset by lower interest costs for mortgages , consumer loans , credit cards .
this can be a wise investment for them and their country now .
i would also point out what the american people already know , and that is , because we 're a big , vast country where we drive long distances , we have maintained far lower burdens on energy than any other advanced country .
we will still have far lower burdens on energy than any other advanced country .
and these will be spread fairly , with real attempts to make sure that no cost is imposed on families with incomes under $ 30,000 and that the costs are very modest until you get into the higher income groups where the income taxes trigger in .
now , i ask all of you to consider this : whatever you think of the tax program , whatever you think of the spending cuts , consider the cost of not changing .
remember the numbers that you all know .
if we just keep on doing what we 're doing , by the end of the decade we 'll have a $ 650-billion - a - year deficit .
if we just keep on doing what we 're doing , by the end of the decade 20 percent of our national income will go to health care every year , twice as much as any other country on the face of the globe .
if we just keep on doing what we 're doing , over 20 cents on the dollar will have to go to service the debt .
unless we have the courage now to start building our future and stop borrowing from it , we 're condemning ourselves to years of stagnation interrupted by occasional recessions , to slow growth in jobs , to no more growth in income , to more debt , to more disappointment .
worse , unless we change , unless we increase investment and reduce the debt to raise productivity so that we can generate both jobs and incomes , we will be condemning our children and our children 's children to a lesser life than we enjoyed .
once americans looked forward to doubling their living standards every 25 years .
at present productivity rates , it will take 100 years to double living standards , until our grandchildren 's grandchildren are born .
i say that is too long to wait .
tonight the american people know we have to change .
but they 're also likely to ask me tomorrow and all of you for the weeks and months ahead whether we have the fortitude to make the changes happen in the right way .
they know that as soon as i leave this chamber and you go home , various interest groups will be out in force lobbying against this or that piece of this plan , and that the forces of conventional wisdom will offer a thousand reasons why we well ought to do this but we just ca n't do it .
our people will be watching and wondering , not to see whether you disagree with me on a particular issue but just to see whether this is going to be business as usual or a real new day , whether we 're all going to conduct ourselves as if we know we 're working for them .
we must scale the walls of the people 's scepticisms , not with our words but with our deeds .
after so many years of gridlock and indecision , after so many hopeful beginnings and so few promising results , the american people are going to be harsh in their judgments of all of us if we fail to seize this moment .
this economic plan ca n't please everybody .
if the package is picked apart , there will be something that will anger each of us , wo n't please anybody .
but if it is taken as a whole , it will help all of us .
so i ask you all to begin by resisting the temptation to focus only on a particular spending cut you do n't like or some particular investment that was n't made .
and nobody likes the tax increases , but let 's just face facts .
for 20 years , through administrations of both parties , incomes have stalled and debt has exploded and productivity has not grown as it should .
we can not deny the reality of our condition .
we have got to play the hand we were dealt and play it as best we can .
my fellow americans , the test of this plan can not be " what is in it for me . "
it has got to be " what is in it for us . "
if we work hard and if we work together , if we rededicate ourselves to creating jobs , to rewarding work , to strengthening our families , to reinventing our government , we can lift our country 's fortunes again .
tonight i ask everyone in this chamber and every american to look simply into your heart , to spark your own hopes , to fire your own imagination .
there is so much good , so much possibility , so much excitement in this country now that if we act boldly and honestly , as leaders should , our legacy will be one of prosperity and progress .
this must be america 's new direction .
let us summon the courage to seize it .
thank you .
god bless america .

my fellow americans , today our armed forces joined our nato allies in airstrikes against serbian forces responsible for the brutality in kosovo .
we have acted with resolve for several reasons .
we act to protect thousands of innocent people in kosovo from a mounting military offensive .
we act to prevent a wider war , to diffuse a powder keg at the heart of europe that has exploded twice before in this century with catastrophic results .
and we act to stand united with our allies for peace .
by acting now , we are upholding our values , protecting our interests , and advancing the cause of peace .
tonight i want to speak to you about the tragedy in kosovo and why it matters to america that we work with our allies to end it .
first , let me explain what it is we are responding to .
kosovo is a province of serbia , in the middle of southeastern europe , about 160 miles east of italy .
that 's less than the distance between washington and new york and only about 70 miles north of greece .
its people are mostly ethnic albanian and mostly muslim .
in 1989 serbia 's leader , slobodan milosevic , the same leader who started the wars in bosnia and croatia and moved against slovenia in the last decade , stripped kosovo of the constitutional autonomy its people enjoyed , thus denying them their right to speak their language , run their schools , shape their daily lives .
for years , kosovars struggled peacefully to get their rights back .
when president milosevic sent his troops and police to crush them , the struggle grew violent .
last fall our diplomacy , backed by the threat of force from our nato alliance , stopped the fighting for a while and rescued tens of thousands of people from freezing and starvation in the hills where they had fled to save their lives .
and last month , with our allies and russia , we proposed a peace agreement to end the fighting for good .
the kosovar leaders signed that agreement last week .
even though it does not give them all they want , even though their people were still being savaged , they saw that a just peace is better than a long and unwinnable war .
the serbian leaders , on the other hand , refused even to discuss key elements of the peace agreement .
as the kosovars were saying yes to peace , serbia stationed 40,000 troops in and around kosovo in preparation for a major offensive -- and in clear violation of the commitments they had made .
now they 've started moving from village to village , shelling civilians and torching their houses .
we 've seen innocent people taken from their homes , forced to kneel in the dirt , and sprayed with bullets ; kosovar men dragged from their families , fathers and sons together , lined up and shot in cold blood .
this is not war in the traditional sense .
it is an attack by tanks and artillery on a largely defenseless people whose leaders already have agreed to peace .
ending this tragedy is a moral imperative .
it is also important to america 's national interest .
take a look at this map .
kosovo is a small place , but it sits on a major fault line between europe , asia , and the middle east , at the meeting place of islam and both the western and orthodox branches of christianity .
to the south are our allies , greece and turkey ; to the north , our new democratic allies in central europe .
and all around kosovo there are other small countries struggling with their own economic and political challenges , countries that could be overwhelmed by a large , new wave of refugees from kosovo .
all the ingredients for a major war are there : ancient grievances , struggling democracies , and in the center of it all a dictator in serbia who has done nothing since the cold war ended but start new wars and pour gasoline on the flames of ethnic and religious division .
sarajevo , the capital of neighboring bosnia , is where world war i began .
world war ii and the holocaust engulfed this region .
in both wars , europe was slow to recognize the dangers , and the united states waited even longer to enter the conflicts .
just imagine if leaders back then had acted wisely and early enough , how many lives could have been saved , how many americans would not have had to die .
we learned some of the same lessons in bosnia just a few years ago .
the world did not act early enough to stop that war , either .
and let 's not forget what happened : innocent people herded into concentration camps , children gunned down by snipers on their way to school , soccer fields and parks turned into cemeteries , a quarter of a million people killed , not because of anything they have done but because of who they were .
two million bosnians became refugees .
this was genocide in the heart of europe , not in 1945 but in 1995 ; not in some grainy newsreel from our parents ' and grandparents ' time but in our own time , testing our humanity and our resolve .
at the time , many people believed nothing could be done to end the bloodshed in bosnia .
they said , " well , that 's just the way those people in the balkans are . "
but when we and our allies joined with courageous bosnians to stand up to the aggressors , we helped to end the war .
we learned that in the balkans , inaction in the face of brutality simply invites more brutality , but firmness can stop armies and save lives .
we must apply that lesson in kosovo before what happened in bosnia happens there , too .
over the last few months we have done everything we possibly could to solve this problem peacefully .
secretary albright has worked tirelessly for a negotiated agreement .
mr. milosevic has refused .
on sunday i sent ambassador dick holbrooke to serbia to make clear to him again , on behalf of the united states and our nato allies , that he must honor his own commitments and stop his repression , or face military action .
again , he refused .
today we and our 18 nato allies agreed to do what we said we would do , what we must do to restore the peace .
our mission is clear : to demonstrate the seriousness of nato 's purpose so that the serbian leaders understand the imperative of reversing course ; to deter an even bloodier offensive against innocent civilians in kosovo and , if necessary , to seriously damage the serbian military 's capacity to harm the people of kosovo .
in short , if president milosevic will not make peace , we will limit his ability to make war .
now , i want to be clear with you , there are risks in this military action , risks to our pilots and the people on the ground .
serbia 's air defenses are strong .
it could decide to intensify its assault on kosovo or to seek to harm us or our allies elsewhere .
if it does , we will deliver a forceful response .
hopefully , mr. milosevic will realize his present course is self - destructive and unsustainable .
if he decides to accept the peace agreement and demilitarize kosovo , nato has agreed to help to implement it with a peacekeeping force .
if nato is invited to do so , our troops should take part in that mission to keep the peace .
but i do not intend to put our troops in kosovo to fight a war .
do our interests in kosovo justify the dangers to our armed forces ?
i 've thought long and hard about that question .
i am convinced that the dangers of acting are far outweighed by the dangers of not acting -- dangers to defenseless people and to our national interests .
if we and our allies were to allow this war to continue with no response , president milosevic would read our hesitation as a license to kill .
there would be many more massacres , tens of thousands more refugees , more victims crying out for revenge .
right now our firmness is the only hope the people of kosovo have to be able to live in their own country without having to fear for their own lives .
remember : we asked them to accept peace , and they did .
we asked them to promise to lay down their arms , and they agreed .
we pledged that we , the united states and the other 18 nations of nato , would stick by them if they did the right thing .
we can not let them down now .
imagine what would happen if we and our allies instead decided just to look the other way , as these people were massacred on nato 's doorstep .
that would discredit nato , the cornerstone on which our security has rested for 50 years now .
we must also remember that this is a conflict with no natural national boundaries .
let me ask you to look again at a map .
the red dots are towns the serbs have attacked .
the arrows show the movement of refugees north , east , and south .
already , this movement is threatening the young democracy in macedonia , which has its own albanian minority and a turkish minority .
already , serbian forces have made forays into albania from which kosovars have drawn support .
albania has a greek minority .
let a fire burn here in this area , and the flames will spread .
eventually , key u. s. allies could be drawn into a wider conflict , a war we would be forced to confront later , only at far greater risk and greater cost .
i have a responsibility as president to deal with problems such as this before they do permanent harm to our national interests .
america has a responsibility to stand with our allies when they are trying to save innocent lives and preserve peace , freedom , and stability in europe .
that is what we are doing in kosovo .
if we 've learned anything from the century drawing to a close , it is that if america is going to be prosperous and secure , we need a europe that is prosperous , secure , undivided , and free .
we need a europe that is coming together , not falling apart , a europe that shares our values and shares the burdens of leadership .
that is the foundation on which the security of our children will depend .
that is why i have supported the political and economic unification of europe .
that is why we brought poland , hungary , and the czech republic into nato , and redefined its missions , and reached out to russia and ukraine for new partnerships .
now , what are the challenges to that vision of a peaceful , secure , united , stable europe ? --
the challenge of strengthening a partnership with a democratic russia that , despite our disagreements , is a constructive partner in the work of building peace ; the challenge of resolving the tension between greece and turkey and building bridges with the islamic world ; and finally , the challenge of ending instability in the balkans so that these bitter ethnic problems in europe are resolved by the force of argument , not the force of arms , so that future generations of americans do not have to cross the atlantic to fight another terrible war .
it is this challenge that we and our allies are facing in kosovo .
that is why we have acted now -- because we care about saving innocent lives ; because we have an interest in avoiding an even crueler and costlier war ; and because our children need and deserve a peaceful , stable , free europe .
our thoughts and prayers tonight must be with the men and women of our armed forces who are undertaking this mission for the sake of our values and our children 's future .
may god bless them , and may god bless america .

mr. dawson , you did your men proud today .
general shalikashvili , mr. cronkite , chaplain , distinguished leaders of our government , members of congress , members of the armed services , our hosts from france , and most of all , our veterans , their families , and their friends : 
 in these last days of ceremonies , we have heard wonderful words of tribute .
now we come to this hallowed place that speaks , more than anything else , in silence .
here on this quiet plateau , on this small piece of american soil , we honor those who gave their lives for us 50 crowded years ago .
today , the beaches of normandy are calm .
if you walk these shores on a summer 's day , all you might hear is the laughter of children playing on the sand or the cry of seagulls overhead or perhaps the ringing of a distant church bell , the simple sounds of freedom barely breaking the silence , peaceful silence , ordinary silence .
but june 6th , 1944 , was the least ordinary day of the 20th century .
on that chilled dawn , these beaches echoed with the sounds of staccato gunfire , the roar of aircraft , the thunder of bombardment .
and through the wind and the waves came the soldiers , out of their landing craft and into the water , away from their youth and toward a savage place many of them would sadly never leave .
they had come to free a continent , the americans , the british , the canadians , the poles , the french resistance , the norwegians , and others ; they had all come to stop one of the greatest forces of evil the world has ever known .
as news of the invasion broke back home in america , people held their breath .
in boston , commuters stood reading the news on the electric sign at south station .
in new york , the statue of liberty , its torch blacked out since pearl harbor , was lit at sunset for 15 minutes .
and in newcastle , pennsylvania , a young mother named pauline elliot wrote to her husband , frank , a corporal in the army , " d - day has arrived .
the first thought of all of us was a prayer . "
below us are the beaches where corporal elliot 's battalion and so many other americans landed , omaha and utah , proud names from america 's heartland , part of the biggest gamble of the war , the greatest crusade , yes , the longest day .
during those first hours on bloody omaha , nothing seemed to go right .
landing craft were ripped apart by mines and shells .
tanks sent to protect them had sunk , drowning their crews .
enemy fire raked the invaders as they stepped into chest - high water and waded past the floating bodies of their comrades .
and as the stunned survivors of the first wave huddled behind a seawall , it seemed the invasion might fail .
hitler and his followers had bet on it .
they were sure the allied soldiers were soft , weakened by liberty and leisure , by the mingling of races and religion .
they were sure their totalitarian youth had more discipline and zeal .
but then something happened .
although many of the american troops found themselves without officers on unfamiliar ground , next to soldiers they did n't know , one by one they got up .
they inched forward , and together , in groups of threes and fives and tens , the sons of democracy improvised and mounted their own attacks .
at that exact moment on these beaches , the forces of freedom turned the tide of the 20th century .
these soldiers knew that staying put meant certain death .
but they were also driven by the voice of free will and responsibility , nurtured in sunday schools , town halls , and sandlot ballgames , the voice that told them to stand up and move forward , saying , " you can do it .
and if you do n't , no one else will . "
and as captain joe dawson led his company up this bluff , and as others followed his lead , they secured a foothold for freedom .
today many of them are here among us .
oh , they may walk with a little less spring in their step , and their ranks are growing thinner , but let us never forget ; when they were young , these men saved the world .
and so let us now ask them , all the veterans of the normandy campaign , to stand if they can and be recognized .
the freedom they fought for was no abstract concept , it was the stuff of their daily lives .
listen to what frank elliot had written to his wife from the embarkation point in england : " i miss hamburgers -- la coney island , american beer -- la duquesne , american shows -- la penn theater , and american girls -- la you . "
pauline elliot wrote back on june 6th , as she and their one - year - old daughter listened on the radio , " little deronda is the only one not affected by d - day news .
i hope and pray she will never remember any of this , but only the happiness of the hours that will follow her daddy 's homecoming step on the porch . "
well , millions of our gi 's did return home from that war to build up our nations and enjoy life 's sweet pleasures .
but on this field there are 9,386 who did not : 33 pairs of brothers , a father and his son , 11 men from tiny bedford , virginia , and corporal frank elliot , killed near these bluffs by a german shell on d - day .
they were the fathers we never knew , the uncles we never met , the friends who never returned , the heroes we can never repay .
they gave us our world .
and those simple sounds of freedom we hear today are their voices speaking to us across the years .
at this place , let us honor all the americans who lost their lives in world war ii .
let us remember , as well , that over 40 million human beings from every side perished : soldiers on the field of battle , jews in the ghettos and death camps , civilians ravaged by shell fire and famine .
may god give rest to all their souls .
fifty years later , what a different world we live in .
germany , japan , and italy , liberated by our victory , now stand among our closest allies and the staunchest defenders of freedom .
russia , decimated during the war and frozen afterward in communism and cold war , has been reborn in democracy .
and as freedom rings from prague to kiev , the liberation of this continent is nearly complete .
now the question falls to our generation : how will we build upon the sacrifice of d - day 's heroes ?
like the soldiers of omaha beach , we can not stand still .
we can not stay safe by doing so .
avoiding today 's problems would be our own generation 's appeasements .
for just as freedom has a price , it also has a purpose , and its name is progress .
today , our mission is to expand freedom 's reach forward ; to test the full potential of each of our own citizens ; to strengthen our families , our faith , and our communities ; to fight indifference and intolerance ; to keep our nation strong ; and to light the lives of those still dwelling in the darkness of undemocratic rule .
our parents did that and more ; we must do nothing less .
they struggled in war so that we might strive in peace .
we know that progress is not inevitable .
but neither was victory upon these beaches .
now , as then , the inner voice tells us to stand up and move forward .
now , as then , free people must choose .
fifty years ago , the first allied soldiers to land here in normandy came not from the sea but from the sky .
they were called pathfinders , the first paratroopers to make the jump .
deep in the darkness , they descended upon these fields to light beacons for the airborne assaults that would soon follow .
now , near the dawn of a new century , the job of lighting those beacons falls to our hands .
to you who brought us here , i promise we will be the new pathfinders , for we are the children of your sacrifice .
thank you , and god bless you all .

thank you .
please sit down .
bishop ford , mrs. mason , bishop owens , and bishop anderson ; my bishops , bishop walker and bishop lindsey .
now , if you have n't had bishop lindsey 's barbecue , you have n't had barbecue .
and if you have n't heard bishop walker attack one of my opponents , you have never heard a political speech .
i am glad to be here .
you have touched my heart .
you 've brought tears to my eyes and joy to my spirit .
last year i was with you over at the convention center .
two years ago your bishops came to arkansas , and we laid a plaque at the point in little book , arkansas , at 8th and gaines , where bishop mason received the inspiration for the name of this great church .
bishop brooks said from his pulpit that i would be elected president when most people thought i would n't survive .
i thank him , and i thank your faith , and i thank your works , for without you i would not be here today as your president .
many have spoken eloquently and well , and many have been introduced .
i want to thank my good friend governor mcwherter and my friend mayor herenton for being with me today ; my friend congressman harold ford , we are glad to be in his congressional district .
i would like to , if i might , introduce just three other people who are members of the congress .
they have come here with me , and without them it 's hard for me to do much or you .
the president proposes and the congress disposes .
sometimes they dispose of what i propose , but i 'm happy to say that according to a recent report in washington , notwithstanding what you may have heard , this congress has given me a higher percentage of my proposals than any first - year president since president eisenhower .
and i thank them for that .
let me introduce my good friend , a visitor to tennessee , congressman bill jefferson from new orleans , louisiana?please stand tip ; and an early supporter of my campaign , congressman bob clement from tennessee , known to many of you ; and a young man who 's going to be coming back to the people of tennessee and asking them to give him a promotion next year , congressman jim cooper from tennessee , and a good friend .
please welcome him .
you know , in the last 10 months , i 've been called a lot of things , but nobody 's called me a bishop yet .
when i was about 9 years old , my beloved and now departed grandmother , who was a very wise woman , looked at me and she said , " you know , i believe you could be a preacher if you were just a little better boy . "
proverbs says , " a happy heart doeth good like medicine , but a broken spirit dryeth the bone . "
this is a happy place , and i 'm happy to be here .
i thank you for your spirit .
by the grace of god and your help , last year i was elected president of this great country .
i never dreamed that i would ever have a chance to come to this hallowed place where martin luther king gave his last sermon .
i ask you to think today about the purpose for which i ran and the purpose for which so many of you worked to put me in this great office .
i have worked hard to keep faith with our common efforts : to restore the economy , to reverse the politics of helping only those at the top of our totem pole and not the hard - working middle class or the poor ; to bring our people together across racial and regional and political lines , to make a strength out of our diversity instead of letting it tear us apart ; to reward work and family and community and try to move us forward into the 21st century .
i have tried to keep faith .
thirteen percent of all my presidential appointments are african - americans , and there are five african - americans in the cabinet of the united states , 2 1/2 times as many as have ever served in the history of this great land .
i have sought to advance the right to vote with the motor voter bill , supported so strongly by all the churches in our country .
and next week it will be my great honor to sign the restoration of religious freedoms act , a bill supported widely by people across all religions and political philosophies to put back the real meaning of the constitution , to give you and every other american the freedom to do what is most important in your life , to worship god as your spirit leads you .
i say to you , my fellow americans , we have made a good beginning .
inflation is clown .
interest rates are down .
the deficit is down .
investment is up .
millions of americans , including , i bet , some people in this room , have refinanced their homes or their business loans just in the last year .
and in the last 10 months , this economy bas produced more jobs in the private sector than in the previous 4 years .
we have passed a law called the family leave law , which says you ca n't be fired if you take a little time off when a baby is born or a parent is sick .
we know that most americans have to work , but you ought not to have to give up being a good parent just to take a job .
if you ca n't succeed as a worker and a parent , this country ca n't make it .
we have radically reformed the college loan program , as i promised , to lower the cost of college loans and broaden the availability of it and make the repayment terms easier .
and we have passed the national service law that will give in 3 years , 3 years from now , 100,000 young americans the chance to serve their communities at home , to repair the frayed bonds of community , to build up the needs of people at the grassroots , and at the same time , earn some money to pay for a college education .
it is a wonderful idea .
on april 15th when people pay their taxes , somewhere between 15 million and 18 million working families on modest incomes , families with children and incomes of tinder $ 23,000 , will get a tax cut , not a tax increase , in the most important effort to ensure that we reward work and family in the last 20 years .
fifty million american parents and their children will be advantaged by putting the tax code back on the side of working american parents for a change .
under the leadership of the first lady , we have produced a comprehensive plan to guarantee health care security to all americans .
how can we expect the american people to work and to live with all the changes in a global economy , where the average 18-year - old will change work seven times in a lifetime , unless we can simply say we have joined the ranks of all the other advanced countries in the world ; you can have decent health care that 's always there , that can never be taken away ?
it is time we did that , long past time .
i ask you to help us achieve that .
but we have so much more to do .
you and i know that most people are still working harder for the same or lower wages , that many people are afraid that their job will go away .
we have to provide the education and training our people need , not just for our children but for our adults , too .
if we can not close this country up to the forces of change sweeping throughout the world , we have to at least guarantee people the security of being employable .
they have to be able to get a new job if they 're going to have to get a new job .
we do n't do that today , and we must , and we intend to proceed until that is done .
we have a guarantee that there will be some investment in those areas of our country , in the inner cities and in the destitute rural areas in the mississippi delta , of my borne state and this state and louisiana and mississippi and other places like it throughout america .
it 's all very well to train people , but if they do n't have a job , they can be trained for nothing .
we must get investment into those places where the people are dying for work .
and finally , let me say , we must find people who will buy what we have to produce .
we are the most productive people on earth .
that makes us proud .
but what that means is that every year one person can produce more in the same amount of time .
now , if fewer and fewer people can produce more and more things , and yet you want to create more jobs and raise people 's incomes , you have to have more customers for what it is you 're making .
and that is why i have worked so hard to sell more american products around the world ; why i have asked that we be able to sell billions of dollars of computers we used not to sell to foreign countries and foreign interests , to put our people to work ; why next week i am going all the way to washington state to meet with the president of china and the prime minister of japan and the heads of 13 other asian countries , the fastest growing part of the world , to say , " we want to be your partners .
we will buy your goods , but we want you to buy ours , too , if you please . "
that is why .
that is why i have worked so hard for this north american trade agreement that congressman ford endorsed today and congressman jefferson endorsed and congressman cooper and congressman clement , because we know that americans can compete and win only if people will buy what it is we have to sell .
there are 90 million people in mexico .
seventy cents of every dollar they spend on foreign goods , they spend on american goods .
people worry fairly about people shutting down plants in america and going not just to mexico but to any place where the labor is cheap .
it has happened .
what i want to say to you , my fellow americans , is nothing in this agreement makes that more likely .
that has happened already .
it may happen again .
what we need to do is keep the jobs here by finding customers there .
that 's what this agreement does .
it gives us a chance to create opportunity for people .
i have friends in this audience , people who are ministers from my state , fathers and sons , people?i've looked out all over this vast crowd and i see people i 've known for years .
they know i spent my whole life working to create jobs .
i would never knowingly do anything that would take a job away from the american people .
this agreement will make more jobs .
now , we can also leave it if it does n't work in 6 months .
but if we do n't take it , we 'll lose it forever .
we need to take it , because we have to do better .
but i guess what i really want to say to you today , my fellow americans , is that we can do all of this and still fail unless we meet the great crisis of the spirit that is gripping america today .
when i leave you , congressman ford and i are going to a baptist church near here to a town meeting he 's having on health care and violence .
i tell you , unless we do something about crime and violence and drugs that is ravaging the community , we will not be able to repair this country .
if martin luther king , who said , " like moses , i am on the mountaintop , and i can see the promised land , but i 'm not going to be able to get there with you , but we will get there"?if he were to reappear by my side today and give us a report card on the last 25 years , what would he say ?
you did a good job , he would say , voting and electing people who formerly were not electable because of the color of their skin .
you have more political power , and that is good .
you did a good job , he would say , letting people who have the ability to do so live wherever they want to live , go wherever they want to go in this great country .
you did a good job , he would say , elevating people of color into the ranks of the united states armed forces to the very top or into the very top of our government .
you did a very good job , he would say .
he would say , you did a good job creating a black middle class of people who really are doing well , and the middle class is growing more among african - americans than among non - african - americans .
you did a good job ; you did a good job in opening opportunity .
but he would say , i did not live and die to see the american family destroyed .
i did not live and die to see 13-year - old boys get automatic weapons and gun down 9-year - olds just for the kick of it .
i did not live and die to see young people destroy their own lives with drugs and then build fortunes destroying the lives of others .
that is not what i came here to do .
i fought for freedom , he would say , but not for the freedom of people to kill each other with reckless abandon , not for the freedom of children to have children and the fathers of the children walk away from them and abandon them as if they do n't amount to anything .
i fought for people to have the right to work but not to have whole communities and people abandoned .
this is not what i lived and died for .
my fellow americans , he would say , i fought to stop white people from being so filled with hate that they would wreak violence on black people .
i did not fight for the right of black people to murder other black people with reckless abandon .
the other day the mayor of baltimore , a dear friend of mine , told me a story of visiting the family of a young man who had been killed 18 years old?on halloween .
he always went out with little bitty , kids so they could trick - or - treat safely .
and across the street from where they were walking on halloween , a 14-year - old boy gave a 13-year - old boy a gun and dared him to shoot the 18-year - old boy , and he shot him dead .
and the mayor had to visit the family .
in washington , dc , where i live , your nation 's capital , the symbol of freedom throughout the world , look how that freedom is being exercised .
the other night a man came along the street and grabbed a 1-year - old child and put the child in his car .
the child may have been the child of the man .
and two people were after him , and they chased him in the car , and they just kept shooting with reckless abandon , knowing that baby was in the car .
and they shot the man dead , and a bullet went through his body into the baby 's body , and blew the little bootie off the child 's foot .
the other day on the front page of our paper , the nation 's capita , are we talking about world peace or world conflict ?
no , big article on the front page of the washington post about an 11-year - old child planning her funeral : " these are the hymns i want sung .
this is the ( tress i want to wear .
i know i 'm not going to live very long . "
that is not the freedom , the freedom to die before you 're a teenager is not what martin luther king lived and died for .
more than 37,000 people die from gunshot wounds in this country every year .
gunfire is the leading cause of death in young men .
and now that we 've all gotten so cool that everybody can get a semiautomatic weapon , a person shot now is 3 times more likely to die than 15 years ago , because they 're likely to have three bullets in them .
a hundred and sixty thousand children stay home from school every day because they are scared they will be hurt in their schools .
the other day i was in california at a town meeting , and a handsome young man stood up and said , " mr. president , my brother and i , we do n't belong to gangs .
we do n't have guns .
we do n't do drugs .
we want to go to school .
we want to he professionals .
we want to work hard .
we want to do well .
we want to have families .
and we changed our school because the school we were in was so dangerous .
so when we stowed up to the new school to register , my brother and i were standing in line and somebody ran into the school and started shooting a gun .
my brother was shot down standing right in front of me at the safer school . "
the freedom to do that kind of thing is not what martin luther king lived and died for , not what people gathered in this hallowed church for the night before he was assassinated in april of 1968 .
if you had told anybody who was here in that church on that night that we would abuse our freedom in that way , they would have found it hard to believe .
and i tell you , it is our moral duty to turn it around .
and now i think finally we have a chance .
finally , i think , we have a chance .
we have a pastor here from new haven , connecticut .
i was in his church with reverend jackson when i was running for president on a snowy day in connecticut to mourn the death of children who had been killed in that city .
and afterward we walked down the street for more than a mile in the snow .
then , the american people were not ready .
people would say , " oh , this is a terrible thing , but what can we do about it ? "
now when we react that foreign visitors come to our shores and are killed at random in our fine state of florida , when we see our children planning their funerals , when the american people are finally coming to grips with the accumulated weight of crime and violence and the breakdown of family and community and the increase in drugs and the decrease in jobs , i think finally we may be ready to do something about it .
anti there is something for each of us to do .
there are changes we eau make from the outside in ; that 's the job of the president the congress and the governors and the mayors and the social service agencies .
and then there 's some changes we 're going to have to make from the inside out , or the others wo n't matter .
that 's what that magnificent song was about , is n't it ?
sometimes there are no answers from the outside in ; sometimes all the answers have to come from the values and the stirrings and the voices that speak to us from within .
so we are beginning .
we are trying to pass a bill to make our people safer , to put another 100,000 police officers on the street , to provide boot camps instead of prisons for young people who can still be rescued , to provide more safety in our schools , to restrict the availability of these awful assault weapons , to pass the brady hill and at least require people to have their criminal background checked before they get a gun , and to say , if you 're not old enough to vote and you 're not old enough to go to war , you ought not to own a handgun , and you ought not to use one unless you 're on a target range .
we want to pass a health care bill that will make drug treatment available for everyone .
and we also have to do it , we have to have drug treatment and education available to everyone and especially those who are in prison who are coming out .
we have a drug czar now in lee brown , who was the police chief of atlanta , of ' houston , of new york , who understands these things .
and when the congress comes back next year , we will be moving forward on that .
we need this crime bill now .
we ought to give it to the american people for christmas .
and we need to move forward on all these other fronts .
but i say to you , my fellow americans , we need some other things as well .
i do not believe we can repair the basic fabric of society until people who are willing to work have work .
work organizes life .
it gives structure and discipline to life .
it gives meaning and self - esteem to people who are parents .
it gives a role model to children .
the famous african - american sociologist william julius wilson has written a stunning book called " the truly disadvantaged " in which he chronicles in breathtaking terms how the inner cities of our country have crumbled as work has disappeared .
and we must find a way , through public and private sources , to enhance the attractiveness of the american people who live there to get investment there .
we can not , i submit to you , repair the american community and restore the american family until we provide the structure , the values , the discipline , and the reward that work gives .
i read a wonderful speech the other day given at howard university in a lecture series funded by bill and camille cosby , in which the speaker said , " i grew up in anacostia years ago .
even then it was all black , and it was a very poor neighborhood .
but you know , when i was a child in anacostia , a 100 percent african - american neighborhood , a very , poor neighborhood , we had a crime rate that was lower than the average of the crime rate of our city .
why ?
because we had coherent families .
we had coherent communities .
the people who filled the church on sunday lived in the same place they went to church the guy that owned the drugstore lived clown the street .
the person that owned the grocery store lived in our community .
we were whole . "
and i say to you , we have to make our people whole again .
this church has stood for that .
why do you think you have 5 million members in this country ?
because people know you are filled with the spirit of god to do the right thing in this life by them .
so i say to you , we have to make a partnership , all the government agencies , all the business folks ; but where there are no families , where there is no order , where there is no hope , where we are reducing the size of our armed services because we have won the cold war , who will be there to give structure , discipline , and love to these children ?
you must do that .
and we must help you .
scripture say 's , you are the salt of the earth and the light of the world , that if your light shines before men they will give glow to the father in heaven .
that is what we must do .
that is what we must do .
how would we explain it to martin luther king if he showed up today and said , yes , we won the cold war .
yes , the biggest threat that all of us grew up under , communism and nuclear war , communism gone , nuclear war receding .
yes , we developed all these miraculous technologies .
yes , we all have got a vcr in our home ; it 's interesting .
yes , we get 50 channels on the cable .
yes , without regard to race , if you work hard and play by the rules , you can get into a service academy or a good college , you 'll do just great .
how would we explain to him all these kids getting killed and killing each other ?
how would we justify the things that we permit that no other country in the world would permit ?
how could we explain that we gave people the freedom to succeed , and we created conditions in which millions abuse that freedom to destroy the things that make life worth living and life itself ? .
we can not .
and so i say to you today , my fellow americans , you gave me this job , and we 're making progress on the things you hired me to do .
but unless we deal with the ravages of crime and drugs and violence and unless we recognize that it 's due to the breakdown of the family , the community , and the disappearance of jobs , and unless we say some of this can not be done by government , because we have to reach deep inside to the values , the spirit , the soul , and the truth of human nature , none of the other things we seek to do will ever take us where we need to go .
so in this pulpit , on this day , let me ask all of you in your heart to say : we will honor the life and the work of martin luther king .
we will honor the meaning of our church .
we will , somehow , by god 's grace , we will turn this around .
we will give these children a future .
we will take away their guns and give them books .
we will take away their despair and give them hope .
we will rebuild the families and the neighborhoods and the communities .
we wo n't make all the work that has gone on here benefit just a few .
we will do it together by the grace of god .
thank you .

father creedon , mrs. kennedy , the children of robert kennedy , and the kennedy family , to all the distinguished americans here present , and most of all , to all of you who bear the noble title , citizen of this country : 
 twenty - five years ago today , on the eve of my college graduation , i cheered the victory of robert kennedy in the california primary and felt again that our country might face its problems openly , meet its challenges bravely , and go forward together .
he dared us all .
he dared the grieving not to retreat into despair .
he dared the comfortable not to be complacent .
he dared the doubting to keep going .
as i looked around this crowd today and saw us all graced not only by the laughter of children but by the tears of those of us old enough to remember , it struck me again that the memory of robert kennedy is so powerful that in a profound way we are all in two places today .
we are here and now , and we are there , then .
for in robert kennedy we all invested our hopes and our dreams that somehow we might redeem the promise of the america we then feared we were losing , somehow we might call back the promise of president kennedy and martin luther king and heal the divisions of vietnam and the violence and pain in our own country .
but i believe if robert kennedy were here today , he would dare us not to mourn his passing but to fulfill his promise and to be the people that he so badly wanted us all to be .
he would dare us to leave yesterday and embrace tomorrow .
we remember him , almost captured in freeze - frame , standing on the hood of a car , grasping at outreached hands , black and brown and white .
his promise was that the hands which reached out to him might someday actually reach out to each other .
and together , those hands could make america everything that it ought to be , a nation reunited with itself and rededicated to its best ideals .
when his funeral train passed through the gritty cities of the northeast , people from both sides of the tracks stood silent .
he had earned their respect because he went to places most leaders never visit and listened to people most leaders never hear and spoke simple truth most leaders never speak .
he spoke out against neglect , but he challenged the neglected to seize their own destiny .
he wanted so badly for government to act , but he did not trust bureaucracy .
and he believed that government had to do things with people , not for them .
he knew we had to do things together or not at all .
he spoke to the sons and daughters of immigrants and the sons and daughters of sharecroppers and told them all , " as long as you stay apart from each other , you will never be what you ought to be . "
he saw the word not in terms of right and left but right and wrong .
and he taught us lessons that can not be labeled except as powerful proof .
robert kennedy reminded us that on any day , in any place , at any time , racism is wrong , exploitation is wrong , violence is wrong , anything that denies the simple humanity and potential of any man or woman is wrong .
he touched children whose stomachs were swollen with hunger but whose eyes still sparkled with life .
he marched with workers who strained their backs for poverty wages while harvesting our food .
he walked down city streets with people who ached , not from work but from the lack of it .
then as now , his piercing eyes and urgent voice speak of the things we all like to think that we believe in .
when he was alive , some said he was ruthless .
some said he was n't a real liberal , and others claimed he was a real radical .
if he were here today , i think he would laugh and say they were both right .
but now as we see him more clearly , we understand he was a man who was very gentle to those who were most vulnerable , very tough in the standards he kept for himself , very old - fashioned in the virtues in which he believed , and a relentless searcher for change , for growth , for the potential of heart and mind that he sought in himself and he demanded of others .
robert kennedy understood that the real purpose of leadership is to bring out the best in others .
he believed the destiny of our nation is the sum total of all the decisions that all of us make .
he often said that one person can make a difference , and each of us must try .
some still believe we lost what is best about america when president kennedy and martin luther king and robert kennedy were killed .
but i ask you to remember , my fellow americans , that robert kennedy did not lose his faith when his own brother was killed .
and when martin luther king was killed , he gave from his heart what was perhaps his finest speech .
he lifted himself from despair time after time and went back to work .
if you listen now you can hear with me his voice telling me and telling you and telling everyone here , " we can do better . "
today 's troubles call us to do better .
the legacy of robert kennedy is a stem rebuke to the cynicism , to the trivialization that grips so much of our public life today .
what use is it in the face of the aching problems gripping millions of americans , the american without a job , the american without health care , the american without a safe street to live on or a good school to send a child to ?
what use is it in the face of all the divisions that keep our country down and rob our children of their rightful future ?
let us learn here once again the simple , powerful , beautiful lesson , the simple faith of robert kennedy : we can do better .
let us leave here no longer in two places , but once again in one only : in the here and now , with a commitment to tomorrow , the only part of our time that we can control .
let us embrace the memory of robert kennedy by living as he would have us to live .
for the sake of his memory , of ourselves , and of all of our children and all those to come , let us believe again , we can do better .

mr. speaker , mr. vice president , members of congress , honored guests , my fellow americans : 
 we are fortunate to be alive at this moment in history .
never before has our nation enjoyed , at once , so much prosperity and social progress with so little internal crisis and so few external threats .
never before have we had such a blessed opportunity and , therefore , such a profound obligation to build the more perfect union of our founders ' dreams .
we begin the new century with over 20 million new jobs ; the fastest economic growth in more than 30 years ; the lowest unemployment rates in 30 years ; the lowest poverty rates in 20 years ; the lowest african - american and hispanic unemployment rates on record ; the first back - to - back surpluses in 42 years ; and next month , america will achieve the longest period of economic growth in our entire history .
we have built a new economy .
and our economic revolution has been matched by a revival of the american spirit : crime down by 20 percent , to its lowest level in 25 years ; teen births down seven years in a row ; adoptions up by 30 percent ; welfare rolls cut in half , to their lowest levels in 30 years .
my fellow americans , the state of our union is the strongest it has ever been .
as always , the real credit belongs to the american people .
my gratitude also goes to those of you in this chamber who have worked with us to put progress over partisanship .
eight years ago , it was not so clear to most americans there would be much to celebrate in the year 2000 .
then our nation was gripped by economic distress , social decline , political gridlock .
the title of a best - selling book asked : " america : what went wrong ? "
in the best traditions of our nation , americans determined to set things right .
we restored the vital center , replacing outmoded ideologies with a new vision anchored in basic , enduring values : opportunity for all , responsibility from all , a community of all americans .
we reinvented government , transforming it into a catalyst for new ideas that stress both opportunity and responsibility and give our people the tools they need to solve their own problems .
with the smallest federal work force in 40 years , we turned record deficits into record surpluses and doubled our investment in education .
we cut crime with 100,000 community police and the brady law , which has kept guns out of the hands of half a million criminals .
we ended welfare as we knew it , requiring work while protecting health care and nutrition for children and investing more in child care , transportation , and housing to help their parents go to work .
we 've helped parents to succeed at home and at work with family leave , which 20 million americans have now used to care for a newborn child or a sick loved one .
we 've engaged 150,000 young americans in citizen service through americorps , while helping them earn money for college .
in 1992 , we just had a roadmap .
today , we have results .
even more important , america again has the confidence to dream big dreams .
but we must not let this confidence drift into complacency .
for we , all of us , will be judged by the dreams and deeds we pass on to our children .
and on that score , we will be held to a high standard , indeed , because our chance to do good is so great .
my fellow americans , we have crossed the bridge we built to the 21st century .
now , we must shape a 21st century american revolution of opportunity , responsibility , and community .
we must be now , as we were in the beginning , a new nation .
at the dawn of the last century , theodore roosevelt said , " the one characteristic more essential than any other is foresight . . .
it should be the growing nation with a future that takes the long look ahead . "
so tonight let us take our long look ahead and set great goals for our nation .
to 21st century america , let us pledge these things : every child will begin school ready to learn and graduate ready to succeed .
every family will be able to succeed at home and at work , and no child will be raised in poverty .
we will meet the challenge of the aging of america .
we will assure quality , affordable health care , at last , for all americans .
we will make america the safest big country on earth .
we will pay off our national debt for the first time since 1835 . *
we will bring prosperity to every american community .
we will reverse the course of climate change and leave a safer , cleaner planet .
america will lead the world toward shared peace and prosperity and the far frontiers of science and technology .
and we will become at last what our founders pledged us to be so long ago : 
 * white house correction .
one nation , under god , indivisible , with liberty and justice for all .
these are great goals , worthy of a great nation .
we will not reach them all this year , not even in this decade .
but we will reach them .
let us remember that the first american revolution was not won with a single shot ; the continent was not settled in a single year .
the lesson of our history and the lesson of the last seven years is that great goals are reached step by step , always building on our progress , always gaining ground .
of course , you ca n't gain ground if you 're standing still .
and for too long this congress has been standing still on some of our most pressing national priorities .
so let 's begin tonight with them .
again , i ask you to pass a real patients ' bill of rights .
i ask you to pass common - sense gun safety legislation .
i ask you to pass campaign finance reform .
i ask you to vote up or down on judicial nominations and other important appointees .
and again , i ask you -- i implore you to raise the minimum wage .
now , two years ago -- let me try to balance the seesaw here --   -- two years ago , as we reached across party lines to reach our first balanced budget , i asked that we meet our responsibility to the next generation by maintaining our fiscal discipline .
because we refused to stray from that path , we are doing something that would have seemed unimaginable seven years ago .
we are actually paying down the national debt .
now , if we stay on this path , we can pay down the debt entirely in just 13 years now and make america debt - free for the first time since andrew jackson was president in 1835 .
in 1993 we began to put our fiscal house in order with the deficit reduction act , which you 'll all remember won passages in both houses by just a single vote .
your former colleague , my first secretary of the treasury , led that effort and sparked our long boom .
he 's here with us tonight .
lloyd bentsen , you have served america well , and we thank you .
beyond paying off the debt , we must ensure that the benefits of debt reduction go to preserving two of the most important guarantees we make to every american , social security and medicare .
tonight i ask you to work with me to make a bipartisan downpayment on social security reform by crediting the interest savings from debt reduction to the social security trust 
 fund so that it will be strong and sound for the next 50 years .
but this is just the start of our journey .
we must also take the right steps toward reaching our great goals .
first and foremost , we need a 21st century revolution in education , guided by our faith that every single child can learn .
because education is more important than ever , more than ever the key to our children 's future , we must make sure all our children have that key .
that means quality preschool and after - school , the best trained teachers in the classroom , and college opportunities for all our children .
for seven years now , we 've worked hard to improve our schools , with opportunity and responsibility , investing more but demanding more in turn .
reading , math , college entrance scores are up .
some of the most impressive gains are in schools in very poor neighborhoods .
but all successful schools have followed the same proven formula : higher standards , more accountability , and extra help so children who need it can get it to reach those standards .
i have sent congress a reform plan based on that formula .
it holds states and school districts accountable for progress and rewards them for results .
each year , our national government invests more than $ 15 billion in our schools .
it is time to support what works and stop supporting what does n't .
now , as we demand more from our schools , we should also invest more in our schools .
let 's double our investment to help states and districts turn around their worst performing schools or shut them down .
let 's double our investments in after - school and summer school programs , which boost achievement and keep people off the streets and out of trouble .
if we do this , we can give every single child in every failing school in america -- everyone -- the chance to meet high standards .
since 1993 , we 've nearly doubled our investment in head start and improved its quality .
tonight i ask you for another $ 1 billion for head start , the largest increase in the history of the program .
we know that children learn best in smaller classes with good teachers .
for two years in a row , congress has supported my plan to hire 100,000 new qualified teachers to lower class size in the early grades .
i thank you for that , and i ask you to make it three in a row .
and to make sure all teachers know the subjects they teach , tonight i propose a new teacher quality initiative , to recruit more talented people into the classroom , reward good teachers for staying there , and give all teachers the training they need .
we know charter schools provide real public school choice .
when i became president , there was just one independent public charter school in all america .
today , thanks to you , there are 1,700 .
i ask you now to help us meet our goal of 3,000 charter schools by next year .
we know we must connect all our classrooms to the internet , and we 're getting there .
in 1994 , only 3 percent of our classrooms were connected .
today , with the help of the vice president 's e - rate program , more than half of them are , and 90 percent of our schools have at least one internet connection .
but we can not finish the job when a third of all our schools are in serious disrepair .
many of them have walls and wires so old , they 're too old for the internet .
so tonight i propose to help 5,000 schools a year make immediate and urgent repairs and , again , to help build or modernize 6,000 more , to get students out of trailers and into high - tech classrooms .
i ask all of you to help me double our bipartisan gear up program , which provides mentors for disadvantaged young people .
if we double it , we can provide mentors for 1.4 million of them .
let 's also offer these kids from disadvantaged backgrounds the same chance to take the same college test - prep courses wealthier students use to boost their test scores .
to make the american dream achievable for all , we must make college affordable for all .
for seven years , on a bipartisan basis , we have taken action toward that goal : larger pell grants , more affordable student loans , education iras , and our hope scholarships , which have already benefited five million young people .
now , 67 percent of high school graduates are going on to college .
that 's up 10 percent since 1993 .
yet millions of families still strain to pay college tuition .
they need help .
so i propose a landmark $ 30 billion college opportunity tax cut , a middle class tax deduction for up to $ 10,000 in college tuition costs .
the previous actions of this congress have already made two years of college affordable for all .
it 's time make four years of college affordable for all .
if we take all these steps , we 'll move a long way toward making sure every child starts school ready to learn and graduates ready to succeed .
we also need a 21st century revolution to reward work and strengthen families by giving every parent the tools to succeed at work and at the most important work of all , raising children .
that means making sure every family has health care and the support to care for aging parents , the tools to bring their children up right , and that no child grows up in poverty .
from my first days as president , we 've worked to give families better access to better health care .
in 1997 , we passed the children 's health insurance program -- chip -- so that workers who do n't have coverage through their employers at least can get it for their children .
so far , we 've enrolled two million children .
we 're well on our way to our goal of five million .
but there are still more than 40 million of our fellow americans without health insurance , more than there were in 1993 .
tonight i propose that we follow vice president gore 's suggestion to make low income parents eligible for the insurance that covers their children .
together with our children 's initiative -- think of this -- together with our children 's initiative , this action would enable us to cover nearly a quarter of all the uninsured people in america .
again , i want to ask you to let people between the ages of 55 and 65 , the fastest growing group of uninsured , buy into medicare .
and this year i propose to give them a tax credit to make that choice an affordable one .
i hope you will support that , as well .
when the baby boomers retire , medicare will be faced with caring for twice as many of our citizens ; yet , it is far from ready to do so .
my generation must not ask our children 's generation to shoulder our burden .
we simply must act now to strengthen and modernize medicare .
my budget includes a comprehensive plan to reform medicare , to make it more efficient and more competitive .
and it dedicates nearly $ 400 billion of our budget surplus to keep medicare solvent past 2025 .
and at long last , it also provides funds to give every senior a voluntary choice of affordable coverage for prescription drugs .
lifesaving drugs are an indispensable part of modern medicine .
no one creating a medicare program today would even think of excluding coverage for prescription drugs .
yet more than three in five of our seniors now lack dependable drug coverage which can lengthen and enrich their lives .
millions of older americans , who need prescription drugs the most , pay the highest prices for them .
in good conscience , we can not let another year pass without extending to all our seniors this lifeline of affordable prescription drugs .
record numbers of americans are providing for aging or ailing loved ones at home .
it 's a loving but a difficult and often very expensive choice .
last year , i proposed a $ 1,000 tax credit for long - term care .
frankly , it was n't enough .
this year , let 's triple it to $ 3,000 .
but this year , let 's pass it .
we also have to make needed investments to expand access to mental health care .
i want to take a moment to thank the person who led our first white house conference on mental health last year and who for seven years has led all our efforts to break down the barriers to decent treatment of people with mental illness .
thank you , tipper gore .
taken together , these proposals would mark the largest investment in health care in the 35 years since medicare was created -- the largest investment in 35 years .
that would be a big step toward assuring quality health care for all americans , young and old .
and i ask you to embrace them and pass them .
we must also make investments that reward work and support families .
nothing does that better than the earned - income tax credit , the eitc .
the " e " in the eitc is about earning , working , taking responsibility , and being rewarded for it .
in my very first address to you , i asked congress to greatly expand this credit , and you did .
as a result , in 1998 alone , the eitc helped more than 4.3 million americans work their way out of poverty toward the middle class .
that 's double the number in 1993 .
tonight i propose another major expansion of the eitc : to reduce the marriage penalty , to make sure it rewards marriage as it rewards work , and also to expand the tax credit for families that have more than two children .
it punishes people with more than two children today .
our proposal would allow families with three or more children to get up to $ 1,100 more in tax relief .
these are working families ; their children should not be in poverty .
we also ca n't reward work and family unless men and women get equal pay for equal work .
today the female unemployment rate is the lowest it has been in 46 years .
yet , women still only earn about 75 cents for every dollar men earn .
we must do better , by providing the resources to enforce present equal pay laws , training more women for high - paying , high - tech jobs , and passing the " paycheck fairness act . "
many working parents spend up to a quarter -- a quarter -- of their income on child care .
last year , we helped parents provide child care for about two million children .
my child care initiative before you now , along with funds already secured in welfare reform , would make child care better , safer , and more affordable for another 400,000 children .
i ask you to pass that .
they need it out there .
for hard - pressed middle income families , we should also expand the child care tax credit .
and i believe strongly we should take the next big step and make that tax credit refundable for low income families .
for people making under $ 30,000 a year , that could mean up to $ 2,400 for child care costs .
you know , we all say we 're pro - work and pro - family .
passing this proposal would prove it .
ten of millions of americans live from paycheck to paycheck .
as hard as they work , they still do n't have the opportunity to save .
too few can make use of iras and 401k plans .
we should do more to help all working families save and accumulate wealth .
that 's the idea behind the individual development accounts , the idas .
i ask you to take that idea to a new level , with new retirement savings accounts that enable every low and moderate income family in america to save for retirement , a first home , a medical emergency , or a college education .
i propose to match their contributions , however small , dollar for dollar , every year they save .
and i propose to give a major new tax credit to any small business that will provide a meaningful pension to its workers .
those people ought to have retirement as well as the rest of us .
nearly one in three american children grows up without a father .
these children are five times more likely to live in poverty than children with both parents at home .
clearly , demanding and supporting responsible fatherhood is critical to lifting all our children out of poverty .
we 've doubled child support collections since 1992 .
and i 'm proposing to you tough new measures to hold still more fathers responsible .
but we should recognize that a lot of fathers want to do right by their children but need help to do it .
carlos rosas of st. paul , minnesota , wanted to do right by his son , and he got the help to do it .
now he 's got a good job , and he supports his little boy .
my budget will help 40,000 more fathers make the same choices carlos rosas did .
i thank him for being here tonight .
stand up , carlos .
thank you .
if there is any single issue on which we should be able to reach across party lines , it is in our common commitment to reward work and strengthen families .
just remember what we did last year .
we came together to help people with disabilities keep their health insurance when they go to work .
and i thank you for that .
thanks to overwhelming bipartisan support from this congress , we have improved foster care .
we 've helped those young people who leave it when they turn 18 , and we have dramatically increased the number of foster care children going into adoptive homes .
i thank all of you for all of that .
of course , i am forever grateful to the person who has led our efforts from the beginning and who 's worked so tirelessly for children and families for 30 years now , my wife , hillary , and i thank her .
if we take the steps just discussed , we can go a long , long way toward empowering parents to succeed at home and at work and ensuring that no child is raised in poverty .
we can make these vital investments in health care , education , support for working families , and still offer tax cuts to help pay for college , for retirement , to care for aging parents , to reduce the marriage penalty .
we can do these things without forsaking the path of fiscal discipline that got us to this point here tonight .
indeed , we must make these investments and these tax cuts in the context of a balanced budget that strengthens and extends the life of social security and medicare and pays down the national debt .
crime in america has dropped for the past seven years -- that 's the longest decline on record -- thanks to a national consensus we helped to forge on community police , sensible gun safety laws , and effective prevention .
but nobody , nobody here , nobody in america believes we 're safe enough .
so again , i ask you to set a higher goal .
let 's make this country the safest big country in the world .
last fall , congress supported my plan to hire , in addition to the 100,000 community police we 've already funded , 50,000 more , concentrated in high - crime neighborhoods .
i ask your continued support for that .
soon after the columbine tragedy , congress considered commonsense gun legislation , to require brady background checks at the gun shows , child safety locks for new handguns , and a ban on the importation of large capacity ammunition clips .
with courage and a tie - breaking vote by the vice president --   -- the senate faced down the gun lobby , stood up for the american people , and passed this legislation .
but the house failed to follow suit .
now , we have all seen what happens when guns fall into the wrong hands .
daniel mauser was only 15 years old when he was gunned down at columbine .
he was an amazing kid , a straight - a student , a good skier .
like all parents who lose their children , his father , tom , has borne unimaginable grief .
somehow he has found the strength to honor his son by transforming his grief into action .
earlier this month , he took a leave of absence from his job to fight for tougher gun safety laws .
i pray that his courage and wisdom will at long last move this congress to make commonsense gun legislation the very next order of business .
tom mauser , stand up .
we thank you for being here tonight .
tom .
thank you , tom .
we must strengthen our gun laws and enforce those already on the books better .
federal gun crime prosecutions are up 16 percent since i took office .
but we must do more .
i propose to hire more federal and local gun prosecutors and more atf agents to crack down on illegal gun traffickers and bad - apple dealers .
and we must give them the enforcement tools that they need , tools to trace every gun and every bullet used in every gun crime in the united states .
i ask you to help us do that .
every state in this country already requires hunters and automobile drivers to have a license .
i think they ought to do the same thing for handgun purchases .
now , specifically , i propose a plan to ensure that all new handgun buyers must first have a photo license from their state showing they passed the brady background check and a gun safety course , before they get the gun .
i hope you 'll help me pass that in this congress .
listen to this -- listen to this .
the accidental gun rate -- the accidental gun death rate of children under 15 in the united states is nine times higher than in the other 25 industrialized countries combined .
now , technologies now exist that could lead to guns that can only be fired by the adults who own them .
i ask congress to fund research into smart gun technology to save these children 's lives .
i ask responsible leaders in the gun industry to work with us on smart guns and other steps to keep guns out of the wrong hands , to keep our children safe .
you know , every parent i know worries about the impact of violence in the media on their children .
i want to begin by thanking the entertainment industry for accepting my challenge to put voluntary ratings on tv programs and video and internet games .
but frankly , the ratings are too numerous , diverse , and confusing to be really useful to parents .
so tonight i ask the industry to accept the first lady 's challenge to develop a single voluntary rating system for all children 's entertainment that is easier for parents to understand and enforce .
the steps i outline will take us well on our way to making america the safest big country in the world .
now , to keep our historic economic expansion going , the subject of a lot of discussion in this community and others , i believe we need a 21st century revolution to open new markets , start new businesses , hire new workers right here in america , in our inner cities , poor rural areas , and native american reservations .
our nation 's prosperity has n't yet reached these places .
over the last six months , i 've traveled to a lot of them , joined by many of you and many far - sighted business people , to shine a spotlight on the enormous potential in communities from appalachia to the mississippi delta , from watts to the pine ridge reservation .
everywhere i go , i meet talented people eager for opportunity and able to work .
tonight i ask you , let 's put them to work .
for business , it 's the smart thing to do .
for america , it 's the right thing to do .
and let me ask you something : if we do n't do this now , when in the wide world will we ever get around to it ?
so i ask congress to give businesses the same incentives to invest in america 's new markets they now have to invest in markets overseas .
tonight i propose a large new markets tax credit and other incentives to spur $ 22 billion in private - sector capital to create new businesses and new investments in our inner cities and rural areas .
because empowerment zones have been creating these opportunities for five years now , i also ask you to increase incentives to invest in them and to create more of them .
and let me say to all of you again what i have tried to say at every turn : this is not a democratic or a republican issue .
giving people a chance to live their dreams is an american issue .
mr. speaker , it was a powerful moment last november when you joined reverend jesse jackson and me in your home state of illinois and committed to working toward our common goal by combining the best ideas from both sides of the aisle .
i want to thank you again and to tell you , mr. speaker , i look forward to working with you .
this is a worthy joint endeavor .
thank you .
i also ask you to make special efforts to address the areas of our nation with the highest rates of poverty , our native american reservations and the mississippi delta .
my budget includes a $ 110 million initiative to promote economic development in the delta and a billion dollars to increase economic opportunity , health care , education , and law enforcement for our native american communities .
we should begin this new century by honoring our historic responsibility to empower the first americans .
and i want to thank tonight the leaders and the members from both parties who 've expressed to me an interest in working with us on these efforts .
they are profoundly important .
there 's another part of our american community in trouble tonight , our family farmers .
when i signed the farm bill in 1996 , i said there was great danger it would work well in good times but not in bad .
well , droughts , floods , and historically low prices have made these times very bad for the farmers .
we must work together to strengthen the farm safety net , invest in land conservation , and create some new markets for them by expanding our programs for bio - based fuels and products .
please , they need help .
let 's do it together .
opportunity for all requires something else today , having access to a computer and knowing how to use it .
that means we must close the digital divide between those who 've got the tools and those who do n't .
connecting classrooms and libraries to the internet is crucial , but it 's just a start .
my budget ensures that all new teachers are trained to teach 21st century skills , and it creates technology centers in 1,000 communities to serve adults .
this spring , i 'll invite high - tech leaders to join me on another new markets tour , to close the digital divide and open opportunity for our people .
i want to thank the high - tech companies that already are doing so much in this area .
i hope the new tax incentives i have proposed will get all the rest of them to join us .
this is a national crusade .
we have got to do this and do it quickly .
now , again i say to you , these are steps , but step by step , we can go a long way toward our goal of bringing opportunity to every community .
to realize the full possibilities of this economy , we must reach beyond our own borders to shape the revolution that is tearing down barriers and building new networks among nations and individuals and economies and cultures : globalization .
it 's the central reality of our time .
of course , change this profound is both liberating and threatening to people .
but there 's no turning back .
and our open , creative society stands to benefit more than any other if we understand and act on the realities of interdependence .
we have to be at the center of every vital global network , as a good neighbor and a good partner .
we have to recognize that we can not build our future without helping others to build theirs .
the first thing we have got to do is to forge a new consensus on trade .
now , those of us who believe passionately in the power of open trade , we have to ensure that it lifts both our living standards and our values , never tolerating abusive child labor or a race to the bottom in the environment and worker protection .
but others must recognize that open markets and rule - based trade are the best engines we know of for raising living standards , reducing global poverty and environmental destruction , and assuring the free flow of ideas .
i believe , as strongly tonight as i did the first day i got here , the only direction forward for america on trade -- the only direction for america on trade is to keep going forward .
i ask you to help me forge that consensus .
we have to make developing economies our partners in prosperity .
that 's why i would like to ask you again to finalize our groundbreaking african and caribbean basin trade initiatives .
but globalization is about more than economics .
our purpose must be to bring together the world around freedom and democracy and peace and to oppose those who would tear it apart .
here are the fundamental challenges i believe america must meet to shape the 21st century world .
first , we must continue to encourage our former adversaries , russia and china , to emerge as stable , prosperous , democratic nations .
both are being held back today from reaching their full potential : russia by the legacy of communism , an economy in turmoil , a cruel and self - defeating war in chechnya ; china by the illusion that it can buy stability at the expense of freedom .
but think how much has changed in the past decade : 5,000 former soviet nuclear weapons taken out of commission ; russian soldiers actually serving with ours in the balkans ; russian people electing their leaders for the first time in 1,000 years ; and in china , an economy more open to the world than ever before .
of course , no one , not a single person in this chamber tonight can know for sure what direction these great nations will take .
but we do know for sure that we can choose what we do .
and we should do everything in our power to increase the chance that they will choose wisely , to be constructive members of our global community .
that 's why we should support those russians who are struggling for a democratic , prosperous future ; continue to reduce both our nuclear arsenals ; and help russia to safeguard weapons and materials that remain .
and that 's why i believe congress should support the agreement we negotiated to bring china into the wto , by passing permanent normal trade relations with china as soon as possible this year .
i think you ought to do it for two reasons : first of all , our markets are already open to china ; this agreement will open china 's markets to us .
and second , it will plainly advance the cause of peace in asia and promote the cause of change in china .
no , we do n't know where it 's going .
all we can do is decide what we 're going to do .
but when all is said and done , we need to know we did everything we possibly could to maximize the chance that china will choose the right future .
a second challenge we 've got is to protect our own security from conflicts that pose the risk of wider war and threaten our common humanity .
we ca n't prevent every conflict or stop every outrage .
but where our interests are at stake and we can make a difference , we should be , and we must be , peacemakers .
we should be proud of our role in bringing the middle east closer to a lasting peace , building peace in northern ireland , working for peace in east timor and africa , promoting reconciliation between greece and turkey and in cyprus , working to defuse these crises between india and pakistan , in defending human rights and religious freedom .
and we should be proud of the men and women of our armed forces and those of our allies who stopped the ethnic cleansing in kosovo , enabling a million people to return to their homes .
when slobodan milosevic unleashed his terror on kosovo , captain john cherrey was one of the brave airmen who turned the tide .
and when another american plane was shot down over serbia , he flew into the teeth of enemy air defenses to bring his fellow pilot home .
thanks to our armed forces ' skill and bravery , we prevailed in kosovo without losing a single american in combat .
i want to introduce captain cherrey to you .
we honor captain cherrey , and we promise you , captain , we 'll finish the job you began .
stand up so we can see you .
a third challenge we have is to keep this inexorable march of technology from giving terrorists and potentially hostile nations the means to undermine our defenses .
keep in mind , the same technological advances that have shrunk cell phones to fit in the palms of our hands can also make weapons of terror easier to conceal and easier to use .
we must meet this threat by making effective agreements to restrain nuclear and missile programs in north korea , curbing the flow of lethal technology to iran , preventing iraq from threatening its neighbors , increasing our preparedness against chemical and biological attack , protecting our vital computer systems from hackers and criminals , and developing a system to defend against new missile threats , while working to preserve our abm missile treaty with russia .
we must do all these things .
i predict to you , when most of us are long gone but some time in the next 10 to 20 years , the major security threat this country will face will come from the enemies of the nation - state , the narcotraffickers and the terrorists and the organized criminals who will be organized together , working together , with increasing access to ever more sophisticated chemical and biological weapons .
and i want to thank the pentagon and others for doing what they 're doing right now to try to help protect us and plan for that , so that our defenses will be strong .
i ask for your support to ensure they can succeed .
i also want to ask you for a constructive bipartisan dialog this year to work to build a consensus which i hope will eventually lead to the ratification of the comprehensive nuclear - test - ban treaty .
i hope we can also have a constructive effort to meet the challenge that is presented to our planet by the huge gulf between rich and poor .
we can not accept a world in which part of humanity lives on the cutting edge of a new economy and the rest live on the bare edge of survival .
i think we have to do our part to change that with expanded trade , expanded aid , and the expansion of freedom .
this is interesting : from nigeria to indonesia , more people got the right to choose their leaders in 1999 than in 1989 , when the berlin wall fell .
we 've got to stand by these democracies , including and especially tonight colombia , which is fighting narcotraffickers , for its own people 's lives and our children 's lives .
i have proposed a strong two - year package to help colombia win this fight .
i want to thank the leaders in both parties in both houses for listening to me and the president of colombia about it .
we have got to pass this .
i want to ask your help .
a lot is riding on it .
and it 's so important for the long - term stability of our country and for what happens in latin america .
i also want you to know i 'm going to send you new legislation to go after what these drug barons value the most , their money .
and i hope you 'll pass that as well .
in a world where over a billion people live on less than a dollar a day , we also have got to do our part in the global endeavor to reduce the debts of the poorest countries , so they can invest in education , health care , and economic growth .
that 's what the pope and other religious leaders have urged us to do .
and last year , congress made a downpayment on america 's share .
i ask you to continue that .
i thank you for what you did and ask you to stay the course .
i also want to say that america must help more nations to break the bonds of disease .
last year in africa , 10 times as many people died from aids as were killed in wars -- 10 times .
the budget i give you invests $ 150 million more in the fight against this and other infectious killers .
and today i propose a tax credit to speed the development of vaccines for diseases like malaria , tb , and aids .
i ask the private sector and our partners around the world to join us in embracing this cause .
we can save millions of lives together , and we ought to do it .
i also want to mention our final challenge , which , as always , is the most important .
i ask you to pass a national security budget that keeps our military the best trained and best equipped in the world , with heightened readiness and 21st century weapons , which raises salaries for our service men and women , which protects our veterans , which fully funds the diplomacy that keeps our soldiers out of war , which makes good on our commitment to our u. n. dues and arrears .
i ask you to pass this budget .
i also want to say something , if i might , very personal tonight .
the american people watching us at home , with the help of all the commentators , can tell , from who stands and who sits and who claps and who does n't , that there 's still modest differences of opinion in this room .
but i want to thank you for something , every one of you .
i want to thank you for the extraordinary support you have given , republicans and democrats alike , to our men and women in uniform .
i thank you for that .
i also want to thank , especially , two people .
first , i want to thank our secretary of defense , bill cohen , for symbolizing our bipartisan commitment to national security .
thank you , sir .
even more , i want to thank his wife , janet , who , more than any other american citizen , has tirelessly traveled this world to show the support we all feel for our troops .
thank you , janet cohen .
i appreciate that .
thank you .
these are the challenges we have to meet so that we can lead the world toward peace and freedom in an era of globalization .
i want to tell you that i am very grateful for many things as president .
but one of the things i 'm grateful for is the opportunity that the vice president and i have had to finally put to rest the bogus idea that you can not grow the economy and protect the environment at the same time .
as our economy has grown , we 've rid more than 500 neighborhoods of toxic waste , ensured cleaner air and water for millions of people .
in the past three months alone , we 've helped preserve 40 million acres of roadless lands in the national forests , created three new national monuments .
but as our communities grow , our commitment to conservation must continue to grow .
tonight i propose creating a permanent conservation fund , to restore wildlife , protect coastlines , save natural treasures , from the california redwoods to the florida everglades .
this lands legacy endowment would represent by far the most enduring investment in land preservation ever proposed in this house .
i hope we can get together with all the people with different ideas and do this .
this is a gift we should give to our children and our grandchildren for all time , across party lines .
we can make an agreement to do this .
last year the vice president launched a new effort to make communities more liberal -- liv - able --   -- liberal , i know .
wait a minute , i 've got a punchline now .
that 's this year 's agenda ; last year was livable , right ?
that 's what senator lott is going to say in the commentary afterwards --   -- to make our communities more livable .
this is big business .
this is a big issue .
what does that mean ?
you ask anybody that lives in an unlivable community , and they 'll tell you .
they want their kids to grow up next to parks , not parking lots ; the parents do n't have to spend all their time stalled in traffic when they could be home with their children .
tonight i ask you to support new funding for the following things , to make american communities more liberal -- livable .
i 've done pretty well with this speech , but i ca n't say that .
one , i want you to help us to do three things .
we need more funding for advanced transit systems .
we need more funding for saving open spaces in places of heavy development .
and we need more funding -- this ought to have bipartisan appeal -- we need more funding for helping major cities around the great lakes protect their waterways and enhance their quality of life .
we need these things , and i want you to help us .
the greatest environmental challenge of the new century is global warming .
the scientists tell us the 1990s were the hottest decade of the entire millennium .
if we fail to reduce the emission of greenhouse gases , deadly heat waves and droughts will become more frequent , coastal areas will flood , and economies will be disrupted .
that is going to happen , unless we act .
many people in the united states , some people in this chamber , and lots of folks around the world still believe you can not cut greenhouse gas emissions without slowing economic growth .
in the industrial age , that may well have been true .
but in this digital economy , it is not true anymore .
new technologies make it possible to cut harmful emissions and provide even more growth .
for example , just last week , automakers unveiled cars that get 70 to 80 miles a gallon , the fruits of a unique research partnership between government and industry .
and before you know it , efficient production of bio - fuels will give us the equivalent of hundreds of miles from a gallon of gasoline .
to speed innovation in these kind of technologies , i think we should give a major tax incentive to business for the production of clean energy and to families for buying energy - saving homes and appliances and the next generation of superefficient cars when they hit the showroom floor .
i also ask the auto industry to use the available technologies to make all new cars more fuel - efficient right away .
and i ask this congress to do something else .
please help us make more of our clean energy technology available to the developing world .
that will create cleaner growth abroad and a lot more new jobs here in the united states of america .
in the new century , innovations in science and technology will be key not only to the health of the environment but to miraculous improvements in the quality of our lives and advances in the economy .
later this year , researchers will complete the first draft of the entire human genome , the very blueprint of life .
it is important for all our fellow americans to recognize that federal tax dollars have funded much of this research and that this and other wise investments in science are leading to a revolution in our ability to detect , treat , and prevent disease .
for example , researchers have identified genes that cause parkinson 's , diabetes , and certain kinds of cancer .
they are designing precision therapies that will block the harmful effect of these genes for good .
researchers already are using this new technique to target and destroy cells that cause breast cancer .
soon , we may be able to use it to prevent the onset of alzheimer 's .
scientists are also working on an artificial retina to help many blind people to see and -- listen to this -- microchips that would actually directly stimulate damaged spinal cords in a way that could allow people now paralyzed to stand up and walk .
these kinds of innovations are also propelling our remarkable prosperity .
information technology only includes 8 percent of our employment but now accounts for a third of our economic growth along with jobs that pay , by the way , about 80 percent above the private sector average .
again , we ought to keep in mind , government - funded research brought supercomputers , the internet , and communications satellites into being .
soon researchers will bring us devices that can translate foreign languages as fast as you can talk , materials 10 times stronger than steel at a fraction of the weight , and -- this is unbelievable to me -- molecular computers the size of a teardrop with the power of today 's fastest supercomputers .
to accelerate the march of discovery across all these disciplines in science and technology , i ask you to support my recommendation of an unprecedented $ 3 billion in the 21st century research fund , the largest increase in civilian research in a generation .
we owe it to our future .
now , these new breakthroughs have to be used in ways that reflect our values .
first and foremost , we have to safeguard our citizens ' privacy .
last year we proposed to protect every citizen 's medical record .
this year we will finalize those rules .
we 've also taken the first steps to protect the privacy of bank and credit card records and other financial statements .
soon i will send legislation to you to finish that job .
we must also act to prevent any genetic discrimination whatever by employers or insurers .
i hope you will support that .
these steps will allow us to lead toward the far frontiers of science and technology .
they will enhance our health , the environment , the economy in ways we ca n't even imagine today .
but we all know that at a time when science , technology , and the forces of globalization are bringing so many changes into all our lives , it 's more important than ever that we strengthen the bonds that root us in our local communities and in our national community .
no tie binds different people together like citizen service .
there 's a new spirit of service in america , a movement we 've tried to support with americorps , expanded peace corps , unprecedented new partnerships with businesses , foundations , community groups ; partnerships , for example , like the one that enlisted 12,000 companies which have now moved 650,000 of our fellow citizens from welfare to work ; partnerships to battle drug abuse , aids , teach young people to read , save america 's treasures , strengthen the arts , fight teen pregnancy , prevent violence among young people , promote racial healing .
the american people are working together .
but we should do more to help americans help each other .
first , we should help faith - based organizations to do more to fight poverty and drug abuse and help people get back on the right track , with initiatives like second chance homes that do so much to help unwed teen mothers .
second , we should support americans who tithe and contribute to charities but do n't earn enough to claim a tax deduction for it .
tonight i propose new tax incentives that would allow low and middle income citizens who do n't itemize to get that deduction .
it 's nothing but fair , and it will get more people to give .
we should do more to help new immigrants to fully participate in our community .
that 's why i recommend spending more to teach them civics and english .
and since everybody in our community counts , we 've got to make sure everyone is counted in this year 's census .
within 10 years -- just 10 years -- there will be no majority race in our largest state of california .
in a little more than 50 years , there will be no majority race in america .
in a more interconnected world , this diversity can be our greatest strength .
just look around this chamber .
look around .
we have members in this congress from virtually every racial , ethnic , and religious background .
and i think you would agree that america is stronger because of it .
you also have to agree that all those differences you just clapped for all too often spark hatred and division even here at home .
just in the last couple of years , we 've seen a man dragged to death in texas just because he was black .
we saw a young man murdered in wyoming just because he was gay .
last year we saw the shootings of african - americans , asian - americans , and jewish children just because of who they were .
this is not the american way , and we must draw the line .
i ask you to draw that line by passing without delay the " hate crimes prevention act " and the " employment non - discrimination act . "
and i ask you to reauthorize the violence against women act .
finally tonight , i propose the largest ever investment in our civil rights laws for enforcement , because no american should be subjected to discrimination in finding a home , getting a job , going to school , or securing a loan .
protections in law should be protections in fact .
last february , because i thought this was so important , i created the white house office of one america to promote racial reconciliation .
that 's what one of my personal heroes , hank aaron , has done all his life .
from his days as our all - time home run king to his recent acts of healing , he has always brought people together .
we should follow his example , and we 're honored to have him with us tonight .
stand up , hank aaron .
i just want to say one more thing about this , and i want every one of you to think about this the next time you get mad at one of your colleagues on the other side of the aisle .
this fall , at the white house , hillary had one of her millennium dinners , and we had this very distinguished scientist there , who is an expert in this whole work in the human genome .
and he said that we are all , regardless of race , genetically 99.9 percent the same .
now , you may find that uncomfortable when you look around here .
but it is worth remembering .
we can laugh about this , but you think about it .
modern science has confirmed what ancient faiths have always taught : the most important fact of life is our common humanity .
therefore , we should do more than just tolerate our diversity ; we should honor it and celebrate it .
my fellow americans , every time i prepare for the state of the union , i approach it with hope and expectation and excitement for our nation .
but tonight is very special , because we stand on the mountaintop of a new millennium .
behind us we can look back and see the great expanse of american achievement , and before us we can see even greater , grander frontiers of possibility .
we should , all of us , be filled with gratitude and humility for our present progress and prosperity .
we should be filled with awe and joy at what lies over the horizon .
and we should be filled with absolute determination to make the most of it .
you know , when the framers finished crafting our constitution in philadelphia , benjamin franklin stood in independence hall , and he reflected on the carving of the sun that was on the back of a chair he saw .
the sun was low on the horizon .
so he said this -- he said , " i 've often wondered whether that sun was rising or setting .
today , " franklin said , " i have the happiness to know it 's a rising sun . "
today , because each succeeding generation of americans has kept the fire of freedom burning brightly , lighting those frontiers of possibility , we all still bask in the glow and the warmth of mr. franklin 's rising sun .
after 224 years , the american revolution continues .
we remain a new nation .
and as long as our dreams outweigh our memories , america will be forever young .
that is our destiny .
and this is our moment .
thank you , god bless you , and god bless america .

thank you very much .
governor keating and mrs. keating , reverend graham , to the families of those who have been lost and wounded , to the people of oklahoma city who have endured so much , and the people of this wonderful state , to all of you who are here as our fellow americans .
i am honored to be here today to represent the american people .
but i have to tell you that hillary and i also come as parents , as husband and wife , as people who were your neighbors for some of the best years of our lives .
today our nation joins with you in grief .
we mourn with you .
we share your hope against hope that some may still survive .
we thank all those who have worked so heroically to save lives and to solve this crime , those here in oklahoma and those who are all across this great land and many who left their own lives to come here to work hand in hand with you .
we pledge to do all we can to help you heal the injured , to rebuild this city , and to bring to justice those who did this evil .
this terrible sin took the lives of our american family , innocent children in that building only because their parents were trying to be good parents as well as good workers , citizens in the building going about their daily business and many there who served the rest of us , who worked to help the elderly and the disabled , who worked to support our farmers and our veterans , who worked to enforce our laws and to protect us .
let us say clearly , they served us well , and we are grateful .
but for so many of you they were also neighbors and friends .
you saw them at church or the pta meetings , at the civic clubs , at the ball park .
you know them in ways that all the rest of america could not .
and to all the members of the families here present who have suffered loss , though we share your grief , your pain is unimaginable , and we know that .
we can not undo it .
that is god 's work .
our words seem small beside the loss you have endured .
but i found a few i wanted to share today .
i 've received a lot of letters in these last terrible days .
one stood out because it came from a young widow and a mother of three whose own husband was murdered with over 200 other americans when pan am 103 was shot down .
here is what that woman said i should say to you today : " the anger you feel is valid , but you must not allow yourselves to be consumed by it .
the hurt you feel must not be allowed to turn into hate but instead into the search for justice .
the loss you feel must not paralyze your own lives .
instead , you must try to pay tribute to your loved ones by continuing to do all the things they left undone , thus ensuring they did not die in vain . "
wise words from one who also knows .
you have lost too much , but you have not lost everything .
and you have certainly not lost america , for we will stand with you for as many tomorrows as it takes .
if ever we needed evidence of that , i could only recall the words of governor and mrs. keating .
if anybody thinks that americans are mostly mean and selfish , they ought to come to oklahoma .
if anybody thinks americans have lost the capacity for love and caring and courage , they ought to come to oklahoma .
to all my fellow americans beyond this hall , i say , one thing we owe those who have sacrificed is the duty to purge ourselves of the dark forces which gave rise to this evil .
they are forces that threaten our common peace , our freedom , our way of life .
let us teach our children that the god of comfort is also the god of righteousness .
those who trouble their own house will inherit the wind .
justice will prevail .
let us let our own children know that we will stand against the forces of fear .
when there is talk of hatred , let us stand up and talk against it .
when there is talk of violence , let us stand up and talk against it .
in the face of death , let us honor life .
as st. paul admonished us , let us not be overcome by evil , but overcome evil with good .
yesterday hillary and i had the privilege of speaking with some children of other federal employees , children like those who were lost here .
and one little girl said something we will never forget .
she said , we should all plant a tree in memory of the children .
so this morning before we got on the plane to come here , at the white house , we planted that tree in honor of the children of oklahoma .
it was a dogwood with its wonderful spring flower and its deep , enduring roots .
it embodies the lesson of the psalms : that the life of a good person is like a tree whose leaf does not wither .
my fellow americans , a tree takes a long time to grow and wounds take a long time to heal .
but we must begin .
those who are lost now belong to god .
some day we will be with them .
but until that happens , their legacy must be our lives .
thank you all , and god bless you .

my fellow citizens , at this last presidential inauguration of the 20th century , let us lift our eyes toward the challenges that await us in the next century .
it is our great good fortune that time and chance have put us not only at the edge of a new century , in a new millennium , but on the edge of a bright new prospect in human affairs , a moment that will define our course and our character for decades to come .
we must keep our old democracy forever young .
guided by the ancient vision of a promised land , let us set our sights upon a land of new promise .
the promise of america was born in the 18th century out of the bold conviction that we are all created equal .
it was extended and preserved in the 19th century , when our nation spread across the continent , saved the union , and abolished the awful scourge of slavery .
then , in turmoil and triumph , that promise exploded onto the world stage to make this the american century .
and what a century it has been .
america became the world 's mightiest industrial power , saved the world from tyranny in two world wars and a long cold war , and time and again reached out across the globe to millions who , like us , longed for the blessings of liberty .
along the way , americans produced a great middle class and security in old age , built unrivaled centers of learning and opened public schools to all , split the atom and explored the heavens , invented the computer and the microchip , and deepened the well - spring of justice by making a revolution in civil rights for african americans and all minorities and extending the circle of citizenship , opportunity , and dignity to women .
now , for the third time , a new century is upon us and another time to choose .
we began the 19th century with a choice : to spread our nation from coast to coast .
we began the 20th century with a choice : to harness the industrial revolution to our values of free enterprise , conservation , and human decency .
those choices made all the difference .
at the dawn of the 21st century , a free people must now choose to shape the forces of the information age and the global society , to unleash the limitless potential of all our people , and yes , to form a more perfect union .
when last we gathered , our march to this new future seemed less certain than it does today .
we vowed then to set a clear course to renew our nation .
in these 4 years , we have been touched by tragedy , exhilarated by challenge , strengthened by achievement .
america stands alone as the world 's indispensable nation .
once again , our economy is the strongest on earth .
once again , we are building stronger families , thriving communities , better educational opportunities , a cleaner environment .
problems that once seemed destined to deepen , now bend to our efforts .
our streets are safer , and record numbers of our fellow citizens have moved from welfare to work .
and once again , we have resolved for our time a great debate over the role of government .
today we can declare : government is not the problem , and government is not the solution .
we -- the american people -- we are the solution .
our founders understood that well and gave us a democracy strong enough to endure for centuries , flexible enough to face our common challenges and advance our common dreams in each new day .
as times change , so government must change .
we need a new government for a new century , humble enough not to try to solve all our problems for us but strong enough to give us the tools to solve our problems for ourselves , a government that is smaller , lives within its means , and does more with less .
yet where it can stand up for our values and interests around the world , and where it can give americans the power to make a real difference in their everyday lives , government should do more , not less .
the preeminent mission of our new government is to give all americans an opportunity , not a guarantee but a real opportunity , to build better lives .
beyond that , my fellow citizens , the future is up to us .
our founders taught us that the preservation of our liberty and our union depends upon responsible citizenship .
and we need a new sense of responsibility for a new century .
there is work to do , work that government alone can not do : teaching children to read , hiring people off welfare rolls , coming out from behind locked doors and shuttered windows to help reclaim our streets from drugs and gangs and crime , taking time out of our own lives to serve others .
each and every one of us , in our own way , must assume personal responsibility not only for ourselves and our families but for our neighbors and our nation .
our greatest responsibility is to embrace a new spirit of community for a new century .
for any one of us to succeed , we must succeed as one america .
the challenge of our past remains the challenge of our future : will we be one nation , one people , with one common destiny , or not ?
will we all come together , or come apart ?
the divide of race has been america 's constant curse .
and each new wave of immigrants gives new targets to old prejudices .
prejudice and contempt cloaked in the pretense of religious or political conviction are no different .
these forces have nearly destroyed our nation in the past .
they plague us still .
they fuel the fanaticism of terror .
and they torment the lives of millions in fractured nations all around the world .
these obsessions cripple both those who hate and of course those who are hated , robbing both of what they might become .
we can not , we will not , succumb to the dark impulses that lurk in the far regions of the soul everywhere .
we shall overcome them .
and we shall replace them with the generous spirit of a people who feel at home with one another .
our rich texture of racial , religious , and political diversity will be a godsend in the 21st century .
great rewards will come to those who can live together , learn together , work together , forge new ties that bind together .
as this new era approaches , we can already see its broad outlines .
ten years ago , the internet was the mystical province of physicists ; today , it is a commonplace encyclopedia for millions of schoolchildren .
scientists now are decoding the blueprint of human life .
cures for our most feared illnesses seem close at hand .
the world is no longer divided into two hostile camps .
instead , now we are building bonds with nations that once were our adversaries .
growing connections of commerce and culture give us a chance to lift the fortunes and spirits of people the world over .
and for the very first time in all of history , more people on this planet live under democracy than dictatorship .
my fellow americans , as we look back at this remarkable century , we may ask , can we hope not just to follow but even to surpass the achievements of the 20th century in america and to avoid the awful bloodshed that stained its legacy ?
to that question , every american here and every american in our land today must answer a resounding , " yes ! "
this is the heart of our task .
with a new vision of government , a new sense of responsibility , a new spirit of community , we will sustain america 's journey .
the promise we sought in a new land , we will find again in a land of new promise .
in this new land , education will be every citizen 's most prized possession .
our schools will have the highest standards in the world , igniting the spark of possibility in the eyes of every girl and every boy .
and the doors of higher education will be open to all .
the knowledge and power of the information age will be within reach not just of the few but of every classroom , every library , every child .
parents and children will have time not only to work but to read and play together .
and the plans they make at their kitchen table will be those of a better home , a better job , the certain chance to go to college .
our streets will echo again with the laughter of our children , because no one will try to shoot them or sell them drugs anymore .
everyone who can work , will work , with today 's permanent under class part of tomorrow 's growing middle class .
new miracles of medicine at last will reach not only those who can claim care now but the children and hard - working families too long denied .
we will stand mighty for peace and freedom and maintain a strong defense against terror and destruction .
our children will sleep free from the threat of nuclear , chemical , or biological weapons .
ports and airports , farms and factories will thrive with trade and innovation and ideas .
and the world 's greatest democracy will lead a whole world of democracies .
our land of new promise will be a nation that meets its obligations , a nation that balances its budget but never loses the balance of its values , a nation where our grandparents have secure retirement and health care and their grandchildren know we have made the reforms necessary to sustain those benefits for their time , a nation that fortifies the world 's most productive economy even as it protects the great natural bounty of our water , air , and majestic land .
and in this land of new promise , we will have reformed our politics so that the voice of the people will always speak louder than the din of narrow interests , regaining the participation and deserving the trust of all americans .
fellow citizens , let us build that america , a nation ever moving forward toward realizing the full potential of all its citizens .
prosperity and power , yes , they are important , and we must maintain them .
but let us never forget , the greatest progress we have made and the greatest progress we have yet to make , is in the human heart .
in the end , all the world 's wealth and a thousand armies are no match for the strength and decency of the human spirit .
thirty - four years ago , the man whose life we celebrate today spoke to us down there , at the other end of this mall , in words that moved the conscience of a nation .
like a prophet of old , he told of his dream that one day america would rise up and treat all its citizens as equals before the law and in the heart .
martin luther king 's dream was the american dream .
his quest is our quest : the ceaseless striving to live out our true creed .
our history has been built on such dreams and labors .
and by our dreams and labors , we will redeem the promise of america in the 21st century .
to that effort i pledge all my strength and every power of my office .
i ask the members of congress here to join in that pledge .
the american people returned to office a president of one party and a congress of another .
surely they did not do this to advance the politics of petty bickering and extreme partisanship they plainly deplore .
no , they call on us instead to be repairers of the breach and to move on with america 's mission .
america demands and deserves big things from us , and nothing big ever came from being small .
let us remember the timeless wisdom of cardinal bernardin , when facing the end of his own life .
he said , " it is wrong to waste the precious gift of time on acrimony and division . "
fellow citizens , we must not waste the precious gift of this time .
for all of us are on that same journey of our lives , and our journey , too , will come to an end .
but the journey of our america must go on .
and so , my fellow americans , we must be strong , for there is much to dare .
the demands of our time are great , and they are different .
let us meet them with faith and courage , with patience and a grateful , happy heart .
let us shape the hope of this day into the noblest chapter in our history .
yes , let us build our bridge , a bridge wide enough and strong enough for every american to cross over to a blessed land of new promise .
may those generations whose faces we can not yet see , whose names we may never know , say of us here that we led our beloved land into a new century with the american dream alive for all her children , with the american promise of a more perfect union a reality for all her people , with america 's bright flame of freedom spreading throughout all the world .
from the height of this place and the summit of this century , let us go forth .
may god strengthen our hands for the good work ahead , and always , always bless our america .

mr. chairman , mr. vice president , my fellow democrats , and my fellow americans : thank you for your nomination .
i do n't know if i can find a fancy way to say this , but i accept .
so many have contributed to the record we have made for the american people , but one above all , my partner , my friend , and the best vice president in our history , al gore .
tonight i thank the city of chicago , its great mayor , and its wonderful people for this magnificent convention .
i love chicago for many reasons , for your powerful spirit , your sports teams , your lively politics , but most of all for the love and light of my life , chicago 's daughter hillary .
four years ago , you and i set forth on a journey to bring our vision to our country , to keep the american dream alive for all who were willing to work for it , to make our american community stronger , to keep america the world 's strongest force for peace and freedom and prosperity .
four years ago , with high unemployment , stagnant wages , crime , welfare , and the deficit on the rise , with a host of unmet challenges and a rising tide of cynicism , i told you about a place i was born , and i told you that i still believed in a place called hope .
well , for four years now , to realize our vision we have pursued a simple but profound strategy : opportunity for all , responsibility from all , a strong united american community .
four days ago , as you were making your way here , i began a train ride to make my way to chicago through america 's heartland .
i wanted to see the faces , i wanted to hear the voices of the people for whom i have worked and fought these last four years .
and did i ever see them .
i met an ingenious business woman who was once on welfare in west virginia ; a brave police officer , shot and paralyzed , now a civic leader in kentucky ; an autoworker in ohio , once unemployed , now proud to be working in the oldest auto plant in america to help make america number one in auto production again for the first time in 20 years .
i met a grandmother fighting for her grandson 's environment in michigan .
and i stood with two wonderful little children proudly reading from their favorite book , the little engine that could .
at every stop , large and exuberant crowds greeted me .
and maybe more important , when we just rolled through little towns there were always schoolchildren there waving their american flags , all of them believing in america and its future .
i would not have missed that trip for all the world , for that trip showed me that hope is back in america .
we are on the right track to the 21st century .
look at the facts , just look at the facts : 4.4 million americans now living in a home of their own for the first time ; hundreds of thousands of women have started their own new businesses ; more minorities own businesses than ever before ; record numbers of new small businesses and exports .
look at what 's happened .
we have the lowest combined rates of unemployment , inflation , and home mortgages in 28 years .
look at what happened : 10 million new jobs , over half of them high - wage jobs ; 10 million workers getting the raise they deserve with the minimum wage law ; 25 million people now having protection in their health insurance because the kennedy - kassebaum bill says you ca n't lose your insurance anymore when you change jobs , even if somebody in your family has been sick ; 40 million americans with more pension security ; a tax cut for 15 million of our hardest working , hardest pressed americans , and all small businesses ; 12 million americans -- 12 million of them -- taking advantage of the family and medical leave law so they can be good parents and good workers .
ten million students have saved money on their college loans .
we are making our democracy work .
we have also passed political reform , the line - item veto , the motor voter bill , tougher registration laws for lobbyists , making congress live under the laws they impose on the private sector , stopping unfunded mandates to state and local government .
we 've come a long way ; we 've got one more thing to do .
will you help me get campaign finance reform in the next four years ?
we have increased our investments in research and technology .
we have increased investments in breast cancer research dramatically .
we are developing a supercomputer -- a supercomputer that will do more calculating in a second than a person with a hand - held calculator can do in 30,000 years .
more rapid development of drugs to deal with hiv and aids and moving them to the market quicker have almost doubled life expectancy in only four years .
and we are looking at no limit in sight to that .
we 'll keep going until normal life is returned to people who deal with this .
our country is still the strongest force for peace and freedom on earth .
on issues that once before tore us apart , we have changed the old politics of washington .
for too long , leaders in washington asked , who 's to blame ?
but we asked , what are we going to do ?
on crime , we 're putting 100,000 police on the streets .
we made " three strikes and you 're out " the law of the land .
we stopped 60,000 felons , fugitives , and stalkers from getting handguns under the brady bill .
we banned assault rifles .
we supported tougher punishment and prevention programs to keep our children from drugs and gangs and violence .
four years now -- for four years now -- the crime rate in america has gone down .
on welfare , we worked with states to launch a quiet revolution .
today there are 1.8 million fewer people on welfare than there were the day i took the oath of office .
we are moving people from welfare to work .
we have increased child support collections by 40 percent .
the federal work force is the smallest it has been since john kennedy .
and the deficit has come down for four years in a row for the first time since before the civil war , down 60 percent on the way to zero .
we will do it .
we are on the right track to the 21st century .
we are on the right track .
but our work is not finished .
what should we do ?
first , let us consider how to proceed .
again i say , the question is no longer who 's to blame but what to do .
i believe that bob dole and jack kemp and ross perot love our country , and they have worked hard to serve it .
it is legitimate , even necessary , to compare our record with theirs , our proposals for the future with theirs .
and i expect them to make a vigorous effort to do the same .
but i will not attack .
i will not attack them personally or permit others to do it in this party if i can prevent it .
my fellow americans , this must be -- this must be a campaign of ideas , not a campaign of insults .
the american people deserve it .
now , here 's the main idea : i love and revere the rich and proud history of america .
and i am determined to take our best traditions into the future .
but with all respect , we do not need to build a bridge to the past .
we need to build a bridge to the future .
and that is what i commit to you to do .
so tonight , tonight let us resolve to build that bridge to the 21st century , to meet our challenges and protect our values .
let us build a bridge to help our parents raise their children , to help young people and adults to get the education and training they need , to make our streets safer , to help americans succeed at home and at work , to break the cycle of poverty and dependence , to protect our environment for generations to come , and to maintain our world leadership for peace and freedom .
let us resolve to build that bridge .
tonight , my fellow americans , i ask all of our fellow citizens to join me and to join you in building that bridge to the 21st century .
four years from now , just four years from now -- think of it -- we begin a new century , full of enormous possibilities .
we have to give the american people the tools they need to make the most of their god - given potential .
we must make the basic bargain of opportunity and responsibility available to all americans , not just a few .
that is the promise of the democratic party .
that is the promise of america .
i want to build a bridge to the 21st century in which we expand opportunity through education , where computers are as much a part of the classroom as blackboards , where highly trained teachers demand peak performance from our students , where every 8-year - old can point to a book and say , " i can read it myself . "
by the year 2000 , the single most critical thing we can do is to give every single american who wants it the chance to go to college .
we must make two years of college just as universal in four years as a high school education is today .
and we can do it .
we can do it , and we should cut taxes to do it .
i propose a $ 1,500-a - year tuition tax credit for americans , a hope scholarship for the first two years of college to make the typical community college education available to every american .
i believe every working family ought also to be able to deduct up to $ 10,000 in college tuition costs per year for education after that .
i believe the families of this country ought to be able to save money for college in a tax - free ira , save it year - in and year - out , withdraw it for college education without penalty .
we should not tax middle - income americans for the money they spend on college .
we 'll get the money back down the road many times over .
i want to say here , before i go further , that these tax cuts and every other one i mention tonight are all fully paid for in my balanced budget plan , line - by - line , dime - by - dime , and they focus on education .
now , one thing so many of our fellow americans are learning is that education no longer stops on graduation day .
i have proposed a new " gi bill " for american workers , a $ 2,600 grant for unemployed and underemployed americans so that they can get the training and the skills they need to go back to work at better paying jobs , good high - skilled jobs for a good future .
but we must demand excellence at every level of education .
we must insist that our students learn the old basics we learned and the new basics they have to know for the next century .
tonight let us set a clear national goal : all children should be able to read on their own by the third grade .
when 40 percent of our 8-year - olds can not read as well as they should , we have to do something .
i want to send 30,000 reading specialists and national service corps members to mobilize a voluntary army of one million reading tutors for third graders all across america .
they will teach our young children to read .
let me say to our parents : you have to lead the way .
every tired night you spend reading a book to your child will be worth it many times over .
i know that hillary and i still talk about the books we read to chelsea when we were so tired we could hardly stay awake .
we still remember them , and more important , so does she .
but we 're going to help the parents of this country make every child able to read for himself or herself by the age of 8 , by the third grade .
do you believe we can do that ?
will you help us do that ?
we must give parents , all parents , the right to choose which public school their children will attend and to let teachers form new charter schools with a charter they can keep only if they do a good job .
we must keep our schools open late so that young people have someplace to go and something to say yes to and stay off the street .
we must require that our students pass tough tests to keep moving up in school .
a diploma has to mean something when they get out .
we should reward teachers that are doing a good job , remove those who do n't measure up .
but in every case , never forget that none of us would be here tonight if it were n't for our teachers .
i know i would n't .
we ought to lift them up , not tear them down .
we need schools that will take our children into the next century .
we need schools that are rebuilt and modernized with an unprecedented commitment from the national government to increase school construction and with every single library and classroom in america connected to the information superhighway by the year 2000 .
now , folks , if we do these things , every 8-year - old will be able to read , every 12-year - old will be able to log in on the internet , every 18-year - old will be able to go to college , and all americans will have the knowledge they need to cross that bridge to the 21st century .
i want to build a bridge to the 21st century in which we create a strong and growing economy to preserve the legacy of opportunity for the next generation , by balancing our budget in a way that protects our values and ensuring that every family will be able to own and protect the value of their most important asset , their home .
tonight let us proclaim to the american people we will balance the budget .
and let us also proclaim , we will do it in a way that preserves medicare , medicaid , education , the environment , the integrity of our pensions , the strength of our people .
now , last year when the republican congress sent me a budget that violated those values and principles , i vetoed it .
and i would do it again tomorrow .
i could never allow cuts that devastate education for our children , that pollute our environment , that end the guarantee of health care for those who are served under medicaid , that end our duty or violate our duty to our parents through medicare .
i just could n't do that .
as long as i 'm president , i 'll never let it happen .
and it does n't matter if they try again , as they did before , to use the blackmail threat of a shutdown of the federal government to force these things on the american people .
we did n't let it happen before .
we wo n't let it happen again .
of course , there is a better answer to this dilemma .
we could have the right kind of balanced budget with a new congress , a democratic congress .
i want to balance the budget with real cuts in government , in waste .
i want a plan that invests in education , as mine does , in technology , and yes , in research , as christopher reeve so powerfully reminded us we must do .
and my plan gives americans tax cuts that will help our economy to grow .
i want to expand iras so that young people can save tax - free to buy a first home .
tonight i propose a new tax cut for home ownership that says to every middle - income working family in this country , if you sell your home you will not have to pay a capital gains tax on it ever , not ever .
i want every american to be able to hear those beautiful words , " welcome home . "
let me say again , every tax cut i call for tonight is targeted , it 's responsible , and it is paid for within my balanced budget plan .
my tax cuts will not undermine our economy , they will speed economic growth .
we should cut taxes for the family sending a child to college , for the worker returning to college , for the family saving to buy a home or for long - term health care , and a $ 500-per - child credit for middle - income families raising their children who need help with child care and what the children will do after school .
that is the right way to cut taxes , pro - family , pro - education , pro - economic growth .
now , our opponents have put forward a very different plan , a risky $ 550 billion tax scheme that will force them to ask for even bigger cuts in medicare , medicaid , education , and the environment than they passed and i vetoed last year .
but even then they will not cover the costs of their scheme , so that even then this plan will explode the deficit , which will increase interest rates by two percent , according to their own estimates last year .
it will require huge cuts in the very investments we need to grow and to grow together and , at the same time , slow down the economy .
you know what higher interest rates mean ?
to you it means a higher mortgage payment , a higher car payment , a higher credit card payment .
to our economy it means business people will not borrow as much money , invest as much money , create as many new jobs , create as much wealth , raise as many wages .
do we really want to make that same mistake all over again ?
do we really want to stop economic growth again ?
do we really want to start piling up another mountain of debt ?
president clinton : do we want to bring back the recession of 1991 and ' 92 ?
audience : no - o - o !
president clinton : do we want to weaken our bridge to the 21st century ?
audience : no - o - o !
president clinton : of course we do n't .
we have an obligation , you and i , to leave our children a legacy of opportunity , not a legacy of debt .
our budget would be balanced today , we would have a surplus today , if we did n't have to make the interest payments on the debt run up in the 12 years before the clinton / gore administration took office .
audience : four more years !
four more years !
four more years !
president clinton : so let me say this is one of those areas in which i respectfully disagree with my opponent .
i do n't believe we should bet the farm , and i certainly do n't believe we should bet the country .
we should stay on the right track to the 21st century .
opportunity alone is not enough .
i want to build an america in the 21st century in which all americans take personal responsibility for themselves , their families , their communities , and their country .
i want our nation to take responsibility to make sure that every single child can look out the window in the morning and see a whole community getting up and going to work .
we want these young people to know the thrill of the first paycheck , the challenge of starting that first business , the pride in following in a parent 's footsteps .
the welfare reform law i signed last week gives america a chance , but not a guarantee , to have that kind of new beginning , to have a new social bargain with the poor , guaranteeing health care , child care , and nutrition for the children but requiring able - bodied parents to work for the income .
now i say to all of you , whether you supported the law or opposed it , but especially to those who supported it , we have a responsibility , we have a moral obligation to make sure the people who are being required to work have the opportunity to work .
we must make sure the jobs are there .
there should be one million new jobs for welfare recipients by the year 2000 .
states under this law can now take the money that was spent on the welfare check and use it to help businesses provide paychecks .
i challenge every state to do it soon .
i propose also to give businesses a tax credit for every person hired off welfare and kept employed .
i propose to offer private job placement firms a bonus for every welfare recipient they place in a job who stays in it .
and more important , i want to help communities put welfare recipients to work right now , without delay , repairing schools , making their neighborhoods clean and safe , making them shine again .
there 's lots of work to be done out there .
our cities can find ways to put people to work and bring dignity and strength back to these families .
my fellow americans , i have spent an enormous amount of time with our dear friend the late ron brown and with secretary kantor and others opening markets for america around the world .
and i 'm proud of every one we opened .
but let us never forget , the greatest untapped market for american enterprise is right here in america , in the inner cities , in the rural areas , who have not felt this recovery .
with investment and business and jobs , they can become our partners in the future .
and it 's a great opportunity we ought not to pass up .
i propose more empowerment zones like the one we have right here in chicago to draw business into poor neighborhoods .
i propose more community development banks , like the south shore bank right here in chicago , to help people in those neighborhoods start their own small businesses .
more jobs , more incomes , new markets for america right here at home making welfare reform a reality .
now , folks , you cheered -- and i thank you -- but the government can only do so much .
the private sector has to provide most of these jobs .
so i want to say again , tonight i challenge every business person in america who has ever complained about the failure of the welfare system to try to hire somebody off welfare and try hard .
thank you .
after all , the welfare system you used to complain about is not here anymore .
there is no more " who 's to blame " on welfare .
now the only question is what to do .
and we all have a responsibility , especially those who have criticized what was passed and who have asked for a change and who have the ability to give poor people a chance to grow and support their families .
i want to build a bridge to the 21st century that ends the permanent under class , that lifts up the poor and ends their isolation , their exile .
and they 're not forgotten anymore .
thank you .
audience : four more years !
four more years !
four more years !
president clinton : i want to build a bridge to the 21st century where our children are not killing other children anymore , where children 's lives are not shattered by violence at home or in the schoolyard , where a generation of young people are not left to raise themselves on the streets .
with more police and punishment and prevention , the crime rate has dropped for four years in a row now .
but we can not rest , because we know it 's still too high .
we can not rest until crime is a shocking exception to our daily lives , not news as usual .
will you stay with me until we reach that good day ?
my fellow americans , we all owe a great debt to sarah and jim brady , and i 'm glad they took their wrong turn and wound up in chicago .
i was glad to see that .
it is to them we owe the good news that 60,000 felons , fugitives , and stalkers could n't get handguns because of the brady bill .
but not a single hunter in arkansas or new hampshire or illinois or anyplace else missed a hunting season .
but now i say we should extend the brady bill , because anyone who has committed an act of domestic violence against a spouse or a child should not buy a gun .
and we must ban those cop - killer bullets .
they are designed for one reason only , to kill police officers .
we ask the police to keep us safe .
we owe it to them to help keep them safe while they do their job for us .
we should pass a victim 's rights constitutional amendment because victims deserve to be heard ; they need to know when an assailant is released .
they need to know these things , and the only way to guarantee them is through a constitutional amendment .
we have made a great deal of progress .
even the crime rate among young people is finally coming down .
so it is very , very painful to me that drug use among young people is up .
drugs nearly killed my brother when he was a young man , and i hate them .
he fought back .
he 's here tonight with his wife , his little boy is here , and i 'm really proud of him .
but i learned something -- i learned something in going through that long nightmare with our family .
and i can tell you , something has happened to some of our young people ; they simply do n't think these drugs are dangerous anymore , or they think the risk is acceptable .
so beginning with our parents , and without regard to our party , we have to renew our energy to teach this generation of young people the hard , cold truth : drugs are deadly ; drugs are wrong ; drugs can cost you your life .
general barry mccaffrey , the four - star general who led our fight against drugs in latin america , now leads our crusade against drugs at home : stopping more drugs at our borders , cracking down on those who sell them , and most important of all , pursuing a national antidrug strategy whose primary aim is to turn our children away from drugs .
i call on congress to give him every cent of funding we have requested for this strategy and to do it now .
there is more we will do .
we should say to parolees : we will test you for drugs ; if you go back on them , we will send you back to jail .
we will say to gangs : we will break you with the same antiracketeering law we used to put mob bosses in jail .
you 're not going to kill our kids anymore or turn them into murderers before they 're teenagers .
my fellow americans , if we 're going to build that bridge to the 21st century we have to make our children free , free of the vise grip of guns and gangs and drugs , free to build lives of hope .
i want to build a bridge to the 21st century with a strong american community , beginning with strong families , an america where all children are cherished and protected from destructive forces , where parents can succeed at home and at work .
everywhere i 've gone in america , people come up and talk to me about their struggle with the demands of work and their desire to do a better job with their children .
the very first person i ever saw fight that battle was here with me four years ago , and tonight i miss her very , very much .
my irrepressible , hard - working , always optimistic mother did the best she could for her brother and me , often against very stiff odds .
i learned from her just how much love and determination can overcome .
but from her and from our life , i also learned that no parent can do it alone .
and no parent should have to .
she had the kind of help every parent deserves , from our neighbors , our friends , our teachers , our pastors , our doctors , and so many more .
you know , when i started out in public life with a lot of my friends from the arkansas delegation down here , there used to be a saying from time to time that every man who runs for public office will claim that he was born in a log cabin he built with his own hands .
well , my mother knew better .
and she made sure i did , too .
long before she even met hillary , my mother knew it takes a village , and she was grateful for the support she got .
as tipper gore and hillary said on tuesday , we have , all of us in our administration , worked hard to support families in raising their children and succeeding at work .
but we must do more .
we should extend the family and medical leave law to give parents some time off to take their children to regular doctor 's appointments or attend those parent - teacher conferences at school .
that is a key determination of their success .
we should pass a flextime law that allows employees to take their overtime pay in money or in time off , depending on what 's better for their family .
the fda has adopted new measures to reduce advertising and sales of cigarettes to children .
the vice president spoke so movingly of it last night .
but let me remind you , my fellow americans , that is very much an issue in this election because that battle is far from over and the two candidates have different views .
i pledge to america 's parents that i will see this effort all the way through .
working with the entertainment industry , we 're giving parents the v - chip .
tv shows are being rated for content so parents will be able to make a judgment about whether their small children should see them .
and three hours of quality children 's programming every week , on every network , are on the way .
the kennedy - kassebaum law says every american can keep his or her health insurance if they have to change jobs , even if someone in their family has been sick .
that is a very important thing .
but tonight we should spell out the next steps .
the first thing we ought to do is to extend the benefits of health care to people who are unemployed .
i propose in my balanced budget plan , paid for , to help unemployed families keep their health insurance for up to six months .
a parent may be without a job , but no child should be without a doctor .
and let me say again , as the first lady did on tuesday , we should protect mothers and newborn babies from being forced out of the hospital in less than 48 hours .
we respect the individual conscience of every american on the painful issue of abortion but believe as a matter of law that this decision should be left to a woman , her conscience , her doctor , and her god .
abortion should not only be safe and legal , it should be rare .
that 's why i helped to establish and support a national effort to reduce out - of - wedlock teen pregnancy , and that is why we must promote adoption .
last week the minimum wage bill i signed contained a $ 5,000 credit to families who adopt children , even more if the children have disabilities .
it put an end to racial discrimination in the adoption process .
it was a good thing for america .
my fellow americans , already there are tens of thousands of children out there who need a good home with loving parents .
i hope more of them will find it now .
i want to build a bridge to the 21st century with a clean and safe environment .
we are making our food safer from pesticides .
we 're protecting our drinking water and our air from poisons .
we saved yellowstone from mining .
we established the largest national park south of alaska in the mojave desert in california .
we are working to save the precious florida everglades .
and when the leaders of this congress invited the polluters into the back room to roll back 25 years of environmental protections that both parties had always supported , i said no .
but we must do more .
today , 10 million children live within just four miles of a toxic waste dump .
we have cleaned up 197 of those dumps in the last three years , more than in the previous 12 years combined .
in the next four years , we propose to clean up 500 more , two - thirds of all that are left and the most dangerous ones .
our children should grow up next to parks , not poison .
we should make it a crime even to attempt to pollute .
we should freeze the serious polluter 's property until they clean up the problems they create .
we should make it easier for families to find out about toxic chemicals in their neighborhoods so they can do more to protect their own children .
these are the things that we must do to build that bridge to the 21st century .
my fellow americans , i want to build a bridge to the 21st century that makes sure we are still the nation with the world 's strongest defense , that our foreign policy still advances the values of our american community in the community of nations .
our bridge to the future must include bridges to other nations , because we remain the world 's indispensable nation to advance prosperity , peace , and freedom and to keep our own children safe from the dangers of terror and weapons of mass destruction .
we have helped to bring democracy to haiti and peace to bosnia .
now the peace signed on the white house lawn between the israelis and the palestinians must embrace more of israel 's neighbors .
the deep desire for peace that hillary and i felt when we walked the streets of belfast and derry must become real for all the people of northern ireland .
and cuba must finally join the community of democracies .
nothing in our lifetime has been more heartening than when people of the former soviet union and central europe broke the grip of communism .
we have aided their progress , and i am proud of it .
and i will continue our strong partnership with a democratic russia .
and we will bring some of central europe 's new democracies into nato so that they will never question their own freedom in the future .
our american exports are at record levels .
in the next four years , we have to break down even more barriers to them , reaching out to latin america , to africa , to other countries in asia , making sure that our workers and our products , the world 's finest , have the benefit of free and fair trade .
in the last four years , we have frozen north korea 's nuclear weapons program .
and i am proud to say that tonight there is not a single russian nuclear missile pointed at an american child .
now we must enforce and ratify without delay measures that further reduce nuclear arsenals , banish poison gas , and ban nuclear tests once and for all .
we have made investments , new investments , in our most important defense asset , our magnificent men and women in uniform .
by the year 2000 we also will have increased funding to modernize our weapons systems by 40 percent .
these commitments will make sure that our military remains the best trained , best equipped fighting force in the entire world .
we are developing a sensible national missile defense , but we must not , not now , not by the year 2000 , squander $ 60 billion on an unproved , ineffective star wars program that could be obsolete tomorrow .
we are fighting terrorism on all fronts with a three - pronged strategy .
first , we are working to rally a world coalition with zero tolerance for terrorism .
just this month , i signed a law imposing harsh sanctions on foreign companies that invest in key sectors of the iranian and libyan economies .
as long as iran trains , supports , and protects terrorists , as long as libya refuses to give up the people who blew up pan am 103 , they will pay a price from the united states .
second , we must give law enforcement the tools they need to take the fight to terrorists .
we need new laws to crack down on money laundering and to prosecute and punish those who commit violent acts against american citizens abroad , to add chemical markers or taggants to gunpowder used in bombs so we can crack the bombmakers , to extend the same power police now have against organized crime to save lives by tapping all the phones that terrorists use .
terrorists are as big a threat to our future , perhaps bigger , than organized crime .
why should we have two different standards for a common threat to the safety of america and our children ?
we need , in short , the laws that congress refused to pass .
and i ask them again , please , as an american , not a partisan matter , pass these laws now .
third , we will improve airport and air travel security .
i have asked the vice president to establish a commission and report back to me on ways to do this .
but now we will install the most sophisticated bomb - detection equipment in all our major airports .
we will search every airplane flying to or from america from another nation , every flight , every cargo hold , every cabin , every time .
my fellow democrats and my fellow americans , i know that in most election seasons foreign policy is not a matter of great interest in the debates in the barbershops and the cafes of america , on the plant floors and at the bowling alleys .
but there are times , there are times when only america can make the difference between war and peace , between freedom and repression , between life and death .
we can not save all the world 's children , but we can save many of them .
we can not become the world 's policeman , but where our values and our interests are at stake and where we can make a difference , we must act and we must lead .
that is our job , and we are better , stronger , and safer because we are doing it .
my fellow americans , let me say one last time , we can only build our bridge to the 21st century if we build it together and if we 're willing to walk arm in arm across that bridge together .
i have spent so much of your time that you gave me these last four years to be your president worrying about the problems of bosnia , the middle east , northern ireland , rwanda , burundi .
what do these places have in common ?
people are killing each other and butchering children because they are different from one another .
they share the same piece of land , but they are different from one another .
they hate their race , their tribe , their ethnic group , their religion .
we have seen the terrible , terrible price that people pay when they insist on fighting and killing their neighbors over their differences .
in our own country , we have seen america pay a terrible price for any form of discrimination .
and we have seen us grow stronger as we have steadily let more and more of our hatreds and our fears go , as we have given more and more of our people the chance to live their dreams .
that is why the flame of our statue of liberty , like the olympic flame carried all across america by thousands of citizen heroes , will always , always burn brighter than the fires that burn our churches , our synagogues , our mosques -- always .
look around this hall tonight , and to our fellow americans watching on television , you look around this hall tonight -- there is every conceivable difference here among the people who are gathered .
if we want to build that bridge to the 21st century we have to be willing to say loud and clear : if you believe in the values of the constitution , the bill of rights , the declaration of independence , if you 're willing to work hard and play by the rules , you are part of our family and we 're proud to be with you .
you cheer now , because you know this is true .
you know this is true .
when you walk out of this hall , think about it .
live by it .
we still have too many americans who give in to their fears of those who are different from them .
not so long ago , swastikas were painted on the doors of some african - american members of our special forces at fort bragg .
folks , for those of you who do n't know what they do , the special forces are just what the name says : they are special forces .
if i walk off this stage tonight and call them on the telephone and tell them to go halfway around the world and risk their lives for you and be there by tomorrow at noon , they will do it .
they do not deserve to have swastikas on their doors .
so look around here , look around here : old or young , healthy as a horse or a person with a disability that has n't kept you down , man or woman , native american , native born , immigrant , straight or gay , whatever , the test ought to be i believe in the constitution , the bill of rights , and the declaration of independence .
i believe in religious liberty .
i believe in freedom of speech .
i believe in working hard and playing by the rules .
i 'm showing up for work tomorrow .
i 'm building that bridge to the 21st century .
that ought to be the test .
my fellow americans , 68 nights from tonight the american people will face once again a critical moment of decision .
we 're going to choose the last president of the 20th century and the first president of the 21st century .
but the real choice is not that .
the real choice is whether we will build a bridge to the future or a bridge to the past , about whether we believe our best days are still out there or our best days are behind us , about whether we want a country of people all working together or one where you 're on your own .
let us commit ourselves this night to rise up and build the bridge we know we ought to build all the way to the 21st century .
let us have faith , american faith that we are not leaving our greatness behind .
we 're going to carry it right on with us into that new century , a century of new challenge and unlimited promise .
let us , in short , do the work that is before us , so that when our time here is over , we will all watch the sun go down , as we all must , and say truly , we have prepared our children for the dawn .
my fellow americans , after these four good , hard years , i still believe in a place called hope , a place called america .
thank you , god bless you , and good night .

mr. speaker , mr. vice president , members of the 105th congress , distinguished guests , and my fellow americans .
i think i should start by saying , thanks for inviting me back .
i come before you tonight with a challenge as great as any in our peacetime history and a plan of action to meet that challenge , to prepare our people for the bold new world of the 21st century .
we have much to be thankful for .
with four years of growth , we have won back the basic strength of our economy .
with crime and welfare rolls declining , we are winning back our optimism , the enduring faith that we can master any difficulty .
with the cold war receding and global commerce at record levels , we are helping to win an unrivaled peace and prosperity all across the world .
my fellow americans , the state of our union is strong .
but now we must rise to the decisive moment , to make a nation and a world better than any we have ever known .
the new promise of the global economy , the information age , unimagined new work , life - enhancing technology , all these are ours to seize .
that is our honor and our challenge .
we must be shapers of events , not observers .
for if we do not act , the moment will pass , and we will lose the best possibilities of our future .
we face no imminent threat , but we do have an enemy .
the enemy of our time is inaction .
so tonight i issue a call to action : action by this congress , action by our states , by our people , to prepare america for the 21st century ; action to keep our economy and our democracy strong and working for all our people ; action to strengthen education and harness the forces of technology and science ; action to build stronger families and stronger communities and a safer environment ; action to keep america the world 's strongest force for peace , freedom , and prosperity ; and above all , action to build a more perfect union here at home .
the spirit we bring to our work will make all the difference .
we must be committed to the pursuit of opportunity for all americans , responsibility from all americans , in a community of all americans .
and we must be committed to a new kind of government , not to solve all our problems for us but to give our people , all our people , the tools they need to make the most of their own lives .
and we must work together .
the people of this nation elected us all .
they want us to be partners , not partisans .
they put us all right here in the same boat , they gave us all oars , and they told us to row .
now , here is the direction i believe we should take .
first , we must move quickly to complete the unfinished business of our country , to balance the budget , renew our democracy , and finish the job of welfare reform .
over the last four years , we have brought new economic growth by investing in our people , expanding our exports , cutting our deficits , creating over 11 million new jobs , a four - year record .
now we must keep our economy the strongest in the world .
we here tonight have an historic opportunity .
let this congress be the congress that finally balances the budget .
thank you .
in two days , i will propose a detailed plan to balance the budget by 2002 .
this plan will balance the budget and invest in our people while protecting medicare , medicaid , education , and the environment .
it will balance the budget and build on the vice president 's efforts to make our government work better , even as it costs less .
it will balance the budget and provide middle class tax relief to pay for education and health care , to help to raise a child , to buy and sell a home .
balancing the budget requires only your vote and my signature .
it does not require us to rewrite our constitution .
i believe it is both unnecessary and unwise to adopt a balanced budget amendment that could cripple our country in time of economic crisis and force unwanted results , such as judges halting social security checks or increasing taxes .
let us at least agree , we should not pass any measure -- no measure should be passed that threatens social security .
whatever your view on that , we all must concede : we do n't need a constitutional amendment ; we need action .
whatever our differences , we should balance the budget now .
and then , for the long - term health of our society , we must agree to a bipartisan process to preserve social security and reform medicare for the long run , so that these fundamental programs will be as strong for our children as they are for our parents .
and let me say something that 's not in my script tonight .
i know this is not going to be easy .
but i really believe one of the reasons the american people gave me a second term was to take the tough decisions in the next four years that will carry our country through the next 50 years .
i know it is easier for me than for you to say or do .
but another reason i was elected is to support all of you , without regard to party , to give you what is necessary to join in these decisions .
we owe it to our country and to our future .
our second piece of unfinished business requires us to commit ourselves tonight , before the eyes of america , to finally enacting bipartisan campaign finance reform .
now , senators mccain and feingold , representatives shays and meehan , have reached across party lines here to craft tough and fair reform .
their proposal would curb spending , reduce the role of special interests , create a level playing field between challengers and incumbents , and ban contributions from noncitizens , all corporate sources , and the other large soft money contributions that both parties receive .
you know and i know that this can be delayed .
and you know and i know the delay will mean the death of reform .
so let 's set our own deadline .
let 's work together to write bipartisan campaign finance reform into law and pass mccain - feingold by the day we celebrate the birth of our democracy , july 4 .
there is a third piece of unfinished business .
over the last four years , we moved a record two million people off the welfare rolls .
then last year , congress enacted landmark welfare reform legislation , demanding that all able - bodied recipients assume the responsibility of moving from welfare to work .
now each and every one of us has to fulfill our responsibility , indeed , our moral obligation , to make sure that people who now must work , can work .
now we must act to meet a new goal : two million more people off the welfare rolls by the year 2000 .
here is my plan : tax credits and other incentives for businesses that hire people off welfare ; incentives for job placement firms and states to create more jobs for welfare recipients ; training , transportation , and child care to help people go to work .
now i challenge every state : turn those welfare checks into private sector paychecks .
i challenge every religious congregation , every community nonprofit , every business to hire someone off welfare .
and i 'd like to say especially to every employer in our country who ever criticized the old welfare system , you ca n't blame that old system anymore .
we have torn it down .
now do your part .
give someone on welfare the chance to go to work .
tonight i am pleased to announce that five major corporations , sprint , monsanto , ups , burger king , and united airlines , will be the first to join in a new national effort to marshal america 's businesses , large and small , to create jobs so that people can move from welfare to work .
we passed welfare reform .
all of you know i believe we were right to do it .
but no one can walk out of this chamber with a clear conscience unless you are prepared to finish the job .
and we must join together to do something else , too , something both republican and democratic governors have asked us to do , to restore basic health and disability benefits when misfortune strikes immigrants who came to this country legally , who work hard , pay taxes , and obey the law .
to do otherwise is simply unworthy of a great nation of immigrants .
now , looking ahead , the greatest step of all , the high threshold of the future we must now cross , and my number one priority for the next four years is to ensure that all americans have the best education in the world .
let 's work together to meet these three goals : every 8-year - old must be able to read ; every 12-year - old must be able to log on to the internet ; every 18-year - old must be able to go to college ; and every adult american must be able to keep on learning for a lifetime .
my balanced budget makes an unprecedented commitment to these goals , $ 51 billion next year .
but far more than money is required .
i have a plan , a call to action for american education , based on these 10 principles : 
 first , a national crusade for education standards , not federal government standards but national standards , representing what all our students must know to succeed in the knowledge economy of the 21st century .
every state and school must shape the curriculum to reflect these standards and train teachers to lift students up to them .
to help schools meet the standards and measure their progress , we will lead an effort over the next two years to develop national tests of student achievement in reading and math .
tonight i issue a challenge to the nation : every state should adopt high national standards , and by 1999 , every state should test every 4th grader in reading and every 8th grader in math to make sure these standards are met .
raising standards will not be easy , and some of our children will not be able to meet them at first .
the point is not to put our children down but to lift them up .
good tests will show us who needs help , what changes in teaching to make , and which schools need to improve .
they can help us end social promotions , for no child should move from grade school to junior high or junior high to high school until he or she is ready .
last month , our secretary of education dick riley and i visited northern illinois , where eighth - grade students from 20 school districts , in a project aptly called first in the world , took the third international math and science study .
that 's a test that reflects the world - class standards our children must meet for the new era .
and those students in illinois tied for first in the world in science and came in second in math .
two of them , kristen tanner and chris getsler , are here tonight , along with their teacher sue winski .
they 're up there with the first lady .
and they prove that when we aim high and challenge our students , they will be the best in the world .
let 's give them a hand .
stand up , please .
second , to have the best schools , we must have the best teachers .
most of us in this chamber would not be here tonight without the help of those teachers .
i know that i would n't be here .
for years , many of our educators , led by north carolina 's governor jim hunt and the national board for professional teaching standards , have worked very hard to establish nationally accepted credentials for excellence in teaching .
just 500 of these teachers have been certified since 1995 .
my budget will enable 100,000 more to seek national certification as master teachers .
we should reward and recognize our best teachers .
and as we reward them , we should quickly and fairly remove those few who do n't measure up , and we should challenge more of our finest young people to consider teaching as a career .
third , we must do more to help all our children read .
forty percent -- 40 percent -- of our 8-year - olds can not read on their own .
that 's why we have just launched the america reads initiative , to build a citizen army of one million volunteer tutors to make sure every child can read independently by the end of the third grade .
we will use thousands of americorps volunteers to mobilize this citizen army .
we want at least 100,000 college students to help .
and tonight i am pleased that 60 college presidents have answered my call , pledging that thousands of their work - study students will serve for one year as reading tutors .
this is also a challenge to every teacher and every principal .
you must use these tutors to help students read .
and it is especially a challenge to our parents .
you must read with your children every night .
this leads to the fourth principle : learning begins in the first days of life .
scientists are now discovering how young children develop emotionally and intellectually from their very first days and how important it is for parents to begin immediately talking , singing , even reading to their infants .
the first lady has spent years writing about this issue , studying it .
and she and i are going to convene a white house conference on early learning and the brain this spring , to explore how parents and educators can best use these startling new findings .
we already know we should start teaching children before they start school .
that 's why this balanced budget expands head start to one million children by 2002 .
and that is why the vice president and mrs. gore will host their annual family conference this june on what we can do to make sure that parents are an active part of their children 's learning all the way through school .
they 've done a great deal to highlight the importance of family in our life , and now they 're turning their attention to getting more parents involved in their children 's learning all the way through school .
and i thank you , mr. vice president , and i thank you especially , tipper , for what you do .
fifth , every state should give parents the power to choose the right public school for their children .
their right to choose will foster competition and innovation that can make public schools better .
we should also make it possible for more parents and teachers to start charter schools , schools that set and meet the highest standards and exist only as long as they do .
our plan will help america to create 3,000 of these charter schools by the next century , nearly seven times as there are in the country today , so that parents will have even more choices in sending their children to the best schools .
sixth , character education must be taught in our schools .
we must teach our children to be good citizens .
and we must continue to promote order and discipline , supporting communities that introduce school uniforms , impose curfews , enforce truancy laws , remove disruptive students from the classroom , and have zero tolerance for guns and drugs in school .
seventh , we can not expect our children to raise themselves up in schools that are literally falling down .
with the student population at an all - time high and record numbers of school buildings falling into disrepair , this has now become a serious national concern .
therefore , my budget includes a new initiative , $ 5 billion to help communities finance $ 20 billion in school construction over the next four years .
eighth , we must make the 13th and 14th years of education , at least two years of college , just as universal in america by the 21st century as a high school education is today , and we must open the doors of college to all americans .
to do that , i propose america 's hope scholarship , based on georgia 's pioneering program : two years of a $ 1,500 tax credit for college tuition , enough to pay for the typical community college .
i also propose a tax deduction of up to $ 10,000 a year for all tuition after high school , an expanded ira you can withdraw from tax free for education , and the largest increase in pell grant scholarships in 20 years .
now , this plan will give most families the ability to pay no taxes on money they save for college tuition .
i ask you to pass it and give every american who works hard the chance to go to college .
ninth , in the 21st century , we must expand the frontiers of learning across a lifetime .
all our people , of whatever age , must have the chance to learn new skills .
most americans live near a community college .
the roads that take them there can be paths to a better future .
my " gi bill " for america 's workers will transform the confusing tangle of federal training programs into a simple skill grant to go directly into eligible workers ' hands .
for too long , this bill has been sitting on that desk there without action .
i ask you to pass it now .
let 's give more of our workers the ability to learn and to earn for a lifetime .
tenth , we must bring the power of the information age into all our schools .
last year , i challenged america to connect every classroom and library to the internet by the year 2000 , so that , for the first time in our history , children in the most isolated rural towns , the most comfortable suburbs , the poorest inner - city schools , will have the same access to the same universe of knowledge .
that is my plan , a call to action for american education .
some may say that it is unusual for a president to pay this kind of attention to education .
some may say it is simply because the president and his wonderful wife have been obsessed with this subject for more years than they can recall .
that is not what is driving these proposals .
we must understand the significance of this endeavor : one of the greatest sources of our strength throughout the cold war was a bipartisan foreign policy ; because our future was at stake , politics stopped at the water 's edge .
now i ask you and i ask all our nation 's governors ; i ask parents , teachers , and citizens all across america for a new nonpartisan commitment to education because education is a critical national security issue for our future , and politics must stop at the schoolhouse door .
to prepare america for the 21st century , we must harness the powerful forces of science and technology to benefit all americans .
this is the first state of the union carried live in video over the internet .
but we 've only begun to spread the benefits of a technology revolution that should become the modern birthright of every citizen .
our effort to connect every classroom is just the beginning .
now we should connect every hospital to the internet , so that doctors can instantly share data about their patients with the best specialists in the field .
and i challenge the private sector tonight to start by connecting every children 's hospital as soon as possible , so that a child in bed can stay in touch with school , family , and friends .
a sick child need no longer be a child alone .
we must build the second generation of the internet so that our leading universities and national laboratories can communicate in speeds 1,000 times faster than today , to develop new medical treatments , new sources of energy , new ways of working together .
but we can not stop there .
as the internet becomes our new town square , a computer in every home , a teacher of all subjects , a connection to all cultures , this will no longer be a dream but a necessity .
and over the next decade , that must be our goal .
we must continue to explore the heavens , pressing on with the mars probes and the international space station , both of which will have practical applications for our everyday living .
we must speed the remarkable advances in medical science .
the human genome project is now decoding the genetic mysteries of life .
american scientists have discovered genes linked to breast cancer and ovarian cancer and medication that stops a stroke in progress and begins to reverse its effects and treatments that dramatically lengthen the lives of people with hiv and aids .
since i took office , funding for aids research at the national institutes of health has increased dramatically to $ 1.5 billion .
with new resources , nih will now become the most powerful discovery engine for an aids vaccine , working with other scientists to finally end the threat of aids .
remember that every year -- every year we move up the discovery of an aids vaccine will save millions of lives around the world .
we must reinforce our commitment to medical science .
to prepare america for the 21st century , we must build stronger families .
over the past four years , the family and medical leave law has helped millions of americans to take time off to be with their families .
with new pressures on people in the way they work and live , i believe we must expand family leave so that workers can take time off for teacher conferences and a child 's medical checkup .
we should pass flex - time , so workers can choose to be paid for overtime in income or trade it in for time off to be with their families .
we must continue , step by step , to give more families access to affordable , quality health care .
forty million americans still lack health insurance .
ten million children still lack health insurance ; 80 percent of them have working parents who pay taxes .
that is wrong .
my balanced budget will extend health coverage to up to five million of those children .
since nearly half of all children who lose their insurance do so because their parents lose or change a job , my budget will also ensure that people who temporarily lose their jobs can still afford to keep their health insurance .
no child should be without a doctor just because a parent is without a job .
my medicare plan modernizes medicare , increases the life of the trust fund to 10 years , provides support for respite care for the many families with loved ones afflicted with alzheimer 's , and for the first time , it would fully pay for annual mammograms .
just as we ended drive - through deliveries of babies last year , we must now end the dangerous and demeaning practice of forcing women home from the hospital only hours after a mastectomy .
i ask your support for bipartisan legislation to guarantee that a woman can stay in the hospital for 48 hours after a mastectomy .
with us tonight is dr. kristen zarfos , a connecticut surgeon whose outrage at this practice spurred a national movement and inspired this legislation .
i 'd like her to stand so we can thank her for her efforts .
dr. zarfos , thank you .
in the last four years , we have increased child support collections by 50 percent .
now we should go further and do better by making it a felony for any parent to cross a state line in an attempt to flee from this , his or her most sacred obligation .
finally , we must also protect our children by standing firm in our determination to ban the advertising and marketing of cigarettes that endanger their lives .
to prepare america for the 21st century , we must build stronger communities .
we should start with safe streets .
serious crime has dropped five years in a row .
the key has been community policing .
we must finish the job of putting 100,000 community police on the streets of the united states .
we should pass the victims ' rights amendment to the constitution .
and i ask you to mount a full - scale assault on juvenile crime , with legislation that declares war on gangs , with new prosecutors and tougher penalties ; extends the brady bill so violent teen criminals will not be able to buy handguns ; requires child safety locks on handguns to prevent unauthorized use ; and helps to keep our schools open after hours , on weekends , and in the summer , so our young people will have someplace to go and something to say yes to .
this balanced budget includes the largest antidrug effort ever , to stop drugs at their source , punish those who push them , and teach our young people that drugs are wrong , drugs are illegal , and drugs will kill them .
i hope you will support it .
our growing economy has helped to revive poor urban and rural neighborhoods .
but we must do more to empower them to create the conditions in which all families can flourish and to create jobs through investment by business and loans by banks .
we should double the number of empowerment zones .
they 've already brought so much hope to communities like detroit , where the unemployment rate has been cut in half in four years .
we should restore contaminated urban land and buildings to productive use .
we should expand the network of community development banks .
and together we must pledge tonight that we will use this empowerment approach , including private - sector tax incentives , to renew our capital city , so that washington is a great place to work and live and once again the proud face america shows the world .
we must protect our environment in every community .
in the last four years , we cleaned up 250 toxic waste sites , as many as in the previous 12 .
now we should clean up 500 more , so that our children grow up next to parks , not poison .
i urge you to pass my proposal to make big polluters live by a simple rule : if you pollute our environment , you should pay to clean it up .
in the last four years , we strengthened our nation 's safe food and clean drinking water laws ; we protected some of america 's rarest , most beautiful land in utah 's red rocks region , created three new national parks in the california desert , and began to restore the florida everglades .
now we must be as vigilant with our rivers as we are with our lands .
tonight , i announce that this year i will designate 10 american heritage rivers , to help communities alongside them revitalize their waterfronts and clean up pollution in the rivers , proving once again that we can grow the economy as we protect the environment .
we must also protect our global environment , working to ban the worst toxic chemicals and to reduce the greenhouse gases that challenge our health even as they change our climate .
now , we all know that in all of our communities , some of our children simply do n't have what they need to grow and learn in their own homes or schools or neighborhoods .
and that means the rest of us must do more , for they are our children , too .
that 's why president bush , general colin powell , former housing secretary henry cisneros will join the vice president and me to lead the president 's summit of service in philadelphia in april .
our national service program , americorps , has already helped 70,000 young people to work their way through college as they serve america .
now we intend to mobilize millions of americans to serve in thousands of ways .
citizen service is an american responsibility which all americans should embrace , and i ask your support for that endeavor .
i 'd like to make just one last point about our national community .
our economy is measured in numbers and statistics , and it 's very important .
but the enduring worth of our nation lies in our shared values and our soaring spirit .
so instead of cutting back on our modest efforts to support the arts and humanities , i believe we should stand by them and challenge our artists , musicians , and writers , challenge our museums , libraries , and theaters .
we should challenge all americans in the arts and humanities to join with our fellow citizens to make the year 2000 a national celebration of the american spirit in every community , a celebration of our common culture in the century that has passed and in the new one to come in the new millennium , so that we can remain in the world 's beacon not only of liberty but of creativity , long after the fireworks have faded .
to prepare america for the 21st century , we must master the forces of change in the world and keep american leadership strong and sure for an uncharted time .
fifty years ago , a farsighted america led in creating the institutions that secured victory in the cold war and built a growing world economy .
as a result , today more people than ever embrace our ideals and share our interests .
already we have dismantled many of the blocs and barriers that divided our parents ' world .
for the first time , more people live under democracy than dictatorship , including every nation in our own hemisphere but one , and its day , too , will come .
now , we stand at another moment of change and choice and another time to be farsighted , to bring america 50 more years of security and prosperity .
in this endeavor , our first task is to help to build , for the very first time , an undivided , democratic europe .
when europe is stable , prosperous , and at peace , america is more secure .
to that end , we must expand nato by 1999 , so that countries that were once our adversaries can become our allies .
at the special nato summit this summer , that is what we will begin to do .
we must strengthen nato 's partnership for peace with non - member allies .
and we must build a stable partnership between nato and a democratic russia .
an expanded nato is good for america ; and a europe in which all democracies define their future not in terms of what they can do to each other but in terms of what they can do together for the good of all -- that kind of europe is good for america .
second , america must look to the east no less than to the west .
our security demands it .
americans fought three wars in asia in this century .
our prosperity requires it .
more than two million american jobs depend upon trade with asia .
there , too , we are helping to shape an asia - pacific community of cooperation , not conflict .
let our progress there not mask the peril that remains .
together with south korea , we must advance peace talks with north korea and bridge the cold war 's last divide .
and i call on congress to fund our share of the agreement under which north korea must continue to freeze and then dismantle its nuclear weapons program .
we must pursue a deeper dialogue with china for the sake of our interests and our ideals .
an isolated china is not good for america ; a china playing its proper role in the world is .
i will go to china , and i have invited china 's president to come here , not because we agree on everything but because engaging china is the best way to work on our common challenges like ending nuclear testing and to deal frankly with our fundamental differences like human rights .
the american people must prosper in the global economy .
we 've worked hard to tear down trade barriers abroad so that we can create good jobs at home .
i am proud to say that today america is once again the most competitive nation and the number one exporter in the world .
now we must act to expand our exports , especially to asia and latin america , two of the fastest growing regions on earth , or be left behind as these emerging economies forge new ties with other nations .
that is why we need the authority now to conclude new trade agreements that open markets to our goods and services even as we preserve our values .
we need not shrink from the challenge of the global economy .
after all , we have the best workers and the best products .
in a truly open market , we can out - compete anyone , anywhere on earth .
but this is about more than economics .
by expanding trade , we can advance the cause of freedom and democracy around the world .
there is no better example of this truth than latin america where democracy and open markets are on the march together .
that is why i will visit there in the spring to reinforce our important tie .
we should all be proud that america led the effort to rescue our neighbor mexico from its economic crises .
and we should all be proud that last month mexico repaid the united states , three full years ahead of schedule , with half a billion dollar profit to us .
america must continue to be an unrelenting force for peace from the middle east to haiti , from northern ireland to africa .
taking reasonable risks for peace keeps us from being drawn into far more costly conflicts later .
with american leadership , the killing has stopped in bosnia .
now the habits of peace must take hold .
the new nato force will allow reconstruction and reconciliation to accelerate .
tonight i ask congress to continue its strong support of our troops .
they are doing a remarkable job there for america , and america must do right by them .
fifth , we must move strongly against new threats to our security .
in the past four years , we agreed to ban -- we led the way to a worldwide agreement to ban nuclear testing .
with russia , we dramatically cut nuclear arsenals , and we stopped targeting each others citizens .
we are acting to prevent nuclear materials from falling into the wrong hands and to rid the world of landmines .
we are working with other nations with renewed intensity to fight drug traffickers and to stop terrorists before they act and hold them fully accountable if they do .
now we must rise to a new test of leadership , ratifying the chemical weapons convention .
make no mistake about it , it will make our troops safer from chemical attack ; it will help us to fight terrorism .
we have no more important obligations , especially in the wake of what we now know about the gulf war .
this treaty has been bipartisan from the beginning , supported by republican and democratic administrations and republican and democratic members of congress and already approved by 68 nations .
but if we do not act by april 29 , when this convention goes into force with or without us , we will lose the chance to have americans leading and enforcing this effort .
together we must make the chemical weapons convention law , so that at last we can begin to outlaw poison gas from the earth .
finally , we must have the tools to meet all these challenges .
we must maintain a strong and ready military .
we must increase funding for weapons modernization by the year 2000 , and we must take good care of our men and women in uniform .
they are the world 's finest .
we must also renew our commitment to america 's diplomacy and pay our debts and dues to international financial institutions like the world bank and to a reforming united nations .
every dollar we devote to preventing conflicts , to promoting democracy , to stopping the spread of disease and starvation , brings a sure return in security and savings .
yet international - affairs spending today is just one percent of the federal budget , a small fraction of what america invested in diplomacy to choose leadership over escapism at the start of the cold war .
if america is to continue to lead the world , we here who lead america simply must find the will to pay our way .
a farsighted america moved the world to a better place over these last 50 years .
and so it can be for another 50 years .
but a shortsighted america will soon find its words falling on deaf ears all around the world .
almost exactly 50 years ago , in the first winter of the cold war , president truman stood before a republican congress and called upon our country to meet its responsibilities of leadership .
this was his warning ; he said , " if we falter , we may endanger the peace of the world , and we shall surely endanger the welfare of this nation . "
that congress , led by republicans like senator arthur vandenberg , answered president truman 's call .
together , they made the commitments that strengthened our country for 50 years .
now let us do the same .
let us do what it takes to remain the indispensable nation , to keep america strong , secure , and prosperous for another 50 years .
in the end , more than anything else , our world leadership grows out of the power of our example here at home , out of our ability to remain strong as one america .
all over the world , people are being torn asunder by racial , ethnic , and religious conflicts that fuel fanaticism and terror .
we are the world 's most diverse democracy , and the world looks to us to show that it is possible to live and advance together across those kinds of differences .
america has always been a nation of immigrants .
from the start , a steady stream of people in search of freedom and opportunity have left their own lands to make this land their home .
we started as an experiment in democracy fueled by europeans .
we have grown into an experiment in democratic diversity fueled by openness and promise .
my fellow americans , we must never , ever believe that our diversity is a weakness .
it is our greatest strength .
americans speak every language , know every country .
people on every continent can look to us and see the reflection of their own great potential , and they always will , as long as we strive to give all of our citizens , whatever their background , an opportunity to achieve their own greatness .
we 're not there yet .
we still see evidence of abiding bigotry and intolerance in ugly words and awful violence , in burned churches and bombed buildings .
we must fight against this , in our country and in our hearts .
just a few days before my second inauguration , one of our country 's best known pastors , reverend robert schuller , suggested that i read isaiah 58:12 .
here 's what it says : " thou shalt raise up the foundations of many generations , and thou shalt be called the repairer of the breach , the restorer of paths to dwell in . "
i placed my hand on that verse when i took the oath of office , on behalf of all americans , for no matter what our differences in our faiths , our backgrounds , our politics , we must all be repairers of the breach .
i want to say a word about two other americans who show us how .
congressman frank tejeda was buried yesterday , a proud american whose family came from mexico .
he was only 51 years old .
he was awarded the silver star , the bronze star , and the purple heart fighting for his country in vietnam .
and he went on to serve texas and america fighting for our future here in this chamber .
we are grateful for his service and honored that his mother , lillie tejeda , and his sister , mary alice , have come from texas to be with us here tonight .
and we welcome you .
gary locke , the newly elected governor of washington state , is the first chinese - american governor in the history of our country .
he 's the proud son of two of the millions of asian - american immigrants who have strengthened america with their hard work , family values , and good citizenship .
he represents the future we can all achieve .
thank you , governor , for being here .
please stand up .
reverend schuller , congressman tejeda , governor locke , along with kristen tanner and chris getsler , sue winski and dr. kristen zarfos , they 're all americans from different roots whose lives reflect the best of what we can become when we are one america .
we may not share a common past , but we surely do share a common future .
building one america is our most important mission , the foundation for many generations of every other strength we must build for this new century .
money can not buy it .
power can not compel it .
technology can not create it .
it can only come from the human spirit .
america is far more than a place .
it is an idea , the most powerful idea in the history of nations .
and all of us in this chamber , we are now the bearers of that idea , leading a great people into a new world .
a child born tonight will have almost no memory of the 20th century .
everything that child will know about america will be because of what we do now to build a new century .
we do n't have a moment to waste .
tomorrow there will be just over 1,000 days until the year 2000 ; 1,000 days to prepare our people ; 1,000 days to work together ; 1,000 days to build a bridge to a land of new promise .
my fellow americans , we have work to do .
let us seize those days and the century .
thank you , god bless you , and god bless america .

thank you .
thank you very much .
i feel good today , do you ?
thank you .
reverend washington ; presiding elder reverend andrews ; governor chiles ; congressman and mrs. gibbons ; our fine congressional candidate , jim davis , welcome , sir .
we 're proud of you .
to my other friends who have joined us in this church today , and to all of you , thank you for making us feel so welcome here in the house of the lord .
i was sort of tired when i came in , and i got into the music , and then we started singing about the little shack by the railroad track --   -- and i said a lot of us in this house of god have lived in a little shack by the railroad track .
and we did have a good time .
my grandfather used to joke with me that if we did n't have any better sense than to know we were poor , we could have a good time .
and we 're having a good time today .
i 'm honored to be in this historic pulpit which has been graced by martin luther king , thurgood marshall , adam clayton powell , jackie robinson .
i am humbled to be here .
and i would like to say , first and foremost , i thank you , all of you , for giving me the chance to serve as the president of the greatest country in human history for the last 4 years .
thank you .
thank you .
in just 2 days all of us together will go to the polls to select the last president of this unbelievable 20th century , the century of the civil rights movement , the century of two great world wars and the great depression , the century of the cold war , a century of more bloodshed than any in history , but a century of remarkable progress as more and more people move toward the realization that all of us are created equal in the eyes of god , are entitled to live as equals in the eyes of god -- the masters of our fate , save only in subjugation to our god .
and with a vast new century stretching before us we know that the world is 
 changing in ways we can not fully understand .
just think about all the changes you have seen here in your community in the last 4 or 5 years .
think about the changes technology is bringing in the way we work and live and relate to one another and the rest of the world .
think about how much more involved in the rest of the world we are today than ever before .
we have a decision to make that goes way beyond the vote on tuesday .
and frankly , it goes way beyond democrats and republicans , way beyond even the choice for president .
it goes far out into the future and deep into the human heart .
we have to decide as a people how we 're going to keep walking into that 21st century and whether we will say to each other , " you 're on your own , " or we 're going to build a bridge together so that everyone has the tools to make the most of his or her own life .
and we have to decide whether we 're going to build that bridge on the shifting sands of division or on the strong rock of common ground .
i believe i know what your decision would be .
i was so glad to hear that wonderful passage from john about the pool of bethesda .
when i went to the holy land for the first time about 15 years ago , i was looking for the pool of bethesda because it 's a great remembrance that when the angel whirled the waters and made it possible for people to go there and find healing power , jesus thought the healing power ought to be given even to the one who could not even get to the pool .
no one was left out .
even the one who could not even get to the pool was given the healing power of the spirit .
that is a lesson for us .
when people tell me , well , some people just are n't going to make it , i say that 's true , but it ought to be their fault , not ours .
it ought to be their fault , not ours .
we ca n't give anybody a guarantee in life .
even the man crawling to the pool had to believe .
his body would n't move , but his mind would .
so i do n't seek to give anybody a guarantee , but i think everybody ought to have a chance .
you know , after the events of the last week , when we are divided we defeat ourselves .
how heartbreaking it is on this lord 's day that there is still no peace in the holy land .
a year ago tomorrow , the prime minister of israel was murdered by one of his own people because he sought to bring peace to the holy land .
the place where the three great religions of the world that believe we are all created by one god , all of us and all of our differences are created by one god , claim as holy , they 're still fighting over religion .
in bosnia , a place where the ethnic groups are divided into three by accident of political and military history , not because they are biologically distinguishable , they 're still fighting over their differences .
science has not gotten in the way of believing that they are inherently different .
that 's what they believe .
in africa today , the hutus and the tutsis share poor lands -- with poor children who desperately need the product of earnest , sustained , loving , cooperative labor -- somehow find it more profitable to slaughter each other and make the land poorer .
well , that 's why when our federal government employees are singled out for hatred , when a horrible tragedy like oklahoma city occurs , when a black or a white church is burned or a synagogue or a mosque is defaced in america , we must stand against that , because we know that we are all in this together , that we are going to rise or fall together , that we have a duty to help each other in our work , in our family , in our lives as citizens , a duty to live in a way that enables us to find common ground and a responsibility to give everyone else the opportunity to go over that bridge with us into tomorrow .
now , president lincoln once paraphrased jesus ' sermon in st. matthew when he said , " the house divided against itself can not stand . "
i did n't have time to go back and read it today , but i believe that the whole verse says " a city and a house divided against itself can not stand " -- not tampa , not st. petersburg , not washington , dc , not the united states of america .
four years ago , when i asked for this job , i was worried because our people were divided and dispirited and as a result we were not doing together what we should have been doing to lift our economy or deal with the whole array of problems plaguing our society , involving so many of our children , of their futures .
now , i know i am preaching to a choir today --   -- but in the next 2 days we need the choir to preach .
we will never be what we ought to be if we allow our country to be led by those who believe we are better off on our own and who seek to pursue that path by driving wedges between us and exploiting our fears and convincing us that our brothers and sisters of different races , different faiths , different walks of life are our inherent enemies .
that is the prescription for disaster in the holy land , in bosnia , in africa , and in the united states .
and we have only become greater at each stage along the way because every time we had to face the music we chose common ground over the shifting sands of division .
and that is what we must do again in this season of our decision .
we have seen the results of the politics of division and gridlock , but now we have seen the results of the politics of opportunity and responsibility and the common ground we seek to build in our american community .
we have more jobs , a lower deficit , higher growth , the highest rate of homeownership in 15 years , the highest rates of homeownership and small business ownership among african - americans , other minorities , and women in the history of america .
it turns out giving everybody a chance , not a guarantee but a chance , is good for the rest of us .
while all these big numbers were occurring , we 've seen the biggest decline in inequality among working people in 27 years , the biggest drop in child poverty in 20 years , the lowest rates of poverty ever recorded for senior citizens and african - americans since the statistics have been kept .
it is the right thing to do for all the rest of us to see that everybody has a chance , just as the man struggling for the pool at bethesda was given his chance .
we are seeing the benefits of greater responsibility : the welfare rolls are down ; the crime rate is at a 10-year low .
we see in so many other areas -- 4 years of declining teenage pregnancy , the first drop in out - of - wedlock pregnancy in 20 years , community efforts building up all over the country , more and more people going in our schools to tell our children that drugs are wrong and illegal and can kill you , more and more citizen efforts working with the police to try to help keep the streets safer , more and more communities doing things to try to help our young people stay out of trouble like curfew policies or even school uniform policies and other things .
these experiments going on in america , people working together to try to find ways to be responsible citizens .
and every place it is done we are better off .
we 're seeing a deeper sense of community -- trying to preserve our natural environment for our children and our grandchildren .
i thank governor chiles for the work he has done on the everglades .
every person in florida , in the farthest northern corner of florida has a stake in that .
every person in the farthest northwest corner of america has a stake in saving our common heritage .
we see it in so many other ways .
we have been moved by the enormous upswelling of american conviction in the aftermath of oklahoma city , the reaction to the church burnings being so negative .
our common sense , whenever it prevails to bring us together as a community , makes us stronger .
and i really believe we 're on the verge of the most exciting period in human history .
but we ca n't forget what brought us here , because it will take us home .
so the trick for us is to find out with god 's wisdom how to seize all these fabulous opportunities that are out there in a way that enables us to move closer to our values .
it is really true that none of us live by bread alone .
i do n't know any serious person who 's lived long enough who believes that with all the bread in the world you can be really happy .
on the other hand , it 's important not to be too self - righteous .
i always say one of my rules of politics is whenever you hear a person standing on a corner screaming , " this is not a money problem , " sure as the world he 's talking about somebody else 's problem , not his .
so we need to be a little humble about this .
but we have work to do .
if you think about what our children can do , if we could put every child in america , from the poorest inner cities to the most remote rural areas , in a classroom with a computer that was hooked up to the entire information superhighway , then for the first time ever every child in america would have access to the same learning in the same way at the same time .
that would revolutionize what our children could do , all of our children .
if we could put a million citizens with 100,000 more police and walk the blocks together , we could have not 4 years but 8 years of declining crime and all of our children could feel safe on their streets and in their schools and in their neighborhoods .
we can reclaim our streets .
four years ago millions of people did not believe we could ever do anything about rising crime .
now we have no excuse .
we know we can bring it down for 4 years , but we know we have to have about 4 more years before it will be tolerable to live in still a lot of our places .
but we can make our streets safe again , we know that .
but we 'll have to do that together .
and we can do that in the future .
we know that we 're breaking down the frontiers of ignorance in so many ways that will help us to cure cancer , that will help us to find ways to grow our economy while we improve our environment , that will help us to find ways to create jobs for people who have never been able to get them before .
but we have work to do .
i signed a law that says that everybody on welfare who 's able - bodied will keep getting health care and food and child care if they go to work , but if they 're able - bodied , they 've got to trade the welfare check for a paycheck in 2 years .
that 's the law .
but now we have figured out something we have n't really been able to figure out for a long time , which is how to give jobs to people .
you ca n't tell people they have to go to work unless there 's work for them to find .
so we 've got work to do .
we know we 've got work to do in building our american family .
we know there 's still too many kids who do n't think drugs will kill them .
we know that 3,000 children start smoking every day and a thousand will die sooner as a result , even though it 's illegal .
we know that even though we have removed a lot of assault weapons from our streets and made it harder for criminals to get guns , there 's still too many completely innocent children being killed .
we know that even though we have demonstrated in our administration that you can have diversity and excellence -- in my appointments to the cabinet , to the federal bench , and throughout the country -- there are still too many people who are literally afraid to deal as equals with people who are different from them .
we know that .
we know that there are still too many white people who would n't feel as comfortable as i do sitting in this church today .
and that 's wrong .
they read the same bible you do .
they claim the same saviour you do .
they ought to feel at home here .
we 've got work to do .
and you ought to feel at home in their churches .
so i say to you , we have work to do .
our best days are still ahead .
but we must always marry our progress to the realization of our values .
we have to take advantage of progress to move closer to living as we say we believe .
we have work to do .
and as we get closer and closer and closer to the election , the work passes from my hands to yours again .
it 's a very humbling thing for me , you know .
if you ever doubt whether the people are the boss in the end in a democracy , run for office .
run for office .
even the the president is a hired hand --   -- trying to get a contract renewed .
it 's a humbling thing .
there is a power in freedom that you can not underestimate .
we take it for granted .
you know , now , in the last few years , for the first time in all of human history , more people are living in democracies on the face of the earth than dictatorships .
it 's the first time in all of human history , just in the last few years .
think how far your ancestors walked , think how many bled and died to give you the right to vote .
and think what a blessing it is that you are anchored in what you believe and that you are not subject to the wild winds that often blow through the airwaves at election time .
i ask you to let me share this story as i close .
in 1992 , when i was seeking this office , i was in a church much like this in cleveland one night .
it was a warm night , and the church was without air conditioner -- at least the air conditioner was unequal to the hot air all the public officials were spewing out .
and we were packed in that church .
and it was one of those meetings , you know , where everybody there talked but three people , and they went home mad .
everybody talked .
we all got to talk .
and the temperature rose , and people started wanting to get out .
and the great pastor in that church stood up , who is a friend of mine , reverend otis moss , one of america 's great preachers ; some of you may know him .
and he started talking to the people about the simple act of voting .
and he said , " you know , my father could not vote ; the law did not allow him to vote .
and finally , one day the law was changed , and he could vote .
and he walked 7 miles to the polling place .
but the people did not want my father to vote , and they said , ' mr. moss , you 're at the wrong place . '
so they sent him to another place , and he walked a couple of more miles .
and they said , ' mr. moss , you 're still at the wrong place . '
and they sent him to another place , and he had to walk a couple of more miles .
and when they got there , they said , ' mr. moss , the polls have closed . ' "
and he said , " when my daughter was old enough to vote , i took her to the polling place , and we went together to two voting machines side - by - side .
and i know you 're not supposed to linger in the ballot booth .
but i could n't vote .
i put my ear right next to that booth until i heard my daughter vote .
we do n't miss votes at our house , " he said .
this is a day that the lord hath made ; let us rejoice and be glad in it .
and let us remember that here on earth , god 's work must truly be our own .
we have work to do .
but if we do it and if we remember , like jesus , that even the man who could not reach the pool at bethesda , we will all go forward on that bridge to the 21st century together .
thank you , and god bless you .

my fellow citizens , today we celebrate the mystery of american renewal .
this ceremony is held in the depth of winter , but by the words we speak and the faces we show the world , we force the spring , a spring reborn in the world 's oldest democracy that brings forth the vision and courage to reinvent america .
when our founders boldly declared america 's independence to the world and our purposes to the almighty , they knew that america , to endure , would have to change ; not change for change 's sake but change to preserve america 's ideals : life , liberty , the pursuit of happiness .
though we marched to the music of our time , our mission is timeless .
each generation of americans must define what it means to be an american .
on behalf of our nation , i salute my predecessor , president bush , for his half - century of service to america .
and i thank the millions of men and women whose steadfastness and sacrifice triumphed over depression , fascism , and communism .
today , a generation raised in the shadows of the cold war assumes new responsibilities in a world warmed by the sunshine of freedom but threatened still by ancient hatreds and new plagues .
raised in unrivaled prosperity , we inherit an economy that is still the world 's strongest but is weakened by business failures , stagnant wages , increasing inequality , and deep divisions among our own people .
when george washington first took the oath i have just sworn to uphold , news traveled slowly across the land by horseback and across the ocean by boat .
now , the sights and sounds of this ceremony are broadcast instantaneously to billions around the world .
communications and commerce are global .
investment is mobile .
technology is almost magical .
and ambition for a better life is now universal .
we earn our livelihood in america today in peaceful competition with people all across the earth .
profound and powerful forces are shaking and remaking our world .
and the urgent question of our time is whether we can make change our friend and not our enemy .
this new world has already enriched the lives of millions of americans who are able to compete and win in it .
but when most people are working harder for less ; when others can not work at all ; when the cost of health care devastates families and threatens to bankrupt our enterprises , great and small ; when the fear of crime robs law - abiding citizens of their freedom ; and when millions of poor children can not even imagine the lives we are calling them to lead , we have not made change our friend .
we know we have to face hard truths and take strong steps , but we have not done so ; instead , we have drifted .
and that drifting has eroded our resources , fractured our economy , and shaken our confidence .
though our challenges are fearsome , so are our strengths .
americans have ever been a restless , questing , hopeful people .
and we must bring to our task today the vision and will of those who came before us .
from our revolution to the civil war , to the great depression , to the civil rights movement , our people have always mustered the determination to construct from these crises the pillars of our history .
thomas jefferson believed that to preserve the very foundations of our nation , we would need dramatic change from time to time .
well , my fellow americans , this is our time .
let us embrace it .
our democracy must be not only the envy of the world but the engine of our own renewal .
there is nothing wrong with america that can not be cured by what is right with america .
and so today we pledge an end to the era of deadlock and drift , and a new season of american renewal has begun .
to renew america , we must be bold .
we must do what no generation has had to do before .
we must invest more in our own people , in their jobs , and in their future , and at the same time cut our massive debt .
and we must do so in a world in which we must compete for every opportunity .
it will not be easy .
it will require sacrifice , but it can be done and done fairly , not choosing sacrifice for its own sake but for our own sake .
we must provide for our nation the way a family provides for its children .
our founders saw themselves in the light of posterity .
we can do no less .
anyone who has ever watched a child 's eyes wander into sleep knows what posterity is .
posterity is the world to come : the world for whom we hold our ideals , from whom we have borrowed our planet , and to whom we bear sacred responsibility .
we must do what america does best : offer more opportunity to all and demand more responsibility from all .
it is time to break the bad habit of expecting something for nothing from our government or from each other .
let us all take more responsibility not only for ourselves and our families but for our communities and our country .
to renew america , we must revitalize our democracy .
this beautiful capital , like every capital since the dawn of civilization , is often a place of intrigue and calculation .
powerful people maneuver for position and worry endlessly about who is in and who is out , who is up and who is down , forgetting those people whose toil and sweat sends us here and pays our way .
americans deserve better .
and in this city today there are people who want to do better .
and so i say to all of you here : let us resolve to reform our politics so that power and privilege no longer shout down the voice of the people .
let us put aside personal advantage so that we can feel the pain and see the promise of america .
let us resolve to make our government a place for what franklin roosevelt called bold , persistent experimentation , a government for our tomorrows , not our yesterdays .
let us give this capital back to the people to whom it belongs .
to renew america , we must meet challenges abroad as well as at home .
there is no longer a clear division between what is foreign and what is domestic .
the world economy , the world environment , the world aids crisis , the world arms race : they affect us all .
today , as an older order passes , the new world is more free but less stable .
communism 's collapse has called forth old animosities and new dangers .
clearly , america must continue to lead the world we did so much to make .
while america rebuilds at home , we will not shrink from the challenges nor fail to seize the opportunities of this new world .
together with our friends and allies , we will work to shape change , lest it engulf us .
when our vital interests are challenged or the will and conscience of the international community is defied , we will act , with peaceful diplomacy whenever possible , with force when necessary .
the brave americans serving our nation today in the persian gulf , in somalia , and wherever else they stand are testament to our resolve .
but our greatest strength is the power of our ideas , which are still new in many lands .
across the world we see them embraced , and we rejoice .
our hopes , our hearts , our hands are with those on every continent who are building democracy and freedom .
their cause is america 's cause .
the american people have summoned the change we celebrate today .
you have raised your voices in an unmistakable chorus .
you have cast your votes in historic numbers .
and you have changed the face of congress , the presidency , and the political process itself .
yes , you , my fellow americans , have forced the spring .
now we must do the work the season demands .
to that work i now turn with all the authority of my office .
i ask the congress to join with me .
but no president , no congress , no government can undertake this mission alone .
my fellow americans , you , too , must play your part in our renewal .
i challenge a new generation of young americans to a season of service : to act on your idealism by helping troubled children , keeping company with those in need , reconnecting our torn communities .
there is so much to be done ; enough , indeed , for millions of others who are still young in spirit to give of themselves in service , too .
in serving , we recognize a simple but powerful truth : we need each other , and we must care for one another .
today we do more than celebrate america .
we rededicate ourselves to the very idea of america , an idea born in revolution and renewed through two centuries of challenge ; an idea tempered by the knowledge that , but for fate , we , the fortunate , and the unfortunate might have been each other ; an idea ennobled by the faith that our nation can summon from its myriad diversity the deepest measure of unity ; an idea infused with the conviction that america 's long , heroic journey must go forever upward .
and so , my fellow americans , as we stand at the edge of the 21st century , let us begin anew with energy and hope , with faith and discipline .
and let us work until our work is done .
the scripture says , " and let us not be weary in well doing : for in due season we shall reap , if we faint not . "
from this joyful mountaintop of celebration we hear a call to service in the valley .
we have heard the trumpets .
we have changed the guard .
and now , each in our own way and with god 's help , we must answer the call .
thank you , and god bless you all .

thank you very much .
to the members of congress who are here , members of the cabinet and the administration , my fellow americans : 
 in recent weeks i have begun a conversation with the american people about our fate and our duty to prepare our nation not only to meet the new century but to live and lead in a world transformed to a degree seldom seen in all of our history .
much of this change is good , but it is not all good , and all of us are affected by it .
therefore , we must reach beyond our fears and our divisions to a new time of great and common purpose .
our challenge is twofold : first , to restore the american dream of opportunity and the american value of responsibility ; and second , to bring our country together amid all our diversity into a stronger community , so that we can find common ground and move forward as one .
more than ever these two endeavors are inseparable .
i am absolutely convinced we can not restore economic opportunity or solve our social problems unless we find a way to bring the american people together .
to bring our people together we must openly and honestly deal with the issues that divide us .
today i want to discuss one of those issues , affirmative action .
it is , in a way , ironic that this issue should be divisive today , because affirmative action began 25 years ago by a republican president with bipartisan support .
it began simply as a means to an end of enduring national purpose , equal opportunity for all americans .
so let us today trace the roots of affirmative action in our never - ending search for equal opportunity .
let us determine what it is and what it is n't .
let us see where it 's worked and where it has n't and ask ourselves what we need to do now .
along the way , let us remember always that finding common ground as we move toward the 21st century depends fundamentally on our shared commitment to equal opportunity for all americans .
it is a moral imperative , a constitutional mandate , and a legal necessity .
there could be no better place for this discussion than the national archives , for within these walls are america 's bedrocks of our common ground , the declaration of independence , the constitution , the bill of rights .
no paper is as lasting as the words these documents contain , so we put them in these special cases to protect the parchment from the elements .
no building is as solid as the principles these documents embody , but we sure tried to build one with these metal doors 11 inches thick to keep them safe , for these documents are america 's only crown jewels .
but the best place of all to hold these words and these principles is the one place in which they can never fade and never grow old , in the stronger chambers of our hearts .
beyond all else , our country is a set of convictions : we hold these truths to be self - evident , that all men are created equal , that they are endowed by their creator with certain inalienable rights , that among these are life , liberty , and the pursuit of happiness .
our whole history can be seen first as an effort to preserve these rights and then as an effort to make them real in the lives of all our citizens .
we know that from the beginning there was a great gap between the plain meaning of our creed and the meaner reality of our daily lives .
back then , only white male property owners could vote .
black slaves were not even counted as whole people , and native americans were regarded as little more than an obstacle to our great national progress .
no wonder thomas jefferson , reflecting on slavery , said he trembled to think god is just .
on the 200th anniversary of our great constitution , justice thurgood marshall , the grandson of a slave , said , " the government our founders devised was defective from the start , requiring several amendments , a civil war , and momentous social transformation to attain the system of constitutional government and its respect for the individual freedoms and human rights we hold as fundamental today . "
emancipation , women 's suffrage , civil rights , voting rights , equal rights , the struggle for the rights of the disabled , all these and other struggles are milestones on america 's often rocky but fundamentally righteous journey to close the gap between the ideals enshrined in these treasures here in the national archives and the reality of our daily lives .
i first came to this very spot where i 'm standing today 32 years ago this month .
i was a 16-year - old delegate to the american legion boys nation .
now , that summer was a high - water mark for our national journey .
that was the summer that president kennedy ordered alabama national guardsmen to enforce a court order to allow two young blacks to enter the university of alabama .
as he told our nation , " every american ought to have the right to be treated as he would wish to be treated , as one would wish his children to be treated . "
later that same summer , on the steps of the lincoln memorial , martin luther king told americans of his dream that one day the sons of former slaves and the sons of former slaveowners would sit down together at the table of brotherhood , that one day his four little children would be judged not by the color of their skin but by the content of their character .
his words captured the hearts and steeled the wills of millions of americans .
some of them sang with him in the hot sun that day .
millions more like me listened and wept in the privacy of their homes .
it 's hard to believe where we were just three decades ago .
when i came up here to boys nation and we had this mock congressional session , i was one of only three or four southerners who would even vote for the civil rights plank .
that 's largely because of my family .
my grandfather had a grade school education and ran a grocery store across the street from the cemetery in hope , arkansas , where my parents and my grandparents are buried .
most of his customers were black , were poor , and were working people .
as a child in that store , i saw that people of different races could treat each other with respect and dignity .
but i also saw that the black neighborhood across the street was the only one in town where the streets were n't paved .
and when i returned to that neighborhood in the late sixties to see a woman who had cared for me as a toddler , the streets still were n't paved .
a lot of you know that i am an ardent movie - goer .
as a child , i never went to a movie where i could sit next to a black american .
they were always sitting upstairs .
in the 1960 's , believe it or not , there were still a few courthouse squares in my state where the restrooms were marked " white " and " colored . "
i graduated from a segregated high school 7 years after president eisenhower integrated little rock central high school .
and when president kennedy barely carried my home state in 1960 , the poll tax system was still alive and well there .
even though my grandparents were in a minority , being poor southern whites who were pro - civil rights , i think most other people knew better than to think the way they did .
and those who were smart enough to act differently discovered a lesson that we ought to remember today : discrimination is not just morally wrong , it hurts everybody .
in 1960 , atlanta , georgia , in reaction to all the things that were going on all across the south , adopted the motto , " the city too busy to hate . "
and however imperfectly over the years , they tried to live by it .
i am convinced that atlanta 's success -- it now is home to more foreign corporations than any other american city , and one year from today it will begin to host the olympics -- that that success all began when people got too busy to hate .
the lesson we learned was a hard one .
when we allow people to pit us against one another or spend energy denying opportunity based on our differences , everyone is held back .
but when we give all americans a chance to develop and use their talents , to be full partners in our common enterprise , then everybody is pushed forward .
my experiences with discrimination are rooted in the south and in the legacy slavery left .
i also lived with a working mother and a working grandmother when women 's work was far rarer and far more circumscribed than it is today .
but we all know there are millions of other stories , those of hispanics , asian - americans , native americans , people with disabilities , others against whom fingers have been pointed .
many of you have your own stories , and that 's why you 're here today , people who were denied the right to develop and to use their full human potential .
and their progress , too , is a part of our journey to make the reality of america consistent with the principles just behind me here .
thirty years ago in this city , you did n't see many people of color or women making their way to work in the morning in business clothes or serving in substantial numbers in powerful positions in congress or at the white house or making executive decisions every day in businesses .
in fact , even the employment want ads were divided , men on one side and women on the other .
it was extraordinary then to see women or people of color as television news anchors or , believe it or not , even in college sports .
there were far fewer women and minorities as job supervisors or firefighters or police officers or doctors or lawyers or college professors or in many other jobs that offer stability and honor and integrity to family life .
a lot has changed , and it did not happen as some sort of random evolutionary drift .
it took hard work and sacrifices and countless acts of courage and conscience by millions of americans .
it took the political courage and statesmanship of democrats and republicans alike , the vigilance and compassion of courts and advocates in and out of government committed to the constitution and to equal protection and to equal opportunity .
it took the leadership of people in business who knew that in the end we would all be better .
it took the leadership of people in labor unions who knew that working people had to be reconciled .
some people , like congressman lewis there , put their lives on the line .
other people lost their lives .
and millions of americans changed their own lives and put hate behind them .
as a result , today all our lives are better .
women have become a major force in business and political life and far more able to contribute to their families ' incomes .
a true and growing black middle class has emerged .
higher education has literally been revolutionized , with women and racial and ethnic minorities attending once overwhelmingly white and sometimes all - male schools .
in communities across our nation , police departments now better reflect the makeup of those whom they protect .
a generation of professionals now serve as role models for young women and minority youth .
hispanics and newer immigrant populations are succeeding in making america stronger .
for an example of where the best of our future lies , just think about our space program and the stunning hookup with the russian space station this month .
let 's remember that that program , the world 's finest , began with heroes like alan shepard and senator john glenn , but today it 's had american heroes like sally ride , ellen ochoa , leroy chiao , guy bluford , and other outstanding , completely qualified women and minorities .
how did this happen ?
fundamentally , because we opened our hearts and minds and changed our ways .
but not without pressure , the pressure of court decisions , legislation , executive action , and the power of examples in the public and private sector .
along the way we learned that laws alone do not change society , that old habits and thinking patterns are deeply ingrained and die hard , that more is required to really open the doors of opportunity .
our search to find ways to move more quickly to equal opportunity led to the development of what we now call affirmative action .
the purpose of affirmative action is to give our nation a way to finally address the systemic exclusion of individuals of talent on the basis of their gender or race from opportunities to develop , perform , achieve , and contribute .
affirmative action is an effort to develop a systematic approach to open the doors of education , employment , and business development opportunities to qualified individuals who happen to be members of groups that have experienced longstanding and persistent discrimination .
it is a policy that grew out of many years of trying to navigate between two unacceptable pasts .
one was to say simply that we declared discrimination illegal and that 's enough .
we saw that that way still relegated blacks with college degrees to jobs as railroad porters and kept women with degrees under a glass ceiling with a lower paycheck .
the other path was simply to try to impose change by leveling draconian penalties on employers who did n't meet certain imposed , ultimately arbitrary , and sometimes unachievable quotas .
that , too , was rejected out of a sense of fairness .
so a middle ground was developed that would change an inequitable status quo gradually but firmly , by building the pool of qualified applicants for college , for contracts , for jobs , and giving more people the chance to learn , work , and earn .
when affirmative action is done right , it is flexible , it is fair , and it works .
i know some people are honestly concerned about the times affirmative action does n't work , when it 's done in the wrong way .
and i know there are times when some employers do n't use it in the right way .
they may cut corners and treat a flexible goal as a quota .
they may give opportunities to people who are unqualified instead of those who deserve it .
they may , in so doing , allow a different kind of discrimination .
when this happens , it is also wrong .
but it is n't affirmative action , and it is not legal .
so when our administration finds cases of that sort , we will enforce the law aggressively .
the justice department files hundreds of cases every year attacking discrimination in employment , including suits on behalf of white males .
most of these suits , however , affect women and minorities for a simple reason , because the vast majority of discrimination in america is still discrimination against them .
but the law does require fairness for everyone , and we are determined to see that that is exactly what the law delivers .
let me be clear about what affirmative action must not mean and what i wo n't allow it to be .
it does not mean and i do n't favor the unjustified preference of the unqualified over the qualified of any race or gender .
it does n't mean and i do n't favor numerical quotas .
it does n't mean and i do n't favor rejection or selection of any employee or student solely on the basis of race or gender without regard to merit .
like many business executives and public servants , i owe it to you to say that my views on this subject are , more than anything else , the product of my personal experience .
i have had experience with affirmative action , nearly 20 years of it now , and i know it works .
when i was attorney general of my home state , i hired a record number of women and african - american lawyers , every one clearly qualified and exceptionally hardworking .
as governor , i appointed more women to my cabinet and state boards than any other governor in the state 's history , and more african - americans than all the governors in the state 's history combined .
and no one ever questioned their qualifications or performance , and our state was better and stronger because of their service .
as president , i am proud to have the most diverse administration in history in my cabinet , my agencies , and my staff .
and i must say , i have been surprised at the criticism i have received from some quarters in my determination to achieve this .
in the last 2 1/2 years , the most outstanding example of affirmative action in the united states , the pentagon , has opened 260,000 positions for women who serve in our armed forces .
i have appointed more women and minorities to the federal bench than any other president , more than the last two combined .
and yet , far more of our judicial appointments have received the highest rating from the american bar association than any other administration since those ratings have been given .
in our administration many government agencies are doing more business with qualified firms run by minorities and women .
the small business administration has reduced its budget by 40 percent , doubled its loan outputs , dramatically increased the number of loans to women and minority small business people , without reducing the number of loans to white businessowners who happen to be male and without changing the loan standards for a single , solitary application .
quality and diversity can go hand - in - hand , and they must .
let me say that affirmative action has also done more than just open the doors of opportunity to individual americans .
most economists who study it agree that affirmative action has also been an important part of closing gaps in economic opportunity in our society , thereby strengthening the entire economy .
a group of distinguished business leaders told me just a couple of days ago that their companies are stronger and their profits are larger because of the diversity and the excellence of their work forces achieved through intelligent and fair affirmative action programs .
and they said , " we have gone far beyond anything the government might require us to do because managing diversity and individual opportunity and being fair to everybody is the key to our future economic success in the global marketplace . "
now , there are those who say , my fellow americans , that even good affirmative action programs are no longer needed , that it should be enough to resort to the courts or the equal employment opportunity commission in cases of actual , provable , individual discrimination because there is no longer any systematic discrimination in our society .
in deciding how to answer that , let us consider the facts .
the unemployment rate for african - americans remains about twice that of whites .
the hispanic rate is still much higher .
women have narrowed the earnings gap , but still make only 72 percent as much as men do for comparable jobs .
the average income for an hispanic woman with a college degree is still less than the average income of a white man with a high school diploma .
according to the recently completed glass ceiling report , sponsored by republican members of congress , in the nation 's largest companies only six - tenths of one percent of senior management positions are held by african - americans , four - tenths of a percent by hispanic - americans , three - tenths of a percent by asian - americans ; women hold between 3 and 5 percent of these positions .
white males make up 43 percent of our work force but hold 95 percent of these jobs .
just last week , the chicago federal reserve bank reported that black home loan applicants are more than twice as likely to be denied credit as whites with the same qualifications and that hispanic applicants are more than 1 1/2 times as likely to be denied loans as whites with the same qualifications .
last year alone the federal government received more than 90,000 complaints of employment discrimination based on race , ethnicity , or gender ; less than 3 percent were for reverse discrimination .
evidence abounds in other ways of the persistence of the kind of bigotry that can affect the way we think , even if we 're not conscious of it , in hiring and promotion and business and educational decisions .
crimes and violence based on hate against asians , hispanics , african - americans , and other minorities are still with us .
and i 'm sorry to say that the worst and most recent evidence of this involves a recent report of federal law enforcement officials in tennessee attending an event literally overflowing with racism , a sickening reminder of just how pervasive these kinds of attitudes still are .
by the way , i want to tell you that i am committed to finding the truth about what happened there and to taking appropriate action .
and i want to say that if anybody who works in federal law enforcement thinks that that kind of behavior is acceptable , they ought to think about working someplace else .
now , let 's get to the other side of the argument .
if affirmative action has worked and if there is evidence that discrimination still exists on a wide scale in ways that are conscious and unconscious , then why should we get rid of it as many people are urging ?
some question the effectiveness or the fairness of particular affirmative action programs .
i say to all of you , those are fair questions , and they prompted the review of our affirmative action programs about which i will talk in a few moments .
some question the fundamental purpose of the effort .
there are people who honestly believe that affirmative action always amounts to group preferences over individual merit , that affirmative action always leads to reverse discrimination , that ultimately , therefore , it demeans those who benefit from it and discriminates against those who are not helped by it .
i just have to tell you that all of you have to decide how you feel about that , and all of our fellow country men and women have to decide as well .
but i believe if there are no quotas , if we give no opportunities to unqualified people , if we have no reverse discrimination , and if , when the problem ends , the program ends , that criticism is wrong .
that 's what i believe .
but we should have this debate , and everyone should ask the question .
now let 's deal with what i really think is behind so much of this debate today .
there are a lot of people who oppose affirmative action today who supported it for a very long time .
i believe they are responding to the sea change in the experiences that most americans have in the world in which we live .
if you say now you 're against affirmative action because the government is using its power or the private sector is using its power to help minorities at the expense of the majority , that gives you a way of explaining away the economic distress that a majority of americans honestly feel .
it gives you a way of turning their resentment against the minorities or against a particular government program , instead of having an honest debate about how we all got into the fix we 're in and what we 're all going to do together to get out of it .
that explanation , the affirmative action explanation , for the fix we 're in is just wrong .
it is just wrong .
affirmative action did not cause the great economic problems of the american middle class .
and because most minorities or women are either members of that middle class or people who are poor who are struggling to get into it , we must also admit that affirmative action alone wo n't solve the problems of minorities and women who seek to be a part of the american dream .
to do that , we have to have an economic strategy that reverses the decline in wages and the growth of poverty among working people .
without that , women , minorities , and white males will all be in trouble in the future .
but it is wrong to use the anxieties of the middle class to divert the american people from the real causes of their economic distress , the sweeping historic changes taking all the globe in its path and the specific policies or lack of them in our own country which have aggravated those challenges .
it is simply wrong to play politics with the issue of affirmative action and divide our country at a time when , if we 're really going to change things , we have to be united .
i must say , i think it is ironic that some of those -- not all but some of those who call for an end to affirmative action also advocate policies which will make the real economic problems of the anxious middle class even worse .
they talk about opportunity and being for equal opportunity for everyone , and then they reduce investment in equal opportunity on an evenhanded basis .
for example , if the real goal is economic opportunity for all americans , why in the world would we reduce our investment in education from head start to affordable college loans ?
why do n't we make college loans available to every american instead ?
if the real goal is empowering all middle class americans and empowering poor people to work their way into the middle class without regard to race or gender , why in the world would the people who advocate that turn around and raise taxes on our poorest working families , or reduce the money available for education and training when they lose their jobs or they 're living on poverty wages , or increase the cost of housing for lower income working people with children ?
why would we do that ?
if we 're going to empower america , we have to do more than talk about it .
we have to do it .
and we surely have learned that we can not empower all americans by a simple strategy of taking opportunity away from some americans .
so to those who use this as a political strategy to divide us , we must say no .
we must say no .
but to those who raise legitimate questions about the way affirmative action works or who raise the larger question about the genuine problems and anxieties of all the american people and their sense of being left behind and treated unfairly , we must say yes , you are entitled to answers to your questions .
we must say yes to that .
now , that 's why i ordered this review of all of our affirmative action programs , a review designed to look at the facts , not the politics , of affirmative action .
this review concluded that affirmative action remains a useful tool for widening economic and educational opportunity .
the model used by the military , the army in particular -- and i 'm delighted to have the commanding general of the army here today because he set such a fine example -- has been especially successful because it emphasizes education and training , ensuring that it has a wide pool of qualified candidates for every level of promotion .
that approach has given us the most racially diverse and best qualified military in our history .
there are more opportunities for women and minorities there than ever before .
and now there are over 50 generals and admirals who are hispanic , asian , or african - americans .
we found that the education department targeted on -- had programs targeted on under - represented minorities that do a great deal of good with the tiniest of investments .
we found that these programs comprised 40 cents of every $ 1,000 in the education department 's budget .
now , college presidents will tell you that the education their schools offer actually benefit from diversity , colleges where young people get the education and make the personal and professional contacts that will shape their lives .
if their colleges look like the world they 're going to live and work in and they learn from all different kinds of people things that they ca n't learn in books , our systems of higher education are stronger .
still , i believe every child needs the chance to go to college -- every child .
that means every child has to have a chance to get affordable and repayable college loans , pell grants for poor kids , and a chance to do things like join americorps and work their way through school .
every child is entitled to that .
that is not an argument against affirmative action , it 's an argument for more opportunity for more americans until everyone is reached .
as i said a moment ago , the review found that the small business administration last year increased loans to minorities by over two - thirds , loans to women by over 80 percent , did not decrease loans to white men , and not a single loan went to an unqualified person .
people who never had a chance before to be part of the american system of free enterprise now have it .
no one was hurt in the process .
that made america stronger .
this review also found that the executive order on employment practices of large federal contractors also has helped to bring more fairness and inclusion into the work force .
since president nixon was here in my job , america has used goals and timetables to preserve opportunity and to prevent discrimination , to urge businesses to set higher expectations for themselves and to realize those expectations .
but we did not and we will not use rigid quotas to mandate outcomes .
we also looked at the way we award procurement contracts under the programs known as set - asides .
there 's no question that these programs have helped to build up firms owned by minorities and women , who historically had been excluded from the old - boy networks in these areas .
it has helped a new generation of entrepreneurs to flourish , opening new paths to self - reliance and an economic growth in which all of us ultimately share .
because of the set - asides , businesses ready to compete have had a chance to compete , a chance they would not have otherwise had .
but as with any government program , set - asides can be misapplied , misused , even intentionally abused .
there are critics who exploit that fact as an excuse to abolish all these programs , regardless of their effects .
i believe they are wrong , but i also believe , based on our factual review , we clearly need some reform .
so first , we should crack down on those who take advantage of everyone else through fraud and abuse .
we must crack down on fronts and pass - throughs , people who pretend to be eligible for these programs and are n't .
that is wrong .
we also , in offering new businesses a leg up , must make sure that the set - asides go to businesses that need them most .
we must really look and make sure that our standard for eligibility is fair and defensible .
we have to tighten the requirement to move businesses out of programs once they 've had a fair opportunity to compete .
the graduation requirement must mean something : it must mean graduation .
there should be no permanent set - aside for any company .
second , we must and we will comply with the supreme court 's adarand decision of last month .
now , in particular , that means focusing set - aside programs on particular regions and business sectors where the problems of discrimination or exclusion are provable and are clearly requiring affirmative action .
i have directed the attorney general and the agencies to move forward with compliance with adarand expeditiously .
but i also want to emphasize that the adarand decision did not dismantle affirmative action and did not dismantle set - asides .
in fact , while setting stricter standards to mandate reform of affirmative action , it actually reaffirmed the need for affirmative action and reaffirmed the continuing existence of systematic discrimination in the united states .
what the supreme court ordered the federal government to do was to meet the same more rigorous standard for affirmative action programs that state and local governments were ordered to meet several years ago .
and the best set - aside programs under that standard have been challenged and have survived .
third , beyond discrimination we need to do more to help disadvantaged people and distressed communities , no matter what their race or gender .
there are places in our country where the free enterprise system simply does n't reach ; it simply is n't working to provide jobs and opportunity .
disproportionately , these areas in urban and rural america are highly populated by racial minorities , but not entirely .
to make this initiative work , i believe the government must become a better partner for people in places in urban and rural america that are caught in a cycle of poverty .
and i believe we have to find ways to get the private sector to assume their rightful role as a driver of economic growth .
it has always amazed me that we have given incentives to our business people to help to develop poor economies in other parts of the world , our neighbors in the caribbean , our neighbors in other parts of the world -- i have supported this when not subject to their own abuses -- but we ignore the biggest source of economic growth available to the american economy , the poor economies isolated within the united states of america .
there are those who say , " well , even if we made the jobs available , people would n't work . "
they have n't tried .
most of the people in disadvantaged communities work today , and most of them who do n't work have a very strong desire to do so .
in central harlem , 14 people apply for every single minimum - wage job opening .
think how many more would apply if there were good jobs with a good future .
our job has to connect disadvantaged people and disadvantaged communities to economic opportunity so that everybody who wants to work can do so .
we 've been working at this through our empowerment zones and community develop banks , through the initiatives of secretary cisneros of the housing and urban development department and many other things that we have tried to do to put capital where it is needed .
and now i have asked vice president gore to develop a proposal to use our contracting to support businesses that locate themselves in these distressed areas or hire a large percentage of their workers from these areas , not to supplement what we 're doing in affirmative action -- not to substitute for it but to supplement it , to go beyond it , to do something that will help to deal with the economic crisis of america .
we want to make our procurement system more responsive to people in these areas who need help .
my fellow americans , affirmative action has to be made consistent with our highest ideals of personal responsibility and merit and our urgent need to find common ground and to prepare all americans to compete in the global economy of the next century .
today i am directing all our agencies to comply with the supreme court 's adarand decision , and also to apply the four standards of fairness to all our affirmative action programs that i have already articulated : no quotas in theory or practice ; no illegal discrimination of any kind , including reverse discrimination ; no preference for people who are not qualified for any job or other opportunity ; and as soon as a program has succeeded , it must be retired .
any program that does n't meet these four principles must be eliminated or reformed to meet them .
but let me be clear : affirmative action has been good for america .
affirmative action has not always been perfect , and affirmative action should not go on forever .
it should be changed now to take care of those things that are wrong , and it should be retired when its job is done .
i am resolved that that day will come .
but the evidence suggests , indeed , screams that that day has not come .
the job of ending discrimination in this country is not over .
that should not be surprising .
we had slavery for centuries before the passage of the 13th , 14th , and 15th amendments .
we waited another 100 years for the civil rights legislation .
women have had the vote less than 100 years .
we have always had difficulty with these things , as most societies do .
but we are making more progress than many people .
based on the evidence , the job is not done .
so here is what i think we should do .
we should reaffirm the principle of affirmative action and fix the practices .
we should have a simple slogan : mend it , but do n't end it .
let me ask all americans , whether they agree or disagree with what i have said today , to see this issue in the larger context of our times .
president lincoln said , " we can not escape our history . "
we can not escape our future , either .
and that future must be one in which every american has the chance to live up to his or her god - given capacities .
the new technology , the instant communications , the explosion of global commerce have created enormous opportunities and enormous anxieties for americans .
in the last 2 1/2 years , we have seen 7 million new jobs , more millionaires and new businesses than ever before , high corporate profits , and a booming stock market .
yet , most americans are working harder for the same or lower pay , and they feel more insecurity about their jobs , their retirement , their health care , and their children 's education .
too many of our children are clearly exposed to poverty and welfare , violence and drugs .
these are the great challenges for our whole country on the homefront at the dawn of the 21st century .
we 've got to find the wisdom and the will to create family - wage jobs for all the people who want to work , to open the door of college to all americans , to strengthen families and reduce the awful problems to which our children are exposed , to move poor americans from welfare to work .
this is the work of our administration , to give people the tools they need to make the most of their own lives , to give families and communities the tools they need to solve their own problems .
but let us not forget affirmative action did n't cause these problems .
it wo n't solve them .
and getting rid of affirmative action certainly wo n't solve them .
if properly done , affirmative action can help us come together , go forward , and grow together .
it is in our moral , legal , and practical interest to see that every person can make the most of his own life .
in the fight for the future , we need all hands on deck , and some of those hands still need a helping hand .
in our national community we 're all different ; we 're all the same .
we want liberty and freedom .
we want the embrace of family and community .
we want to make the most of our own lives , and we 're determined to give our children a better one .
today there are voices of division who would say forget all that .
do n't you dare .
remember we 're still closing the gap between our founders ' ideals and our reality .
but every step along the way has made us richer , stronger , and better .
and the best is yet to come .
thank you very much , and god bless you .

mr. president , mr. speaker , members of the 104th congress , my fellow americans : again we are here in the sanctuary of democracy , and once again our democracy has spoken .
so let me begin by congratulating all of you here in the 104th congress and congratulating you , mr. speaker .
if we agree on nothing else tonight , we must agree that the american people certainly voted for change in 1992 and in 1994 .
and as i look out at you , i know how some of you must have felt in 1992.i must say that in both years we did n't hear america singing , we heard america shouting .
and now all of us , republicans and democrats alike , must say , " we hear you .
we will work together to earn the jobs you have given us .
for we are the keepers of a sacred trust , and we must be faithful to it in this new and very demanding era."over 200 years ago , our founders changed the entire course of human history by joining together to create a new country based on a single powerful idea : " we hold these truths to be self - evident , that all men are created equal , . . .
endowed by their creator with certain unalienable rights , and among these are life , liberty and the pursuit of happiness."it has fallen to every generation since then to preserve that idea , the american idea , and to deepen and expand its meaning in new and different times : to lincoln and to his congress to preserve the union and to end slavery ; to theodore roosevelt and woodrow wilson to restrain the abuses and excesses of the industrial revolution and to assert our leadership in the world ; to franklin roosevelt to fight the failure and pain of the great depression and to win our country 's great struggle against fascism ; and to all our presidents since to fight the cold war .
especially , i recall two who struggled to fight that cold war in partnership with congresses where the majority was of a different party : to harry truman , who summoned us to unparalleled prosperity at home and who built the architecture of the cold war ; and to ronald reagan , whom we wish well tonight and who exhorted us to carry on until the twilight struggle against communism was won .
in another time of change and challenge , i had the honor to be the first president to be elected in the post - cold - war era , an era marked by the global economy , the information revolution , unparalleled change and opportunity and insecurity for the american people .
i came to this hallowed chamber two years ago on a mission , to restore the american dream for all our people and to make sure that we move into the 21st century still the strongest force for freedom and democracy in the entire world .
i was determined then to tackle the tough problems too long ignored .
in this effort i am frank to say that i have made my mistakes , and i have learned again the importance of humility in all human endeavor .
but i am also proud to say tonight that our country is stronger than it was two years ago .
thank you .
record numbers of americans are succeeding in the new global economy .
we are at peace , and we are a force for peace and freedom throughout the world .
we have almost six million new jobs since i became president , and we have the lowest combined rate of unemployment and inflation in 25 years .
our businesses are more productive .
and here we have worked to bring the deficit down , to expand trade , to put more police on our streets , to give our citizens more of the tools they need to get an education and to rebuild their own communities .
but the rising tide is not lifting all boats .
while our nation is enjoying peace and prosperity , too many of our people are still working harder and harder , for less and less .
while our businesses are restructuring and growing more productive and competitive , too many of our people still ca n't be sure of having a job next year or even next month .
and far more than our material riches are threatened , things far more precious to us , our children , our families , our values .
our civil life is suffering in america today .
citizens are working together less and shouting at each other more .
the common bonds of community which have been the great strength of our country from its very beginning are badly frayed .
what are we to do about it?more than 60 years ago , at the dawn of another new era , president roosevelt told our nation , " new conditions impose new requirements on government and those who conduct government . "
and from that simple proposition , he shaped the new deal , which helped to restore our nation to prosperity and define the relationship between our people and their government for half a century .
that approach worked in its time .
but we today , we face a very different time and very different conditions .
we are moving from an industrial age built on gears and sweat to an information age demanding skills and learning and flexibility .
our government , once a champion of national purpose , is now seen by many as simply a captive of narrow interests , putting more burdens on our citizens rather than equipping them to get ahead .
the values that used to hold us all together seem to be coming apart .
so tonight we must forge a new social compact to meet the challenges of this time .
as we enter a new era , we need a new set of understandings , not just with government but , even more important , with one another as americans .
that 's what i want to talk with you about tonight .
i call it the new covenant .
but it 's grounded in a very , very old idea , that all americans have not just a right but a solemn responsibility to rise as far as their god - given talents and determination can take them and to give something back to their communities and their country in return .
opportunity and responsibility : they go hand in hand .
we ca n't have one without the other .
and our national community ca n't hold together without both .
our new covenant is a new set of understandings for how we can equip our people to meet the challenges of a new economy , how we can change the way our government works to fit a different time , and , above all , how we can repair the damaged bonds in our society and come together behind our common purpose .
we must have dramatic change in our economy , our government , and ourselves .
my fellow americans , without regard to party , let us rise to the occasion .
let us put aside partisanship and pettiness and pride .
as we embark on this new course , let us put our country first , remembering that regardless of party label , we are all americans .
and let the final test of everything we do be a simple one : is it good for the american people?let me begin by saying that we can not ask americans to be better citizens if we are not better servants .
you made a good start by passing that law which applies to congress all the laws you put on the private sector , and i was proud to sign it yesterday .
but we have a lot more to do before people really trust the way things work around here .
three times as many lobbyists are in the streets and corridors of washington as were here 20 years ago .
the american people look at their capital , and they see a city where the well - connected and the well - protected can work the system , but the interests of ordinary citizens are often left out .
as the new congress opened its doors , lobbyists were still doing business as usual ; the gifts , the trips , all the things that people are concerned about have n't stopped .
twice this month you missed opportunities to stop these practices .
i know there were other considerations in those votes , but i want to use something that i 've heard my republican friends say from time to time , " there does n't have to be a law for everything . "
so tonight i ask you to just stop taking the lobbyists ' perks .
just stop .
we do n't have to wait for legislation to pass to send a strong signal to the american people that things are really changing .
but i also hope you will send me the strongest possible lobby reform bill , and i 'll sign that , too .
we should require lobbyists to tell the people for whom they work what they 're spending , what they want .
we should also curb the role of big money in elections by capping the cost of campaigns and limiting the influence of pacs .
and as i have said for three years , we should work to open the airwaves so that they can be an instrument of democracy , not a weapon of destruction , by giving free tv time to candidates for public office .
when the last congress killed political reform last year , it was reported in the press that the lobbyists actually stood in the halls of this sacred building and cheered .
this year , let 's give the folks at home something to cheer about .
more important , i think we all agree that we have to change the way the government works .
let 's make it smaller , less costly , and smarter ; leaner , not meaner .
i just told the speaker the equal time doctrine is alive and well .
the new covenant approach to governing is as different from the old bureaucratic way as the computer is from the manual typewriter .
the old way of governing around here protected organized interests .
we should look out for the interests of ordinary people .
the old way divided us by interest , constituency , or class .
the new covenant way should unite us behind a common vision of what 's best for our country .
the old way dispensed services through large , top - down , inflexible bureaucracies .
the new covenant way should shift these resources and decisionmaking from bureaucrats to citizens , injecting choice and competition and individual responsibility into national policy .
the old way of governing around here actually seemed to reward failure .
the new covenant way should have built - in incentives to reward success .
the old way was centralized here in washington .
the new covenant way must take hold in the communities all across america .
and we should help them to do that .
our job here is to expand opportunity , not bureaucracy , to empower people to make the most of their own lives , and to enhance our security here at home and abroad .
we must not ask government to do what we should do for ourselves .
we should rely on government as a partner to help us to do more for ourselves and for each other .
i hope very much that as we debate these specific and exciting matters , we can go beyond the sterile discussion between the illusion that there is somehow a program for every problem , on the one hand , and the other illusion that the government is a source of every problem we have .
our job is to get rid of yesterday 's government so that our own people can meet today 's and tomorrow 's needs .
and we ought to do it together .
you know , for years before i became president , i heard others say they would cut government and how bad it was , but not much happened .
we actually did it .
we cut over a quarter of a trillion dollars in spending , more than 300 domestic programs , more than 100,000 positions from the federal bureaucracy in the last two years alone .
based on decisions already made , we will have cut a total of more than a quarter of a million positions from the federal government , making it the smallest it has been since john kennedy was president , by the time i come here again next year .
under the leadership of vice president gore , our initiatives have already saved taxpayers $ 63 billion .
the age of the $ 500 hammer and the ashtray you can break on " david letterman " is gone .
deadwood programs , like mohair subsidies , are gone .
we 've streamlined the agriculture department by reducing it by more than 1,200 offices .
we 've slashed the small business loan form from an inch thick to a single page .
we 've thrown away the government 's 10,000-page personnel manual .
and the government is working better in important ways : fema , the federal emergency management agency , has gone from being a disaster to helping people in disasters .
you can ask the farmers in the middle west who fought the flood there or the people in california who have dealt with floods and earthquakes and fires , and they 'll tell you that .
government workers , working hand in hand with private business , rebuilt southern california 's fractured freeways in record time and under budget .
and because the federal government moved fast , all but one of the 5,600 schools damaged in the earthquake are back in business .
now , there are a lot of other things that i could talk about .
i want to just mention one because it will be discussed here in the next few weeks .
university administrators all over the country have told me that they are saving weeks and weeks of bureaucratic time now because of our direct college loan program , which makes college loans cheaper and more affordable with better repayment terms for students , costs the government less , and cuts out paperwork and bureaucracy for the government and for the universities .
we should n't cap that program .
we should give every college in america the opportunity to be a part of it .
previous government programs gathered dust .
the reinventing government report is getting results .
and we 're not through .
there 's going to be a second round of reinventing government .
we propose to cut $ 130 billion in spending by shrinking departments , extending our freeze on domestic spending , cutting 60 public housing programs down to three , getting rid of over 100 programs we do not need , like the interstate commerce commission and the helium reserve program .
and we 're working on getting rid of unnecessary regulations and making them more sensible .
the programs and regulations that have outlived their usefulness should go .
we have to cut yesterday 's government to help solve tomorrow 's problems .
and we need to get government closer to the people it 's meant to serve .
we need to help move programs down to the point where states and communities and private citizens in the private sector can do a better job .
if they can do it , we ought to let them do it .
we should get out of the way and let them do what they can do better .
taking power away from federal bureaucracies and giving it back to communities and individuals is something everyone should be able to be for .
it 's time for congress to stop passing on to the states the cost of decisions we make here in washington .
i know there are still serious differences over the details of the unfunded mandates legislation , but i want to work with you to make sure we pass a reasonable bill which will protect the national interests and give justified relief where we need to give it .
for years , congress concealed in the budget scores of pet spending projects .
last year was no difference .
there was a $ 1 million to study stress in plants and $ 12 million for a tick removal program that did n't work .
it 's hard to remove ticks .
those of us who have had them know .
but i 'll tell you something , if you 'll give me line - item veto , i 'll remove some of that unnecessary spending .
but i think we should all remember , and almost all of us would agree , that government still has important responsibilities .
our young people -- we should think of this when we cut -- our young people hold our future in their hands .
we still owe a debt to our veterans .
and our senior citizens have made us what we are .
now , my budget cuts a lot .
but it protects education , veterans , social security , and medicare , and i hope you will do the same thing .
you should , and i hope you will .
and when we give more flexibility to the states , let us remember that there are certain fundamental national needs that should be addressed in every state , north and south , east and west : immunization against childhood disease , school lunches in all our schools , head start , medical care and nutrition for pregnant women and infants --   -- medical care and nutrition for pregnant women and infants , all these things , all these things are in the national interest .
i applaud your desire to get rid of costly and unnecessary regulations .
but when we deregulate , let 's remember what national action in the national interest has given us : safer food for our families , safer toys for our children , safer nursing homes for our parents , safer cars and highways , and safer workplaces , cleaner air , and cleaner water .
do we need common sense and fairness in our regulations ?
you bet we do .
but we can have common sense and still provide for safe drinking water .
we can have fairness and still clean up toxic dumps , and we ought to do it .
should we cut the deficit more ?
well , of course we should .
of course we should .
but we can bring it down in a way that still protects our economic recovery and does not unduly punish people who should not be punished but instead should be helped .
i know many of you in this chamber support the balanced budget amendment .
i certainly want to balance the budget .
our administration has done more to bring the budget down and to save money than any in a very , very long time .
if you believe passing this amendment is the right thing to do , then you have to be straight with the american people .
they have a right to know what you 're going to cut , what taxes you 're going to raise , and how it 's going to affect them .
we should be doing things in the open around here .
for example , everybody ought to know if this proposal is going to endanger social security .
i would oppose that , and i think most americans would .
nothing has done more to undermine our sense of common responsibility than our failed welfare system .
this is one of the problems we have to face here in washington in our new covenant .
it rewards welfare over work .
it undermines family values .
it lets millions of parents get away without paying their child support .
it keeps a minority but a significant minority of the people on welfare trapped on it for a very long time .
i 've worked on this problem for a long time , nearly 15 years now .
as a governor , i had the honor of working with the reagan administration to write the last welfare reform bill back in 1988 .
in the last two years , we made a good start at continuing the work of welfare reform .
our administration gave two dozen states the right to slash through federal rules and regulations to reform their own welfare systems and to try to promote work and responsibility over welfare and dependency .
last year i introduced the most sweeping welfare reform plan ever presented by an administration .
we have to make welfare what it was meant to be , a second chance , not a way of life .
we have to help those on welfare move to work as quickly as possible , to provide child care and teach them skills , if that 's what they need , for up to two years .
and after that , there ought to be a simple , hard rule : anyone who can work must go to work .
if a parent is n't paying child support , they should be forced to pay .
we should suspend drivers ' license , track them across state lines , make them work off what they owe .
that is what we should do .
governments do not raise children , people do .
and the parents must take responsibility for the children they bring into this world .
i want to work with you , with all of you , to pass welfare reform .
but our goal must be to liberate people and lift them up from dependence to independence , from welfare to work , from mere childbearing to responsible parenting .
our goal should not be to punish them because they happen to be poor .
we should , we should require work and mutual responsibility .
but we should n't cut people off just because they 're poor , they 're young , or even because they 're unmarried .
we should promote responsibility by requiring young mothers to live at home with their parents or in other supervised settings , by requiring them to finish school .
but we should n't put them and their children out on the street .
and i know all the arguments , pro and con , and i have read and thought about this for a long time .
i still do n't think we can in good conscience punish poor children for the mistakes of their parents .
my fellow americans , every single survey shows that all the american people care about this without regard to party or race or region .
so let this be the year we end welfare as we know it .
but also let this be the year that we are all able to stop using this issue to divide america .
no one is more eager to end welfare --   -- i may be the only president who has actually had the opportunity to sit in a welfare office , who 's actually spent hours and hours talking to people on welfare .
and i am telling you , the people who are trapped on it know it does n't work ; they also want to get off .
so we can promote , together , education and work and good parenting .
i have no problem with punishing bad behavior or the refusal to be a worker or a student or a responsible parent .
i just do n't want to punish poverty and past mistakes .
all of us have made our mistakes , and none of us can change our yesterdays .
but every one of us can change our tomorrows .
and america 's best example of that may be lynn woolsey , who worked her way off welfare to become a congresswoman from the state of california .
i know the members of this congress are concerned about crime , as are all the citizens of our country .
and i remind you that last year we passed a very tough crime bill : longer sentences , " three strikes and you 're out , " almost 60 new capital punishment offenses , more prisons , more prevention , 100,000 more police .
and we paid for it all by reducing the size of the federal bureaucracy and giving the money back to local communities to lower the crime rate .
there may be other things we can do to be tougher on crime , to be smarter with crime , to help to lower that rate first .
well , if there are , let 's talk about them , and let 's do them .
but let 's not go back on the things that we did last year that we know work , that we know work because the local law enforcement officers tell us that we did the right thing , because local community leaders who have worked for years and years to lower the crime rate tell us that they work .
let 's look at the experience of our cities and our rural areas where the crime rate has gone down and ask the people who did it how they did it .
and if what we did last year supports the decline in the crime rate -- and i am convinced that it does -- let us not go back on it .
let 's stick with it , implement it .
we 've got four more hard years of work to do to do that .
i do n't want to destroy the good atmosphere in the room or in the country tonight , but i have to mention one issue that divided this body greatly last year .
the last congress also passed the brady bill and , in the crime bill , the ban on 19 assault weapons .
i do n't think it 's a secret to anybody in this room that several members of the last congress who voted for that are n't here tonight because they voted for it .
and i know , therefore , that some of you who are here because they voted for it are under enormous pressure to repeal it .
i just have to tell you how i feel about it .
the members of congress who voted for that bill and i would never do anything to infringe on the right to keep and bear arms to hunt and to engage in other appropriate sporting activities .
i 've done it since i was a boy , and i 'm going to keep right on doing it until i ca n't do it anymore .
but a lot of people laid down their seats in congress so that police officers and kids would n't have to lay down their lives under a hail of assault weapon attack , and i will not let that be repealed .
i will not let it be repealed .
i 'd like to talk about a couple of other issues we have to deal with .
i want us to cut more spending , but i hope we wo n't cut government programs that help to prepare us for the new economy , promote responsibility , and are organized from the grassroots up , not by gederal bureaucracy .
the very best example of this is the national service corps , americorps .
it passed with strong bipartisan support .
and now there are 20,000 americans , more than ever served in one year in the peace corps , working all over this country , helping people person - to - person in local grassroots volunteer groups , solving problems , and in the process earning some money for their education .
this is citizenship at its best .
it 's good for the americorps members , but it 's good for the rest of us , too .
it 's the essence of the new covenant , and we should n't stop it .
all americans , not only in the states most heavily affected but in every place in this country , are rightly disturbed by the large numbers of illegal aliens entering our country .
the jobs they hold might otherwise be held by citizens or legal immigrants .
the public service they use impose burdens on our taxpayers .
that 's why our administration has moved aggressively to secure our borders more by hiring a record number of new border guards , by deporting twice as many criminal aliens as ever before , by cracking down on illegal hiring , by barring welfare benefits to illegal aliens .
in the budget i will present to you , we will try to do more to speed the deportation of illegal aliens who are arrested for crimes , to better identify illegal aliens in the workplace as recommended by the commission headed by former congresswoman barbara jordan .
we are a nation of immigrants .
but we are also a nation of laws .
it is wrong and ultimately self - defeating for a nation of immigrants to permit the kind of abuse of our immigration laws we have seen in recent years , and we must do more to stop it .
the most important job of our government in this new era is to empower the american people to succeed in the global economy .
america has always been a land of opportunity , a land where , if you work hard , you can get ahead .
we 've become a great middle - class country .
middle - class values sustain us .
we must expand that middle class and shrink the underclass , even as we do everything we can to support the millions of americans who are already successful in the new economy .
america is once again the world 's strongest economic power : almost six million new jobs in the last two years , exports booming , inflation down .
high - wage jobs are coming back .
a record number of american entrepreneurs are living the american dream .
if we want it to stay that way , those who work and lift our nation must have more of its benefits .
today , too many of those people are being left out .
they 're working harder for less .
they have less security , less income , less certainty that they can even afford a vacation , much less college for their kids or retirement for themselves .
we can not let this continue .
if we do n't act , our economy will probably keep doing what it 's been doing since about 1978 , when the income growth began to go to those at the very top of our economic scale and the people in the vast middle got very little growth , and people who worked like crazy but were on the bottom then fell even further and further behind in the years afterward , no matter how hard they worked .
we 've got to have a government that can be a real partner in making this new economy work for all of our people , a government that helps each and every one of us to get an education and to have the opportunity to renew our skills .
that 's why we worked so hard to increase educational opportunities in the last two years , from head start to public schools , to apprenticeships for young people who do n't go to college , to making college loans more available and more affordable .
that 's the first thing we have to do .
we 've got to do something to empower people to improve their skills .
the second thing we ought to do is to help people raise their incomes immediately by lowering their taxes .
we took the first step in 1993 with a working family tax cut for 15 million families with incomes under $ 27,000 , a tax cut that this year will average about $ 1,000 a family .
and we also gave tax reductions to most small and new businesses .
before we could do more than that , we first had to bring down the deficit we inherited , and we had to get economic growth up .
now we 've done both .
and now we can cut taxes in a more comprehensive way .
but tax cuts should reinforce and promote our first obligation : to empower our citizens through education and training to make the most of their own lives .
the spotlight should shine on those who make the right choices for themselves , their families , and their communities .
i have proposed the middle class bill of rights , which should properly be called the bill of rights and responsibilities because its provisions only benefit those who are working to educate and raise their children and to educate themselves .
it will , therefore , give needed tax relief and raise incomes in both the short run and the long run in a way that benefits all of us .
there are four provisions .
first , a tax deduction for all education and training after high school .
if you think about it , we permit businesses to deduct their investment , we permit individuals to deduct interest on their home mortgages , but today an education is even more important to the economic well - being of our whole country than even those things are .
we should do everything we can to encourage it .
and i hope you will support it .
second , we ought to cut taxes $ 500 for families with children under 13 .
third , we ought to foster more savings and personal responsibility by permitting people to establish an individual retirement account and withdraw from it tax free for the cost of education , health care , first - time homebuying , or the care of a parent .
and fourth , we should pass a gi bill for america 's workers .
we propose to collapse nearly 70 federal programs and not give the money to the states but give the money directly to the american people , offer vouchers to them so that they , if they 're laid off or if they 're working for a very low wage , can get a voucher worth $ 2,600 a year for up to two years to go to their local community colleges or wherever else they want to get the skills they need to improve their lives .
let 's empower people in this way , move it from the government directly to the workers of america .
now , any one of us can call for a tax cut , but i wo n't accept one that explodes the deficit or puts our recovery at risk .
we ought to pay for our tax cuts fully and honestly .
just two years ago , it was an open question whether we would find the strength to cut the deficit .
thanks to the courage of the people who were here then , many of whom did n't return , we did cut the deficit .
we began to do what others said would not be done .
we cut the deficit by over $ 600 billion , about $ 10,000 for every family in this country .
it 's coming down three years in a row for the first time since mr. truman was president , and i do n't think anybody in america wants us to let it explode again .
in the budget i will send you , the middle class bill of rights is fully paid for by budget cuts in bureaucracy , cuts in programs , cuts in special interest subsidies .
and the spending cuts will more than double the tax cuts .
my budget pays for the middle class bill of rights without any cuts in medicare .
and i will oppose any attempts to pay for tax cuts with medicare cuts .
that 's not the right thing to do .
i know that a lot of you have your own ideas about tax relief , and some of them i find quite interesting .
i really want to work with all of you .
my test for our proposals will be : will it create jobs and raise incomes ; will it strengthen our families and support our children ; is it paid for ; will it build the middle class and shrink the underclass ?
if it does , i 'll support it .
but if it does n't , i wo n't .
the goal of building the middle class and shrinking the underclass is also why i believe that you should raise the minimum wage .
it rewards work .
two and a half million americans , two and a half million americans , often women with children , are working out there today for $ 4.25 an hour .
in terms of real buying power , by next year that minimum wage will be at a 40-year low .
that 's not my idea of how the new economy ought to work .
now , i 've studied the arguments and the evidence for and against a minimum wage increase .
i believe the weight of the evidence is that a modest increase does not cost jobs and may even lure people back into the job market .
but the most important thing is , you ca n't make a living on $ 4.25 an hour , especially if you have children , even with the working families tax cut we passed last year .
in the past , the minimum wage has been a bipartisan issue , and i think it should be again .
so i want to challenge you to have honest hearings on this , to get together , to find a way to make the minimum wage a living wage .
members of congress have been here less than a month , but by the end of the week , 28 days into the new year , every member of congress will have earned as much in congressional salary as a minimum wage worker makes all year long .
everybody else here , including the president , has something else that too many americans do without , and that 's health care .
now , last year we almost came to blows over health care , but we did n't do anything .
and the cold , hard fact is that , since last year , since i was here , another 1.1 million americans in working families have lost their health care .
and the cold , hard fact is that many millions more , most of them farmers and small business people and self - employed people , have seen their premiums skyrocket , their co - pays and deductibles go up .
there 's a whole bunch of people in this country that in the statistics have health insurance but really what they 've got is a piece of paper that says they wo n't lose their home if they get sick .
now , i still believe our country has got to move toward providing health security for every american family .
but i know that last year , as the evidence indicates , we bit off more than we could chew .
so i 'm asking you that we work together .
let 's do it step by step .
let 's do whatever we have to do to get something done .
let 's at least pass meaningful insurance reform so that no american risks losing coverage for facing skyrocketing prices , that nobody loses their coverage because they face high prices or unavailable insurance when they change jobs or lose a job or a family member gets sick .
i want to work together with all of you who have an interest in this , with the democrats who worked on it last time , with the republican leaders like senator dole , who has a longtime commitment to health care reform and made some constructive proposals in this area last year .
we ought to make sure that self - employed people in small businesses can buy insurance at more affordable rates through voluntary purchasing pools .
we ought to help families provide long - term care for a sick parent or a disabled child .
we can work to help workers who lose their jobs at least keep their health insurance coverage for a year while they look for work .
and we can find a way -- it may take some time , but we can find a way -- to make sure that our children have health care .
you know , i think everybody in this room , without regard to party , can be proud of the fact that our country was rated as having the world 's most productive economy for the first time in nearly a decade .
but we ca n't be proud of the fact that we 're the only wealthy country in the world that has a smaller percentage of the work force and their children with health insurance today than we did 10 years ago , the last time we were the most productive economy in the world .
so let 's work together on this .
it is too important for politics as usual .
much of what the american people are thinking about tonight is what we 've already talked about .
a lot of people think that the security concerns of america today are entirely internal to our borders .
they relate to the security of our jobs and our homes and our incomes and our children , our streets , our health , and protecting those borders .
now that the cold war has passed , it 's tempting to believe that all the security issues , with the possible exception of trade , reside here at home .
but it 's not so .
our security still depends upon our continued world leadership for peace and freedom and democracy .
we still ca n't be strong at home unless we 're strong abroad .
the financial crisis in mexico is a case in point .
i know it 's not popular to say it tonight , but we have to act , not for the mexican people but for the sake of the millions of americans whose livelihoods are tied to mexico 's well - being .
if we want to secure american jobs , preserve american exports , safeguard america 's borders , then we must pass the stabilization program and help to put mexico back on track .
now let me repeat : it 's not a loan ; it 's not foreign aid ; it 's not a bailout .
we will be given a guarantee like cosigning a note , with good collateral that will cover our risks .
this legislation is the right thing for america .
that 's why the bipartisan leadership has supported it .
and i hope you in congress will pass it quickly .
it is in our interest , and we can explain it to the american people because we 're going to do it in the right way .
you know , tonight , this is the first state of the union address ever delivered since the beginning of the cold war when not a single russian missile is pointed at the children of america .
and along with the russians , we 're on our way to destroying the missiles and the bombers that carry 9,000 nuclear warheads .
we 've come so far so fast in this post - cold - war world that it 's easy to take the decline of the nuclear threat for granted .
but it 's still there , and we are n't finished yet .
this year i 'll ask the senate to approve start ii to eliminate weapons that carry 5,000 more warheads .
the united states will lead the charge to extend indefinitely the nuclear non - proliferation treaty , to enact a comprehensive nuclear test ban , and to eliminate chemical weapons .
to stop and roll back north korea 's potentially deadly nuclear program , we 'll continue to implement the agreement we have reached with that nation .
it 's smart .
it 's tough .
it 's a deal based on continuing inspection with safeguards for our allies and ourselves .
this year i 'll submit to congress comprehensive legislation to strengthen our hand in combating terrorists , whether they strike at home or abroad .
as the cowards who bombed the world trade center found out , this country will hunt down terrorists and bring them to justice .
just this week , another horrendous terrorist act in israel killed 19 and injured scores more .
on behalf of the american people and all of you , i send our deepest sympathy to the families of the victims .
i know that in the face of such evil , it is hard for the people in the middle east to go forward .
but the terrorists represent the past , not the future .
we must and we will pursue a comprehensive peace between israel and all her neighbors in the middle east .
accordingly , last night i signed an executive order that will block the assets in the united states of terrorist organizations that threaten to disrupt the peace process .
it prohibits financial transactions with these groups .
and tonight i call on all our allies and peace - loving nations throughout the world to join us with renewed fervor in a global effort to combat terrorism .
we can not permit the future to be marred by terror and fear and paralysis .
from the day i took the oath of office , i pledged that our nation would maintain the best equipped , best trained , and best prepared military on earth .
we have , and they are .
they have managed the dramatic downsizing of our forces after the cold war with remarkable skill and spirit .
but to make sure our military is ready for action and to provide the pay and the quality of life the military and their families deserve , i 'm asking the congress to add $ 25 billion in defense spending over the next six years .
i have visited many bases at home and around the world since i became president .
tonight i repeat that request with renewed conviction .
we ask a very great deal of our armed forces .
now that they are smaller in number , we ask more of them .
they go out more often to more different places and stay longer .
they are called to service in many , many ways .
and we must give them and their families what the times demand and what they have earned .
just think about what our troops have done in the last year , showing america at its best , helping to save hundreds of thousands of people in rwanda , moving with lightning speed to head off another threat to kuwait , giving freedom and democracy back to the people of haiti .
we have proudly supported peace and prosperity and freedom from south africa to northern ireland , from central and eastern europe to asia , from latin america to the middle east .
all these endeavors are good in those places , but they make our future more confident and more secure .
well , my fellow americans , that 's my agenda for america 's future : expanding opportunity , not bureaucracy ; enhancing security at home and abroad ; empowering our people to make the most of their own lives .
it 's ambitious and achievable , but it 's not enough .
we even need more than new ideas for changing the world or equipping americans to compete in the new economy , more than a government that 's smaller , smarter , and wiser , more than all of the changes we can make in government and in the private sector from the outside in .
our fortunes and our posterity also depend upon our ability to answer some questions from within , from the values and voices that speak to our hearts as well as our heads ; voices that tell us we have to do more to accept responsibility for ourselves and our families , for our communities , and yes , for our fellow citizens .
we see our families and our communities all over this country coming apart , and we feel the common ground shifting from under us .
the pta , the town hall meeting , the ball park , it 's hard for a lot of overworked parents to find the time and space for those things that strengthen the bonds of trust and cooperation .
too many of our children do n't even have parents and grandparents who can give them those experiences that they need to build their own character and their sense of identity .
we all know what while we here in this chamber can make a difference on those things , that the real differences will be made by our fellow citizens , where they work and where they live and that it will be made almost without regard to party .
when i used to go to the softball park in little rock to watch my daughter 's league , and people would come up to me , fathers and mothers , and talk to me , i can honestly say i had no idea whether 90 percent of them were republicans or democrats .
when i visited the relief centers after the floods in california , northern california , last week , a woman came up to me and did something that very few of you would do .
she hugged me and said , " mr. president , i 'm a republican , but i 'm glad you 're here . "
now , why ?
we ca n't wait for disasters to act the way we used to act every day , because as we move into this next century , everybody matters .
we do n't have a person to waste .
and a lot of people are losing a lot of chances to do better .
that means that we need a new covenant for everybody .
for our corporate and business leaders , we 're going to work here to keep bringing the deficit down , to expand markets , to support their success in every possible way .
but they have an obligation when they 're doing well to keep jobs in our communities and give their workers a fair share of the prosperity they generate .
for people in the entertainment industry in this country , we applaud your creativity and your worldwide success , and we support your freedom of expression .
but you do have a responsibility to assess the impact of your work and to understand the damage that comes from the incessant , repetitive , mindless violence and irresponsible conduct that permeates our media all the time .
we 've got to ask our community leaders and all kinds of organizations to help us stop our most serious social problem , the epidemic of teen pregnancies and births where there is no marriage .
i have sent to congress a plan to target schools all over this country with antipregnancy programs that work .
but government can only do so much .
tonight i call on parents and leaders all across this country to join together in a national campaign against teen pregnancy to make a difference .
we can do this , and we must .
and i would like to say a special word to our religious leaders .
you know , i 'm proud of the fact the united states has more houses of worship per capita than any country in the world .
these people who lead our houses of worship can ignite their congregations to carry their faith into action , can reach out to all of our children , to all of the people in distress , to those who have been savaged by the breakdown of all we hold dear .
because so much of what must be done must come from the inside out and our religious leaders and their congregations can make all the difference , they have a role in the new covenant as well .
there must be more responsibility for all of our citizens .
you know , it takes a lot of people to help all the kids in trouble stay off the streets and in school .
it takes a lot of people to build the habitat for humanity houses that the speaker celebrates on his lapel pin .
it takes a lot of people to provide the people power for all of the civic organizations in this country that made our communities mean so much to most of us when we were kids .
it takes every parent to teach the children the difference between right and wrong and to encourage them to learn and grow and to say no to the wrong things but also to believe that they can be whatever they want to be .
i know it 's hard when you 're working harder for less , when you 're under great stress to do these things .
a lot of our people do n't have the time or the emotional stress , they think , to do the work of citizenship .
most of us in politics have n't helped very much .
for years , we 've mostly treated citizens like they were consumers or spectators , sort of political couch potatoes who were supposed to watch the tv ads either promise them something for nothing or play on their fears and frustrations .
and more and more of our citizens now get most of their information in very negative and aggressive ways that are hardly conducive to honest and open conversations .
but the truth is , we have got to stop seeing each other as enemies just because we have different views .
if you go back to the beginning of this country , the great strength of america , as de tocqueville pointed out when he came here a long time ago , has always been our ability to associate with people who were different from ourselves and to work together to find common ground .
and in this day , everybody has a responsibility to do more of that .
we simply can not want for a tornado , a fire , or a flood to behave like americans ought to behave in dealing with one another .
i want to finish up here by pointing out some folks that are up with the first lady that represent what i 'm trying to talk about -- citizens .
i have no idea what their party affiliation is or who they voted for in the last election .
but they represent what we ought to be doing .
cindy perry teaches second graders to read in americorps in rural kentucky .
she gains when she gives .
she 's a mother of four .
she says that her service inspired her to get her high school equivalency last year .
she was married when she was a teenager -- stand up , cindy .
she was married when she was a teenager .
she had four children .
but she had time to serve other people , to get her high school equivalency , and she 's going to use her americorps money to go back to college .
chief stephen bishop is the police chief of kansas city .
he 's been a national leader -- stand up , steve .
he 's been a national leader in using more police in community policing , and he 's worked with americorps to do it .
and the crime rate in kansas city has gone down as a result of what he did .
corporal gregory depestre went to haiti as part of his adopted country 's force to help secure democracy in his native land .
and i might add , we must be the only country in the world that could have gone to haiti and taken haitian - americans there who could speak the language and talk to the people .
and he was one of them , and we 're proud of him .
the next two folks i 've had the honor of meeting and getting to know a little bit , the reverend john and the reverend diana cherry of the ame zion church in temple hills , maryland .
i 'd like to ask them to stand .
i want to tell you about them .
in the early ' 80s , they left government service and formed a church in a small living room in a small house , in the early ' 80s .
today that church has 17,000 members .
it is one of the three or four biggest churches in the entire united states .
it grows by 200 a month .
they do it together .
and the special focus of their ministry is keeping families together .
two things they did make a big impression on me .
i visited their church once , and i learned they were building a new sanctuary closer to the washington , dc , line in a higher crime , higher drug rate area because they thought it was part of their ministry to change the lives of the people who needed them .
the second thing i want to say is that once reverend cherry was at a meeting at the white house with some other religious leaders , and he left early to go back to this church to minister to 150 couples that he had brought back to his church from all over america to convince them to come back together , to save their marriages , and to raise their kids .
this is the kind of work that citizens are doing in america .
we need more of it , and it ought to be lifted up and supported .
the last person i want to introduce is jack lucas from hattiesburg , mississippi .
jack , would you stand up ?
fifty years ago , in the sands of iwo jima , jack lucas taught and learned the lessons of citizenship .
on february 20 , 1945 , he and three of his buddies encountered the enemy and two grenades at their feet .
jack lucas threw himself on both of them .
in that moment , he saved the lives of his companions , and miraculously in the next instant , a medic saved his life .
he gained a foothold for freedom , and at the age of 17 , just a year older than his grandson who is up there with him today -- and his son , who is a west point graduate and a veteran -- at 17 , jack lucas became the youngest marine in history and the youngest soldier in this century to win the congressional medal of honor .
all these years later , yesterday , here 's what he said about that day : " it did n't matter where you were from or who you were , you relied on one another .
you did it for your country."we all gain when we give , and we reap what we sow .
that 's at the heart of this new covenant .
responsibility , opportunity , and citizenship , more than stale chapters in some remote civic book , they 're still the virtue by which we can fulfill ourselves and reach our god - given potential and be like them and also to fulfill the eternal promise of this country , the enduring dream from that first and most sacred covenant .
i believe every person in this country still believes that we are created equal and given by our creator the right to life , liberty and the pursuit of happiness .
this is a very , very great country .
and our best days are still to come .
thank you , and god bless you all .

good evening .
last week , the warring factions in bosnia reached a peace agreement , as a result of our efforts in dayton , ohio , and the support of our european and russian partners .
tonight , i want to speak with you about implementing the bosnian peace agreement , and why our values and interests as americans require that we participate .
let me say at the outset , america 's role will not be about fighting a war .
it will be about helping the people of bosnia to secure their own peace agreement .
our mission will be limited , focused , and under the command of an american general .
in fulfilling this mission , we will have the chance to help stop the killing of innocent civilians , especially children , and at the same time , to bring stability to central europe , a region of the world that is vital to our national interests .
it is the right thing to do .
from our birth , america has always been more than just a place .
america has embodied an idea that has become the ideal for billions of people throughout the world .
our founders said it best : america is about life , liberty , and the pursuit of happiness .
in this century especially , america has done more than simply stand for these ideals .
we have acted on them and sacrificed for them .
our people fought two world wars so that freedom could triumph over tyranny .
after world war i , we pulled back from the world , leaving a vacuum that was filled by the forces of hatred .
after world war ii , we continued to lead the world .
we made the commitments that kept the peace , that helped to spread democracy , that created unparalleled prosperity , and that brought victory in the cold war .
today , because of our dedication , america 's ideals -- liberty , democracy , and peace -- are more and more the aspirations of people everywhere in the world .
it is the power of our ideas , even more than our size , our wealth , and our military might , that makes america a uniquely trusted nation .
with the cold war over , some people now question the need for our continued active leadership in the world .
they believe that , much like after world war i , america can now step back from the responsibilities of leadership .
they argue that to be secure we need only to keep our own borders safe and that the time has come now to leave to others the hard work of leadership beyond our borders .
i strongly disagree .
as the cold war gives way to the global village , our leadership is needed more than ever because problems that start beyond our borders can quickly become problems within them .
we 're all vulnerable to the organized forces of intolerance and destruction ; terrorism ; ethnic , religious and regional rivalries ; the spread of organized crime and weapons of mass destruction and drug trafficking .
just as surely as fascism and communism , these forces also threaten freedom and democracy , peace and prosperity .
and they , too , demand american leadership .
but nowhere has the argument for our leadership been more clearly justified than in the struggle to stop or prevent war and civil violence .
from iraq to haiti , from south africa to korea , from the middle east to northern ireland , we have stood up for peace and freedom because it 's in our interest to do so and because it is the right thing to do .
now , that does n't mean we can solve every problem .
my duty as president is to match the demands for american leadership to our strategic interest and to our ability to make a difference .
america can not and must not be the world 's policeman .
we can not stop all war for all time , but we can stop some wars .
we can not save all women and all children , but we can save many of them .
we ca n't do everything , but we must do what we can .
there are times and places where our leadership can mean the difference between peace and war , and where we can defend our fundamental values as a people and serve our most basic , strategic interests .
my fellow americans , in this new era there are still times when america and america alone can and should make the difference for peace .
the terrible war in bosnia is such a case .
nowhere today is the need for american leadership more stark or more immediate than in bosnia .
for nearly 4 years a terrible war has torn bosnia apart .
horrors we prayed had been banished from europe forever have been seared into our minds again : skeletal prisoners caged behind barbed - wire fences ; women and girls raped as a tool of war ; defenseless men and boys shot down into mass graves , evoking visions of world war ii concentration camps ; and endless lines of refugees marching toward a future of despair .
when i took office , some were urging immediate intervention in the conflict .
i decided that american ground troops should not fight a war in bosnia because the united states could not force peace on bosnia 's warring ethnic groups , the serbs , croats , and muslims .
instead , america has worked with our european allies in searching for peace , stopping the war from spreading , and easing the suffering of the bosnian people .
we imposed tough economic sanctions on serbia .
we used our air power to conduct the longest humanitarian airlift in history and to enforce a no - fly zone that took the war out of the skies .
we helped to make peace between two of the three warring parties , the muslims and the croats .
but as the months of war turned into years , it became clear that europe alone could not end the conflict .
this summer , bosnian serb shelling once again turned bosnia 's playgrounds and marketplaces into killing fields .
in response , the united states led nato 's heavy and continuous air strikes , many of them flown by skilled and brave american pilots .
those air strikes , together with the renewed determination of our european partners and the bosnian and croat gains on the battlefield convinced the serbs , finally , to start thinking about making peace .
at the same time , the united states initiated an intensive diplomatic effort that forged a bosnia - wide cease - fire and got the parties to agree to the basic principles of peace .
three dedicated american diplomats , bob frasure , joe kruzel , and nelson drew , lost their lives in that effort .
tonight we remember their sacrifice and that of their families .
and we will never forget their exceptional service to our nation .
finally , just 3 weeks ago , the muslims , croats , and serbs came to dayton , ohio , in america 's heartland , to negotiate a settlement .
there , exhausted by war , they made a commitment to peace .
they agreed to put down their guns , to preserve bosnia as a single state , to investigate and prosecute war criminals , to protect the human rights of all citizens , to try to build a peaceful , democratic future .
and they asked for america 's help as they implement this peace agreement .
america has a responsibility to answer that request , to help to turn this moment of hope into an enduring reality .
to do that , troops from our country and around the world would go into bosnia to give them the confidence and support they need to implement their peace plan .
i refuse to send american troops to fight a war in bosnia , but i believe we must help to secure the bosnian peace .
i want you to know tonight what is at stake , exactly what our troops will be asked to accomplish , and why we must carry out our responsibility to help implement the peace agreement .
implementing the agreement in bosnia can end the terrible suffering of the people , the warfare , the mass executions , the ethnic cleansing , the campaigns of rape and terror .
let us never forget a quarter of a million men , women , and children have been shelled , shot , and tortured to death .
two million people , half of the population , were forced from their homes and into a miserable life as refugees .
and these faceless numbers hide millions of real personal tragedies .
for each of the war 's victims was a mother or daughter , a father or son , a brother or sister .
now the war is over .
american leadership created the chance to build a peace and stop the suffering .
securing peace in bosnia will also help to build a free and stable europe .
bosnia lies at the very heart of europe , next - door to many of its fragile new democracies and some of our closest allies .
generations of americans have understood that europe 's freedom and europe 's stability is vital to our own national security .
that 's why we fought two wars in europe .
that 's why we launched the marshall plan to restore europe .
that 's why we created nato and waged the cold war .
and that 's why we must help the nations of europe to end their worst nightmare since world war ii , now .
the only force capable of getting this job done is nato , the powerful , military alliance of democracies that has guaranteed our security for half a century now .
and as nato 's leader and the primary broker of the peace agreement , the united states must be an essential part of the mission .
if we 're not there , nato will not be there ; the peace will collapse ; the war will reignite ; the slaughter of innocents will begin again .
a conflict that already has claimed so many victims could spread like poison throughout the region , eat away at europe 's stability , and erode our partnership with our european allies .
and america 's commitment to leadership will be questioned if we refuse to participate in implementing a peace agreement we brokered right here in the united states , especially since the presidents of bosnia , croatia , and serbia all asked us to participate and all pledged their best efforts to the security of our troops .
when america 's partnerships are weak and our leadership is in doubt , it undermines our ability to secure our interests and to convince others to work with us .
if we do maintain our partnerships and our leadership , we need not act alone .
as we saw in the gulf war and in haiti , many other nations who share our goals will also share our burdens .
but when america does not lead , the consequences can be very grave , not only for others but eventually for us as well .
as i speak to you , nato is completing its planning for ifor , an international force for peace in bosnia of about 60,000 troops .
already , more than 25 other nations , including our major nato allies , have pledged to take part .
they will contribute about two - thirds of the total implementation force , some 40,000 troops .
the united states would contribute the rest , about 20,000 soldiers .
later this week , the final nato plan will be submitted to me for review and approval .
let me make clear what i expect it to include , and what it must include , for me to give final approval to the participation of our armed forces .
first , the mission will be precisely defined with clear , realistic goals that can be achieved in a definite period of time .
our troops will make sure that each side withdraws its forces behind the frontlines and keeps them there .
they will maintain the cease - fire to prevent the war from accidentally starting again .
these efforts , in turn , will help to create a secure environment , so that the people of bosnia can return to their homes , vote in free elections , and begin to rebuild their lives .
our joint chiefs of staff have concluded that this mission should and will take about one year .
second , the risks to our troops will be minimized .
american troops will take their orders from the american general who commands nato .
they will be heavily armed and thoroughly trained .
by making an overwhelming show of force , they will lessen the need to use force .
but unlike the u. n. forces , they will have the authority to respond immediately , and the training and the equipment to respond with overwhelming force to any threat to their own safety or any violations of the military provisions of the peace agreement .
if the nato plan meets with my approval i will immediately send it to congress and request its support .
i will also authorize the participation of a small number of american troops in a nato advance mission that will lay the groundwork for ifor , starting sometime next week .
they will establish headquarters and set up the sophisticated communication systems that must be in place before nato can send in its troops , tanks , and trucks to bosnia .
the implementation force itself would begin deploying in bosnia in the days following the formal signature of the peace agreement in mid - december .
the international community will help to implement arms control provisions of the agreement so that future hostilities are less likely and armaments are limited , while the world community , the united states and others , will also make sure that the bosnian federation has the means to defend itself once ifor withdraws .
ifor will not be a part of this effort .
civilian agencies from around the world will begin a separate program of humanitarian relief and reconstruction , principally paid for by our european allies and other interested countries .
this effort is also absolutely essential to making the peace endure .
it will bring the people of bosnia the food , shelter , clothing , and medicine so many have been denied for so long .
it will help them to rebuild -- to rebuild their roads and schools , their power plants and hospitals , their factories and shops .
it will reunite children with their parents and families with their homes .
it will allow the bosnians freely to choose their own leaders .
it will give all the people of bosnia a much greater stake in peace than war , so that peace takes on a life and a logic of its own .
in bosnia we can and will succeed because our mission is clear and limited , and our troops are strong and very well - prepared .
but my fellow americans , no deployment of american troops is risk - free , and this one may well involve casualties .
there may be accidents in the field or incidents with people who have not given up their hatred .
i will take every measure possible to minimize these risks , but we must be prepared for that possibility .
as president my most difficult duty is to put the men and women who volunteer to serve our nation in harm 's way when our interests and values demand it .
i assume full responsibility for any harm that may come to them .
but anyone contemplating any action that would endanger our troops should know this : america protects its own .
anyone -- anyone who takes on our troops will suffer the consequences .
we will fight fire with fire and then some .
after so much bloodshed and loss , after so many outrageous acts of inhuman brutality , it will take an extraordinary effort of will for the people of bosnia to pull themselves from their past and start building a future of peace .
but with our leadership and the commitment of our allies , the people of bosnia can have the chance to decide their future in peace .
they have a chance to remind the world that just a few short years ago the mosques and churches of sarajevo were a shining symbol of multiethnic tolerance , that bosnia once found unity in its diversity .
indeed , the cemetery in the center of the city was just a few short years ago a magnificent stadium which hosted the olympics , our universal symbol of peace and harmony .
bosnia can be that kind of place again .
we must not turn our backs on bosnia now .
and so i ask all americans , and i ask every member of congress , democrat and republican alike , to make the choice for peace .
in the choice between peace and war , america must choose peace .
my fellow americans , i ask you to think just for a moment about this century that is drawing to close and the new one that will soon begin .
because previous generations of americans stood up for freedom and because we continue to do so , the american people are more secure and more prosperous .
and all around the world , more people than ever before live in freedom .
more people than ever before are treated with dignity .
more people than ever before can hope to build a better life .
that is what america 's leadership is all about .
we know that these are the blessings of freedom .
and america has always been freedom 's greatest champion .
if we continue to do everything we can to share these blessings with people around the world , if we continue to be leaders for peace , then the next century can be the greatest time our nation has ever known .
a few weeks ago , i was privileged to spend some time with his holiness , pope john paul ii , when he came to america .
at the very end of our meeting , the pope looked at me and said , " i have lived through most of this century .
i remember that it began with a war in sarajevo .
mr. president , you must not let it end with a war in sarajevo . "
in bosnia , this terrible war has challenged our interests and troubled our souls .
thankfully , we can do something about it .
i say again , our mission will be clear , limited , and achievable .
the people of bosnia , our nato allies , and people all around the world are now looking to america for leadership .
so let us lead .
that is our responsibility as americans .
goodnight , and god bless america .

thank you very much .
i 'm delighted to see all of you here .
i thank speaker foley and the republican leader , bob michel , for joining us today .
there are so many people to thank , and the vice president did a marvelous job .
i do want to mention , if i might , just three others : laura tyson , the chair of the council of economic advisers ; bob rubin , head of my national economic team ; and one republican member of the house that was n't mentioned , congressman david dreier , who went with me on a rainy day to louisiana to campaign for nafta .
there are many others that i might mention , but i thank all of you for what you have done .
i also ca n't help but note that in spite of all the rest of our efforts , there was that magic moment on larry king , which made a lot of difference .
and i thank the vice president for that and for so much else .
in the campaign , when we decided to come out for nafta , he was a strong supporter of that position in our personal meetings , long before we knew whether we would even be here or not .
i also would be remiss if i did not personally thank both mickey kantor and mack mclarty for the work they did , especially in the closing days with the mexican trade representatives and the mexican government .
i 'd also like to web come here the representatives from mexico and canada and tell them they are , in fact , welcome here .
they are our partners in the future that we are trying to make together .
i want to say a special word of thanks to the cabinet because we have tried to do something that i have not always seen in the past .
and we try to get all of our departments and all of our cabinet leaders to work together on all the things that we all care about .
and a lot of them , therefore , bad to take a lot of personal time and business time away from their very busy schedules to do this .
i thank the former leaders of our government that were mentioned and our military .
i ca n't help but noting , since general powell is here , that every senior military officer with whom i spoke about nafta was perhaps -- they were as a group perhaps the most intensely supportive of any group i spoke with .
and i think it is because they have in their bones the experience of the world of the last several decades .
and they knew we could not afford to turn away from our leadership responsibilities and our constructive involvement in the world .
and many of them , of course , still in uniform , were not permitted to say that in public and should not have been .
but i think i can say that today i was profoundly personally moved by the remarks that they made .
i do want to say , also , a special word of thanks to all the citizens who helped us , the business leaders , the labor folks , the environmental people who came out and worked through this - many of them at great criticism , particularly in the environmental movement -- and some of the working people who helped it .
and a group that was quite pivotal to our success that i want to acknowledge specifically are the small business people , many of whom got themselves organized and came forward and tried to help us .
they made a real difference .
and they 've been mentioned , but i could n't let this moment go by without thanking my good friend bill daley and congressman bill frenzel for their work in helping to mobilize this effort .
congressman frenzel wrote me a great letter the other day and sent me one of his famous doodles that he doodled around the nafta legislation , which i am now having framed .
but they sort of represented the bipartisan spirit that encaptured the congress , encaptured the country in the cause to change .
i hope that we can have more than that in the days and months and years ahead .
it was a very fine thing .
this whole issue turned out to be a defining moment for our nation .
i spoke with one of the folks who was in the reception just a few moments ago who told me that he was in china watching the vote on international television when it was taken .
and be said you would have had to be there to understand how important this was to the rest of the world , not because of the terms of nafta , which basically is a trade agreement between the united states , mexico , and canada , but because it became a symbolic struggle for the spirit of our country and for how we would approach this very difficult and rapidly changing world dealing with our own considerable challenges here at home .
i believe we have made a decision now that will permit us to create an economic order in the world that will promote more growth , more equality , better preservation of the environment , and a greater possibility of world peace .
we are on the verge of a global economic expansion that is sparked by the fact that the united states lit this critical moment decided that we would compete , not retreat .
in a few moments , i will sign the north american free trade act into law .
nafta will tear clown trade barriers between our three nations .
it will create the world 's largest trade zone and create 200,000 jobs in this country by 1995 alone .
the environmental and labor side agreements negotiated by our administration will make this agreement a force for social progress as well as economic growth .
already the confidence we 've displayed by ratifying nafta has begun to bear fruit .
we are now making real progress toward a worldwide trade agreement so significant that it could make the material gains of nafta for our country look small by comparison .
today we have the chance to do what our parents did before us .
we have the opportunity to remake the world .
for this new era , our national security we now know will be determined as much by our ability to pull down foreign trade barriers as by our ability to breach distant ramparts .
once again , we are leading .
and in so doing , we are rediscovering a fundamental truth about ourselves : when we lead , we build security , we build prosperity for our own people .
we 've learned this lesson the hard way .
twice before in this century , we have been forced to define our role in the world .
after world war i we turned inward , building walls of protectionism around our nation .
the result was a great depression and ultimately another horrible world war .
after the second world war , we took a different course : we reached outward .
gifted leaders of both political parties built a new order based on collective security and expanded trade .
they created a foundation of stability and created in the process the conditions which led to the explosion of the great american middle class , one of the true economic miracles in the whole history of civilization .
their statecraft stands to this day : the imf and the world bank , gatt , and nato .
in this very auditorium in 1949 , president harry truman signed one of the charter documents of this golden era of american leadership , the north atlantic treaty that created nato . "
in this pact we hope to create a shield against aggression and the fear of aggression , " told his audience , " a bulwark which will permit us to get on with the real business of government and society , the business of achieving a fuller and happier life for our citizens . "
now , the institutions built by truman and acheson , by marshall and vandenberg , have accomplished their task .
the cold war is over .
the grim certitude of the contest with communism has been replaced by the exuberant uncertainty of international economic competition .
and the great question of this day is how to ensure security for our people at a time when change is the only constant .
make no mistake , the global economy with all of its promise and perils is now the central fact of life for hard - working americans .
it has enriched the lives of millions of americans .
but for too many those same winds of change have worn away at file basis of their security .
for two decades , most people have worked harder for less .
seemingly secure jobs have been lost .
and while america once again is the most productive nation on earth , this productivity itself holds the seeds of further insecurity .
after all , productivity means the same people can produce more or , very often , that fewer people can produce more .
this is the world we face .
we can not stop global change .
we can not repeal the international economic competition that is everywhere .
we can only harness the energy to our benefit .
now we must recognize that the only way for a wealthy nation to grow richer is to export , to simply find new customers for the products and services it makes .
that , my fellow americans , is the decision the congress made when they voted to ratify nafta .
i am gratified with the work that congress has done this year , bringing the deficit down and keeping interest rates down , getting housing starts and new jobs going upward .
but we know that over the long rim , our ability to have our internal economic policies work for the benefit of our people requires us to have external economic policies that permit productivity to find expression not simply in higher incomes for our businesses but in more jobs and higher incomes for our people .
that means more customers .
there is no other way , not for the united states or for europe or for japan or for any other wealthy nation in the world .
that is why i am gratified that we had such a good meeting after the nafta vote in the house with the asian - pacific leaders in washington .
i am gratified that , as vice president gore and chief of staff mack mclarty announced 2 weeks ago when they met with president salinas , next year the nations of this hemisphere will gather in an economic summit that will plan how to extend the benefits of trade to the emerging market democracies of all the americas .
and now i am pleased that we have the opportunity to secure the biggest breakthrough of all .
negotiators from 112 nations are seeking to conclude negotiations on a new round of the general agreement on tariffs and trade ; a historic world , de trade pact , one that would spur a global economic boon , is now within our grasp .
let me be clear .
we can not , nor should we , settle for a bad gatt agreement .
but we will not flag in our efforts to secure a good one in these closing days .
we are prepared to make our contributions to the success of this negotiation , but we insist that other nations do their part as well .
we must not squander this opportunity .
i call on all the nations of the world to seize this moment and close the deal on a strong gatt agreement within the next week .
i say to everyone , even to our negotiators : do n't rest .
do n't sleep .
close the deal .
i told mickey kantor the other day that we rewarded his laborious effort on nafta with a vacation at the gatt talks .
my fellow americans , bit by bit all these things are creating the conditions of a sustained global expansion .
as significant as they are , our goals must be more ambitious .
the united states must seek nothing less than a new trading system that benefits all nations through robust commerce but that protects our middle class and gives other nations a chance to grow one , that lifts workers and the environment up without dragging people down , that seeks to ensure that our policies reflect our values .
our agenda must , therefore , be far reaching .
we are determining that dynamic trade can not lead to environmental despoliation .
we will seek new institutional arrangements to ensure that trade leaves the world cleaner than before .
we will press for workers in all countries to secure rights that we now take for granted , to organize and earn a decent living .
we will insist that expanded trade be fair to our businesses and to our regions .
no country should use cartels , subsidies , or rules of entry to keep our products off its shelves .
and we must see to it that our citizens have the personal security to confidently participate in this new era .
every worker must receive the education and training he or she needs to reap the rewards of international competition rather than to bear its burdens .
next year , our administration will propose comprehensive legislation to transform our unemployment system into a reemployment and job retraining system for the 21st century .
and above all , i say to you we must seek to reconstruct the broad - based political coalition for expanded trade .
for decades , working men and women and their representatives supported policies that brought us prosperity and security .
that was because we recognized that expanded trade benefited all of us but that we have an obligation to protect those workers who do bear the brunt of competition by giving them a chance to be retrained and to go on to a new and different and , ultimately , more secure and more rewarding way of work .
in recent years , this social contract has been sundered .
it can not continue .
when i affix my signature to the nafta legislation a few moments from now , i do so with this pledge : to the men and women of our country who were afraid of these changes and found in their opposition to nafta an expression of that fear -- what i thought was a wrong expression and what i know was a wrong expression but nonetheless represented legitimate fears -- the gains from this agreement will be your gains , too .
i ask those who opposed nafta to work with us to guarantee that the labor and side agreements are enforced , and i call on all of us who believe in nafta to join with me to urge the congress to create the world 's best worker training and retraining system .
we owe it to the business community as well as to the working men and women of this country .
it means greater productivity , lower unemployment , greater worker efficiency , and higher wages and greater security for our people .
we have to do that .
we seek a new and more open global trading system not for its own sake but for our own sake .
good jobs , rewarding careers , broadened horizons for the middle class americans can only be secured by expanding exports and global growth .
for too long our step has been unsteady as the ground has shifted beneath our feet .
today , as i sign the north american free trade agreement into law and call for further progress on gatt , i believe we have found our footing .
and i ask all of you to be steady , to recognize that there is no turning back from the world of today and tomorrow .
we must face the challenges , embrace them with confidence , deal with the problems honestly and openly , and make this world work for all of us .
america is where it should be , in the lead , setting the pace , showing the confidence that all of us need to face tomorrow .
we are ready to compete , and we can win .
thank you very much .

my fellow americans : 
 today i want to talk with you about our nation 's military involvement in somalia .
a year ago , we all watched with horror as somali children and their families lay dying by the tens of thousands , dying the slow , agonizing death of starvation , a starvation brought on not only by drought , but also by the anarchy that then prevailed in that country .
this past weekend we all reacted with anger and horror as an armed somali gang desecrated the bodies of our american soldiers and displayed a captured american pilot , all of them soldiers who were taking part in an international effort to end the starvation of the somali people themselves .
these tragic events raise hard questions about our effort in somalia .
why are we still there ?
what are we trying to accomplish ?
how did a humanitarian mission turn violent ?
and when will our people come home ?
these questions deserve straight answers .
let 's start by remembering why our troops went into somalia in the first place .
we went because only the united states could help stop one of the great human tragedies of this time .
a third of a million people had died of starvation and disease .
twice that many more were at risk of dying .
meanwhile , tons of relief supplies piled up in the capital of mogadishu because a small number of somalis stopped food from reaching their own countrymen .
our conscience said , enough .
in our nation 's best tradition , we took action with bipartisan support .
president .
bush sent in 28,000 american troops as part of a united nations humanitarian mission .
our troops created a secure environment so that food and medicine could get through .
we .
saved close to one million lives .
and throughout most of somalia , everywhere but in mogadishu , life began returning to normal .
crops are growing .
markets are reopening .
so are schools and hospitals .
nearly a million somalis still depend completely on relief supplies , but at least the starvation is gone .
and none of this would have happened without american leadership and america 's troops .
until june , things went well , with little violence .
the united states reduced our troop presence from 28,000 down to less than 5,000 , with other nations picking up where we left off .
but then in june , the people who caused much of the problem in the beginning started attacking american , pakistani , and other troops who were there just to keep the peace .
rather than participate in building the peace with others , these people sought to fight and to disrupt , even if it means returning somalia to anarchy and mass famine .
and make no mistake about it , if we were to leave somalia tomorrow , other nations would leave , too .
chaos would resume .
the relief effort would stop , and starvation soon would return .
that knowledge has led us to continue our mission .
it is not our job to rebuild somalia 's society or even to create a political process that can allow somalia 's clans to live and work in peace .
the somalis must do that for themselves .
the united nations and many african states are more than willing to help .
but we , we in the united states must decide whether we will give them enough time to have a reasonable chance to succeed .
we started this mission for the right reasons , and we 're going to finish it in the right way .
in a sense , we came to somalia to rescue innocent people in a burning house .
we 've nearly put the fire out , but some smoldering embers remain .
if we leave them now , those embers will reignite into flames , and people will die again .
if we stay a short while longer and do the right things , we 've got a reasonable chance of cooling off the embers and getting other firefighters to take our place .
we also have to recognize that we can not leave now and still have all our troops present and accounted for .
and i want you to know that i am determined to work for the security of those americans missing or held captive .
anyone holding an american fight now should understand , above all else , that we will hold them strictly responsible for our soldiers ' well - being .
we expected them to be well - treated , and we expect them to be released .
so now we face a choice .
do we leave when the job gets tough , or when the job is well done ?
do we invite a return of mass suffering , or do we leave in a way that gives the somalis a decent chance to survive ?
recently , general colin powell said this about our choices in somalia : " because things get difficult , you do n't cut and rim .
you work the problem and try to find a correct solution . "
i want to bring our troops home from somalia .
before the events of this week , as i said , we had already reduced the number of our troops there from 28,000 to less than 5,000 .
we must complete that withdrawal soon , and i will .
but we must also leave on our terms .
we must do it right .
and here is what i intend to do .
this past week 's events make it clear that even as we prepare to withdraw from somalia , we need more strength there .
we need more armor , more air power , to ensure that our people are safe and that we can do our job .
today i have ordered 1,700 additional army troops and 104 additional armored vehicles to somalia to protect our troops and to complete our mission .
i 've also ordered an aircraft carrier and two amphibious groups with 3,600 combat marines to be stationed offshore .
these forces will be under american command .
their mission , what i am asking these young americans to do , is the following : 
 first , they are there to protect our troops and our bases .
we did not go to somalia with a military purpose .
we never wanted to kill anyone .
but those who attack our soldiers must know they will pay a very heavy price .
second , they are there to keep open and secure the roads , the port , and the lines of communication that are essential for the united nations and the relief workers to keep the flow of food and supplies and people moving freely throughout the country so that starvation and anarchy do not return .
third , they are there to keep the pressure on those who cut off relief supplies and attacked our people , not to personalize the conflict but to prevent a return to anarchy .
fourth , through their pressure and their presence , our troops will help to make it possible for the somali people , working with others , to reach agreements among themselves so that they can solve their problems and survive when we leave .
that is our mission .
i am proposing this plan because it will let us finish leaving somalia on our own terms and without destroying all that two administrations have accomplished there .
for , if we were to leave today , we know what would happen .
within months , somali children again would be dying in the streets .
our own credibility with friends and allies would be severely damaged .
our leadership in world affairs would be undermined at the very time when people are looking to america to help promote peace and freedom in the post - cold - war world .
and all around the world , aggressors , thugs , and terrorists will conclude that the best way to get us to change our policies is to kill our people .
it would be open season on americans .
that is why i am committed to getting this job done in somalia , not only quickly but also effectively .
to do that , i am taking steps to ensure troops from other nations are ready to take the place of our own soldiers .
we 've already withdrawn some 20,000 troops , and more than that number have replaced them from over two dozen other nations .
now we will intensify efforts to have other countries deploy more troops to somalia to assure that security will remain when we 're gone .
and we 'll complete the replacement of u. s. military logistics personnel with civilian contractors who can provide the same support to the united nations .
while we 're taking military steps to protect our own people and to help the u. n. maintain a secure environment , we must pursue new diplomatic efforts to help the somalis find a political solution to their problems .
that is the only kind of outcome that can endure .
for fundamentally , the solution to somalia 's problems is not a military one , it is political .
leaders of the neighboring african states , such as ethiopia and eritrea , have offered to take the lead in efforts to build a settlement among the somali people that can preserve order and security .
i have directed my representatives to pursue such efforts vigorously .
and i 've asked ambassador bob oakley , who served effectively in two administrations as our representative in somalia , to travel again to the region immediately to advance this process .
obviously , even then there is no guarantee that somalia will rid itself of violence and suffering .
but at least we will have given somalia a reasonable chance .
this week some 15,000 somalis took to the streets to express sympathy for our losses , to thank us for our effort .
most somalis are not hostile to us but grateful .
and they want to use this opportunity to rebuild their country .
it is my judgment and that of my military advisers that we may need up to 6 months to complete these steps and to conduct an orderly withdrawal .
we 'll do what we can to complete the mission before then .
all american troops will be out of somalia no later than march the 31st , except for a few hundred support personnel in noncombat roles .
if we take these steps , if we take the time to do the job right , i am convinced we will have lived up to the responsibilities of american leadership in the word .
and we will have proved that we are committed to addressing the new problems of a new era .
when out troops in somalia came under fire this last weekend , we witnessed a dramatic example of the heroic ethic of our american military .
when the first black hawk helicopter was downed this weekend , the other american troops did n't retreat although they could have .
some 90 of them formed a perimeter around the helicopter , and they held that ground under intensely heavy fire .
they stayed with their comrades .
that 's the kind of soldiers they are .
that 's the kind of people we are .
so let us finish the work we set out to do .
let us demonstrate to the world , as generations of americans have done before us , that when americans take on a challenge , they do the job right .
let me express my thanks and my gratitude and my profound sympathy to the families of the young americans who were killed in somalia .
my message to you is , your country is grateful , and so is the rest of the word , and so are the vast majority of the somali people .
our mission from this day forward is to increase our strength , do our job , bring our soldiers out , and bring them home .
thank you , and god bless america .

mr. speaker , mr. vice president , members of congress , honored guests , my fellow americans : tonight , i have the honor of reporting to you on the state of the union .
let me begin by saluting the new speaker of the house , and thanking him , especially tonight , for extending an invitation to two guests sitting in the gallery with mrs. hastert : lyn gibson and wenling chestnut are the widows of the two brave capitol hill police officers who gave their lives to defend freedom 's house .
mr. speaker , at your swearing - in , you asked us all to work together in a spirit of civility and bipartisanship .
mr. speaker , let 's do exactly that .
tonight , i stand before you to report that america has created the longest peacetime economic expansion in our history with nearly 18 million new jobs , wages rising at more than twice the rate of inflation , the highest homeownership in history , the smallest welfare rolls in 30 years , and the lowest peacetime unemployment since 1957 .
for the first time in three decades , the budget is balanced .
from a deficit of $ 290 billion in 1992 , we had a surplus of $ 70 billion last year .
and now we are on course for budget surpluses for the next 25 years .
thanks to the pioneering leadership of all of you , we have the lowest violent crime rate in a quarter century and the cleanest environment in a quarter century .
america is a strong force for peace from northern ireland to bosnia to the middle east .
thanks to the leadership of vice president gore , we have a government for the information age .
once again , a government that is a progressive instrument of the common good , rooted in our oldest values of opportunity , responsibility , and community ; devoted to fiscal responsibility ; determined to give our people the tools they need to make the most of their own lives in the 21st century ; a 21st century government for 21st century america .
my fellow americans , i stand before you tonight to report that the state of our union is strong .
now , america is working again .
the promise of our future is limitless .
but we can not realize that promise if we allow the hum of our prosperity to lull us into complacency .
how we fare as a nation far into the 21st century depends upon what we do as a nation today .
so with our budget surplus growing , our economy expanding , our confidence rising , now is the moment for this generation to meet our historic responsibility to the 21st century .
our fiscal discipline gives us an unsurpassed opportunity to address a remarkable new challenge , the aging of america .
with the number of elderly americans set to double by 2030 , the baby boom will become a senior boom .
so first , and above all , we must save social security for the 21st century .
early in this century , being old meant being poor .
when president roosevelt created social security , thousands wrote to thank him for eliminating what one woman called " the stark terror of penniless , helpless old age . "
even today , without social security , half our nation 's elderly would be forced into poverty .
today , social security is strong .
but by 2013 , payroll taxes will no longer be sufficient to cover monthly payments .
by 2032 , the trust fund will be exhausted and social security will be unable to pay the full benefits older americans have been promised .
the best way to keep social security a rock - solid guarantee is not to make drastic cuts in benefits , not to raise payroll tax rates , not to drain resources from social security in the name of saving it .
instead , i propose that we make the historic decision to invest the surplus to save social security .
specifically , i propose that we commit 60 percent of the budget surplus for the next 15 years to social security , investing a small portion in the private sector , just as any private or state government pension would do .
this will earn a higher return and keep social security sound for 55 years .
but we must aim higher .
we should put social security on a sound footing for the next 75 years .
we should reduce poverty among elderly women , who are nearly twice as likely to be poor as our other seniors .
and we should eliminate the limits on what seniors on social security can earn .
now , these changes will require difficult but fully achievable choices over and above the dedication of the surplus .
they must be made on a bipartisan basis .
they should be made this year .
so let me say to you tonight , i reach out my hand to all of you in both houses , in both parties , and ask that we join together in saying to the american people : we will save social security now .
now , last year we wisely reserved all of the surplus until we knew what it would take to save social security .
again , i say , we should n't spend any of it , not any of it , until after social security is truly saved .
first things first .
second , once we have saved social security , we must fulfill our obligation to save and improve medicare .
already , we have extended the life of the medicare trust fund by 10 years , but we should extend it for at least another decade .
tonight , i propose that we use one out of every $ 6 in the surplus for the next 15 years to guarantee the soundness of medicare until the year 2020 .
but again , we should aim higher .
we must be willing to work in a bipartisan way and look at new ideas , including the upcoming report of the bipartisan medicare commission .
if we work together , we can secure medicare for the next two decades and cover the greatest growing need of seniors , affordable prescription drugs .
third , we must help all americans , from their first day on the job to save , to invest , to create wealth .
from its beginning , americans have supplemented social security with private pensions and savings .
yet , today , millions of people retire with little to live on other than social security .
americans living longer than ever simply must save more than ever .
therefore , in addition to saving social security and medicare , i propose a new pension initiative for retirement security in the 21st century .
i propose that we use a little over 11 percent of the surplus to establish universal savings accounts -- usa accounts -- to give all americans the means to save .
with these new accounts americans can invest as they choose and receive funds to match a portion of their savings , with extra help for those least able to save .
usa accounts will help all americans to share in our nation 's wealth and to enjoy a more secure retirement .
i ask you to support them .
fourth , we must invest in long - term care .
i propose a tax credit of $ 1,000 for the aged , ailing or disabled , and the families who care for them .
long - term care will become a bigger and bigger challenge with the aging of america , and we must do more to help our families deal with it .
i was born in 1946 , the first year of the baby boom .
i can tell you that one of the greatest concerns of our generation is our absolute determination not to let our growing old place an intolerable burden on our children and their ability to raise our grandchildren .
our economic success and our fiscal discipline now give us an opportunity to lift that burden from their shoulders , and we should take it .
saving social security , medicare , creating usa accounts : this is the right way to use the surplus .
if we do so -- if we do so -- we will still have resources to meet critical needs in education and defense .
and i want to point out that this proposal is fiscally sound .
listen to this : if we set aside 60 percent of the surplus for social security and 16 percent for medicare , over the next 15 years , that saving will achieve the lowest level of publicly held debt since right before world war i , in 1917 .
so with these four measures -- saving social security , strengthening medicare , establishing the usa accounts , supporting long - term care -- we can begin to meet our generation 's historic responsibility to establish true security for 21st century seniors .
now , there are more children from more diverse backgrounds in our public schools than at any time in our history .
their education must provide the knowledge and nurture the creativity that will allow our entire nation to thrive in the new economy .
today we can say something we could n't say six years ago : with tax credits and more affordable student loans , with more work - study grants and more pell grants , with education iras and the new hope scholarship tax cut that more than five million americans will receive this year , we have finally opened the doors of college to all americans .
with our support , nearly every state has set higher academic standards for public schools , and a voluntary national test is being developed to measure the progress of our students .
with over $ 1 billion in discounts available this year , we are well on our way to our goal of connecting every classroom and library to the internet .
last fall , you passed our proposal to start hiring 100,000 new teachers to reduce class size in the early grades .
now i ask you to finish the job .
you know , our children are doing better .
sat scores are up ; math scores have risen in nearly all grades .
but there 's a problem .
while our 4th graders outperform their peers in other countries in math and science , our 8th graders are around average , and our 12th graders rank near the bottom .
we must do better .
now , each year the national government invests more than $ 15 billion in our public schools .
i believe we must change the way we invest that money , to support what works and to stop supporting what does not work .
first , later this year , i will send to congress a plan that , for the first time , holds states and school districts accountable for progress and rewards them for results .
my " education accountability act " will require every school district receiving federal help to take the following five steps .
first , all schools must end social promotion .
no child should graduate from high school with a diploma he or she ca n't read .
we do our children no favors when we allow them to pass from grade to grade without mastering the material .
but we ca n't just hold students back because the system fails them .
so my balanced budget triples the funding for summer school and after - school programs , to keep a million children learning .
now , if you doubt this will work , just look at chicago , which ended social promotion and made summer school mandatory for those who do n't master the basics .
math and reading scores are up three years running with some of the biggest gains in some of the poorest neighborhoods .
it will work , and we should do it .
second , all states and school districts must turn around their worst - performing schools or shut them down .
that 's the policy established in north carolina by governor jim hunt .
north carolina made the biggest gains in test scores in the nation last year .
our budget includes $ 200 million to help states turn around their own failing schools .
third , all states and school districts must be held responsible for the quality of their teachers .
the great majority of our teachers do a fine job .
but in too many schools , teachers do n't have college majors -- or even minors -- in the subjects they teach .
new teachers should be required to pass performance exams , and all teachers should know the subjects they 're teaching .
this year 's balanced budget contains resources to help them reach higher standards .
and to attract talented young teachers to the toughest assignments , i recommend a sixfold increase in our program for college scholarships for students who commit to teach in the inner cities and isolated rural areas and in indian communities .
let us bring excellence in every part of america .
fourth , we must empower parents with more information and more choices .
in too many communities , it 's easier to get information on the quality of the local restaurants than on the quality of the local schools .
every school district should issue report cards on every school .
and parents should be given more choices in selecting their public school .
when i became president , there was just one independent public charter school in all america .
with our support , on a bipartisan basis , today there are 1,100 .
my budget assures that early in the next century , there will be 3,000 .
fifth , to assure that our classrooms are truly places of learning and to respond to what teachers have been asking us to do for years , we should say that all states and school districts must both adopt and implement sensible discipline policies .
now , let 's do one more thing for our children .
today , too many schools are so old they 're falling apart , or so overcrowded students are learning in trailers .
last fall , congress missed the opportunity to change that .
this year , with 53 million children in our schools , congress must not miss that opportunity again .
i ask you to help our communities build or modernize 5,000 schools .
if we do these things -- end social promotion ; turn around failing schools ; build modern ones ; support qualified teachers ; promote innovation , competition and discipline -- then we will begin to meet our generation 's historic responsibility to create 21st century schools .
now , we also have to do more to support the millions of parents who give their all every day at home and at work .
the most basic tool of all is a decent income .
so let 's raise the minimum wage by a dollar an hour over the next two years .
and let 's make sure that women and men get equal pay for equal work by strengthening enforcement of equal pay laws .
that was encouraging , you know .
there was more balance on the seesaw .
i like that .
let 's give them a hand .
that 's great .
working parents also need quality child care .
so again this year , i ask congress to support our plan for tax credits and subsidies for working families , for improved safety and quality , for expanded after - school programs .
and our plan also includes a new tax credit for stay - at - home parents , too .
they need support , as well .
parents should never have to worry about choosing between their children and their work .
now , the family and medical leave act , the very first bill i signed into law , has now , since 1993 , helped millions and millions of americans to care for a newborn baby or an ailing relative without risking their jobs .
i think it 's time , with all the evidence that it has been so little burdensome to employers , to extend family leave to 10 million more americans working for smaller companies .
and i hope you will support it .
finally on the matter of work , parents should never have to face discrimination in the workplace .
so i want to ask congress to prohibit companies from refusing to hire or promote workers simply because they have children .
that is not right .
america 's families deserve the world 's best medical care .
thanks to bipartisan federal support for medical research , we are now on the verge of new treatments to prevent or delay diseases from parkinson 's to alzheimer 's , to arthritis to cancer .
but as we continue our advances in medical science , we ca n't let our medical system lag behind .
managed care has literally transformed medicine in america , driving down costs but threatening to drive down quality as well .
i think we ought to say to every american : you should have the right to know all your medical options , not just the cheapest .
if you need a specialist , you should have a right to see one .
you have a right to the nearest emergency care if you 're in an accident .
these are things that we ought to say .
and i think we ought to say : you should have a right to keep your doctor during a period of treatment , whether it 's a pregnancy or a chemotherapy treatment , or anything else .
i believe this .
now , i 've ordered these rights to be extended to the 85 million americans served by medicare , medicaid , and other federal health programs .
but only congress can pass a patients ' bill of rights for all americans .
now , last year , congress missed that opportunity , and we must not miss that opportunity again .
for the sake of our families , i ask us to join together across party lines and pass a strong , enforceable patients ' bill of rights .
as more of our medical records are stored electronically , the threats to all our privacy increase .
because congress has given me the authority to act if it does not do so by august , one way or another , we can all say to the american people , " we will protect the privacy of medical records , and we will do it this year . "
now two years ago , the congress extended health coverage to up to five million children .
now we should go beyond that .
we should make it easier for small businesses to offer health insurance .
we should give people between the ages of 55 and 65 who lose their health insurance the chance to buy into medicare .
and we should continue to ensure access to family planning .
no one should have to choose between keeping health care and taking a job .
and therefore , i especially ask you tonight to join hands to pass the landmark bipartisan legislation , proposed by senators kennedy and jeffords , roth , and moynihan to allow people with disabilities to keep their health insurance when they go to work .
we need to enable our public hospitals , our community , our university health centers to provide basic , affordable care for all the millions of working families who do n't have any insurance .
they do a lot of that today , but much more can be done .
and my balanced budget makes a good down payment toward that goal .
i hope you will think about them and support that provision .
let me say we must step up our efforts to treat and prevent mental illness .
no american should ever be afraid -- ever -- to address this disease .
this year , we will host a white house conference on mental health .
with sensitivity , commitment , and passion , tipper gore is leading our efforts here , and i 'd like to thank her for what she 's done .
thank you .
thank you .
as everyone knows , our children are targets of a massive media campaign to hook them on cigarettes .
now , i ask this congress to resist the tobacco lobby , to reaffirm the fda 's authority to protect our children from tobacco , and to hold tobacco companies accountable while protecting tobacco farmers .
smoking has cost taxpayers hundreds of billions of dollars under medicare and other programs .
you know , the states have been right about this : taxpayers should n't pay for the cost of lung cancer , emphysema , and other smoking - related illnesses ; the tobacco companies should .
so tonight i announce that the justice department is preparing a litigation plan to take the tobacco companies to court and , with the funds we recover , to strengthen medicare .
now , if we act in these areas -- minimum wage , family leave , child care , health care , the safety of our children -- then we will begin to meet our generation 's historic responsibilities to strengthen our families for the 21st century .
today , america is the most dynamic , competitive , job - creating economy in history .
but we can do even better in building a 21st century economy that embraces all americans .
today 's income gap is largely a skills gap .
last year , the congress passed a law enabling workers to get a skills grant to choose the training they need .
and i applaud all of you here who were part of that .
this year , i recommend a five - year commitment to the new system so that we can provide , over the next five years , appropriate training opportunities for all americans who lose their jobs and expand rapid response teams to help all towns which have been really hurt when businesses close .
i hope you will support this .
also , i ask your support for a dramatic increase in federal support for adult literacy , to mount a national campaign aimed at helping the millions and millions of working people who still read at less than a fifth grade level .
we need to do this .
here 's some good news : in the past six years , we have cut the welfare rolls nearly in half .
you can all be proud of that .
two years ago , from this podium , i asked five companies to lead a national effort to hire people off welfare .
tonight , our welfare to work partnership includes 10,000 companies who have hired hundreds of thousands of people .
and our balanced budget will help another 200,000 people move to the dignity and pride of work .
i hope you will support it .
we must do more to bring the spark of private enterprise to every corner of america , to build a bridge from wall street to appalachia to the mississippi delta to our native american communities , with more support for community development banks , for empowerment zones , for 100,000 more vouchers for affordable housing .
and i ask congress to support our bold new plan to help businesses raise up to $ 15 billion in private sector capital to bring jobs and opportunities to our inner cities and rural areas with tax credits , loan guarantees , including the new " american private investment company , " modeled on the overseas private investment company .
for years and years and years , we 've had this opic , this overseas private investment corporation , because we knew we had untapped markets overseas .
but our greatest untapped markets are not overseas ; they are right here at home .
and we should go after them .
we must work hard to help bring prosperity back to the family farm .
as this congress knows very well , dropping prices and the loss of foreign markets have devastated too many family farms .
last year , the congress provided substantial assistance to help stave off a disaster in american agriculture .
and i am ready to work with lawmakers of both parties to create a farm safety net that will include crop insurance reform and farm income assistance .
i ask you to join with me and do this .
this should not be a political issue .
everyone knows what an economic problem is going on out there in rural america today , and we need an appropriate means to address it .
we must strengthen our lead in technology .
it was government investment that led to the creation of the internet .
i propose a 28-percent increase in long - term computing research .
we also must be ready for the 21st century from its very first moment , by solving the so - called y2 k computer problem .
we had one member of congress stand up and applaud .
and we may have about that ratio out there applauding at home , in front of their television sets .
but remember , this is a big , big problem .
and we 've been working hard on it .
already , we 've made sure that the social security checks will come on time .
but i want all the folks at home listening to this to know that we need every state and local government , every business , large and small , to work with us to make sure that this y2 k computer bug will be remembered as the last headache of the 20th century , not the first crisis of the 21st .
for our own prosperity , we must support economic growth abroad .
you know , until recently , a third of our economic growth came from exports .
but over the past year and a half , financial turmoil overseas has put that growth at risk .
today , much of the world is in recession , with asia hit especially hard .
this is the most serious financial crisis in half a century .
to meet it , the united states and other nations have reduced interest rates and strengthened the international monetary fund .
and while the turmoil is not over , we have worked very hard with other nations to contain it .
at the same time , we have to continue to work on the long - term project , building a global financial system for the 21st century that promotes prosperity and tames the cycle of boom and bust that has engulfed so much of asia .
this june i will meet with other world leaders to advance this historic purpose , and i ask all of you to support our endeavors .
i also ask you to support creating a freer and fairer trading system for 21st century america .
i 'd like to say something really serious to everyone in this chamber in both parties .
i think trade has divided us , and divided americans outside this chamber , for too long .
somehow we have to find a common ground on which business and workers and environmentalists and farmers and government can stand together .
i believe these are the things we ought to all agree on .
so let me try .
first , we ought to tear down barriers , open markets , and expand trade .
but at the same time , we must ensure that ordinary citizens in all countries actually benefit from trade , a trade that promotes the dignity of work and the rights of workers and protects the environment .
we must insist that international trade organizations be more open to public scrutiny , instead of mysterious , secret things subject to wild criticism .
when you come right down to it , now that the world economy is becoming more and more integrated , we have to do in the world what we spent the better part of this century doing here at home .
we have got to put a human face on the global economy .
we must enforce our trade laws when imports unlawfully flood our nation .
i have already informed the government of japan that if that nation 's sudden surge of steel imports into our country is not reversed , america will respond .
we must help all manufacturers hit hard by the present crisis with loan guarantees and other incentives to increase american exports by nearly $ 2 billion .
i 'd like to believe we can achieve a new consensus on trade , based on these principles .
and i ask the congress again to join me in this common approach and to give the president the trade authority long used and now overdue and necessary to advance our prosperity in the 21st century .
tonight i issue a call to the nations of the world to join the united states in a new round of global trade negotiations to expand exports of services , manufactures , and farm products .
tonight i say we will work with the international labor organization on a new initiative to raise labor standards around the world .
and this year , we will lead the international community to conclude a treaty to ban abusive child labor everywhere in the world .
if we do these things -- invest in our people , our communities , our technology , and lead in the global economy -- then we will begin to meet our historic responsibility to build a 21st century prosperity for america .
you know , no nation in history has had the opportunity and the responsibility we now have to shape a world that is more peaceful , more secure , more free .
all americans can be proud that our leadership helped to bring peace in northern ireland .
all americans can be proud that our leadership has put bosnia on the path to peace .
and with our nato allies , we are pressing the serbian government to stop its brutal repression in kosovo , to bring those responsible to justice , and to give the people of kosovo the self - government they deserve .
all americans can be proud that our leadership renewed hope for lasting peace in the middle east .
some of you were with me last december as we watched the palestinian national council completely renounce its call for the destruction of israel .
now i ask congress to provide resources so that all parties can implement the wye agreement to protect israel 's security , to stimulate the palestinian economy , to support our friends in jordan .
we must not -- we dare not -- let them down .
i hope you will help .
as we work for peace , we must also meet threats to our nation 's security , including increased dangers from outlaw nations and terrorism .
we will defend our security wherever we are threatened , as we did this summer when we struck at osama bin laden 's network of terror .
the bombing of our embassies in kenya and tanzania reminds us again of the risks faced every day by those who represent america to the world .
so let 's give them the support they need , the safest possible workplaces , and the resources they must have so america can continue to lead .
we must work to keep terrorists from disrupting computer networks .
we must work to prepare local communities for biological and chemical emergenices , to support research into vaccines and treatments .
we must increase our efforts to restrain the spread of nuclear weapons and missiles , from korea to india and pakistan .
we must expand our work with russia , ukraine , and other former soviet nations to safeguard nuclear materials and technology so they never fall into the wrong hands .
our balanced budget will increase funding for these critical efforts by almost two - thirds over the next five years .
with russia , we must continue to reduce our nuclear arsenals .
the start ii treaty and the framework we have already agreed to for start iii could cut them by 80 percent from their cold war height .
it 's been two years since i signed the comprehensive test ban treaty .
if we do n't do the right thing , other nations wo n't either .
i ask the senate to take this vital step : approve the treaty now , to make it harder for other nations to develop nuclear arms , and to make sure we can end nuclear testing forever .
for nearly a decade , iraq has defied its obligations to destroy its weapons of terror and the missiles to deliver them .
america will continue to contain saddam , and we will work for the day when iraq has a government worthy of its people .
now , last month , in our action over iraq , our troops were superb .
their mission was so flawlessly executed that we risk taking for granted the bravery and the skill it required .
captain jeff taliaferro , a 10-year veteran of the air force , flew a b-1b bomber over iraq as we attacked saddam 's war machine .
he 's here with us tonight .
i 'd like to ask you to honor him and all the 33,000 men and women of operation desert fox .
captain taliaferro .
it is time to reverse the decline in defense spending that began in 1985 .
since april , together we have added nearly $ 6 billion to maintain our military readiness .
my balanced budget calls for a sustained increase over the next six years for readiness , for modernization , and for pay and benefits for our troops and their families .
we are the heirs of a legacy of bravery represented in every community in america by millions of our veterans .
america 's defenders today still stand ready at a moment 's notice to go where comforts are few and dangers are many , to do what needs to be done as no one else can .
they always come through for america .
we must come through for them .
the new century demands new partnerships for peace and security .
the united nations plays a crucial role , with allies sharing burdens america might otherwise bear alone .
america needs a strong and effective u. n. i want to work with this new congress to pay our dues and our debts .
we must continue to support security and stability in europe and asia , expanding nato and defining its new missions , maintaining our alliance with japan , with korea , with our other asian allies , and engaging china .
in china , last year , i said to the leaders and the people what i 'd like to say again tonight : stability can no longer be bought at the expense of liberty .
but i 'd also like to say again to the american people : it 's important not to isolate china .
the more we bring china into the world , the more the world will bring change and freedom to china .
last spring , with some of you , i traveled to africa , where i saw democracy and reform rising but still held back by violence and disease .
we must fortify african democracy and peace by launching radio democracy for africa , supporting the transition to democracy now beginning to take place in nigeria , and passing the " african trade and development act . "
we must continue to deepen our ties to the americas and the caribbean , our common work to educate children , fight drugs , strengthen democracy and increase trade .
in this hemisphere , every government but one is freely chosen by its people .
we are determined that cuba , too , will know the blessings of liberty .
the american people have opened their hearts and their arms to our central american and caribbean neighbors who have been so devastated by the recent hurricanes .
working with congress , i am committed to help them rebuild .
when the first lady and tipper gore visited the region , they saw thousands of our troops and thousands of american volunteers .
in the dominican republic , hillary helped to rededicate a hospital that had been rebuilt by dominicans and americans , working side - by - side .
with her was someone else who has been very important to the relief efforts .
you know , sports records are made and , sooner or later , they 're broken .
but making other people 's lives better , and showing our children the true meaning of brotherhood -- that lasts forever .
so , for far more than baseball , sammy sosa , you 're a hero in two countries tonight .
thank you .
so i say to all of you , if we do these things -- if we pursue peace , fight terrorism , increase our strength , renew our alliances -- we will begin to meet our generation 's historic responsibility to build a stronger 21st century america in a freer , more peaceful world .
as the world has changed , so have our own communities .
we must make them safer , more livable , and more united .
this year , we will reach our goal of 100,000 community police officers ahead of schedule and under budget .
the brady bill has stopped a quarter million felons , fugitives , and stalkers from buying handguns .
and now , the murder rate is the lowest in 30 years and the crime rate has dropped for six straight years .
tonight i propose a 21st century crime bill to deploy the latest technologies and tactics to make our communities even safer .
our balanced budget will help put up to 50,000 more police on the street in the areas hardest hit by crime and then to equip them with new tools , from crime - mapping computers to digital mug shots .
we must break the deadly cycle of drugs and crime .
our budget expands support for drug testing and treatment , saying to prisoners : if you stay on drugs , you have to stay behind bars ; and to those on parole : if you want to keep your freedom , you must stay free of drugs .
i ask congress to restore the five - day waiting period for buying a handgun and extend the brady bill to prevent juveniles who commit violent crimes from buying a gun .
we must do more to keep our schools the safest places in our communities .
last year , every american was horrified and heartbroken by the tragic killings in jonesboro , paducah , pearl , edinboro , springfield .
we were deeply moved by the courageous parents now working to keep guns out of the hands of children and to make other efforts so that other parents do n't have to live through their loss .
after she lost her daughter , suzann wilson of jonesboro , arkansas , came here to the white house with a powerful plea .
she said , " please , please , for the sake of your children , lock up your guns .
do n't let what happened in jonesboro happen in your town . "
it 's a message she is passionately advocating every day .
suzann is here with us tonight , with the first lady .
i 'd like to thank her for her courage and her commitment .
thank you .
in memory of all the children who lost their lives to school violence , i ask you to strengthen the safe and drug - free school act , to pass legislation to require child trigger locks , to do everything possible to keep our children safe .
a century ago , president theodore roosevelt defined our " great , central task " as " leaving this land even a better land for our descendants than it is for us . "
today , we 're restoring the florida everglades , saving yellowstone , preserving the red rock canyons of utah , protecting california 's redwoods and our precious coasts .
but our most fateful new challenge is the threat of global warming ; 1998 was the warmest year ever recorded .
last year 's heat waves , floods , and storms are but a hint of what future generations may endure if we do not act now .
tonight i propose a new clean air fund to help communities reduce greenhouse and other pollution , and tax incentives and investments to spur clean energy technology .
and i want to work with members of congress in both parties to reward companies that take early , voluntary action to reduce greenhouse gases .
all our communities face a preservation challenge , as they grow and green space shrinks .
seven thousand acres of farmland and open space are lost every day .
in response , i propose two major initiatives : first , a $ 1 billion livability agenda to help communities save open space , ease traffic congestion , and grow in ways that enhance every citizen 's quality of life ; and second , a $ 1 billion lands legacy initiative to preserve places of natural beauty all across america from the most remote wilderness to the nearest city park .
these are truly landmark initiatives , which could not have been developed without the visionary leadership of the vice president , and i want to thank him very much for his commitment here .
now , to get the most out of your community , you have to give something back .
that 's why we created americorps , our national service program that gives today 's generation a chance to serve their communities and earn money for college .
so far , in just four years , 100,000 young americans have built low - income homes with habitat for humanity , helped to tutor children with churches , worked with fema to ease the burden of natural disasters , and performed countless other acts of service that have made america better .
i ask congress to give more young americans the chance to follow their lead and serve america in americorps .
now , we must work to renew our national community as well for the 21st century .
last year the house passed the bipartisan campaign finance reform legislation sponsored by representatives shays and meehan and senators mccain and feingold .
but a partisan minority in the senate blocked reform .
so i 'd like to say to the house : pass it again , quickly .
and i 'd like to say to the senate : i hope you will say yes to a stronger american democracy in the year 2000 .
since 1997 , our initiative on race has sought to bridge the divides between and among our people .
in its report last fall , the initiative 's advisory board found that americans really do want to bring our people together across racial lines .
we know it 's been a long journey .
for some , it goes back to before the beginning of our republic ; for others , back since the civil war ; for others , throughout the 20th century .
but for most of us alive today , in a very real sense , this journey began 43 years ago , when a woman named rosa parks sat down on a bus in alabama and would n't get up .
she 's sitting down with the first lady tonight , and she may get up or not , as she chooses .
we thank her .
thank you , rosa .
we know that our continuing racial problems are aggravated , as the presidential initiative said , by opportunity gaps .
the initiative i 've outlined tonight will help to close them .
but we know that the discrimination gap has not been fully closed either .
discrimination or violence because of race or religion , ancestry or gender , disability or sexual orientation , is wrong , and it ought to be illegal .
therefore , i ask congress to make the " employment non - discrimination act " and the " hate crimes prevention act " the law of the land .
now , since every person in america counts , every american ought to be counted .
we need a census that uses modern scientific methods to do that .
our new immigrants must be part of our one america .
after all , they 're revitalizing our cities ; they 're energizing our culture ; they 're building up our economy .
we have a responsibility to make them welcome here , and they have a responsibility to enter the mainstream of american life .
that means learning english and learning about our democratic system of government .
there are now long waiting lines of immigrants that are trying to do just that .
therefore , our budget significantly expands our efforts to help them meet their responsibility .
i hope you will support it .
whether our ancestors came here on the mayflower , on slave ships , whether they came to ellis island or lax in los angeles , whether they came yesterday or walked this land a thousand years ago , our great challenge for the 21st century is to find a way to be one america .
we can meet all the other challenges if we can go forward as one america .
you know , barely more than 300 days from now , we will cross that bridge into the new millennium .
this is a moment , as the first lady has said , " to honor the past and imagine the future . "
i 'd like to take just a minute to honor her .
for leading our millennium project , for all she 's done for our children , for all she has done in her historic role to serve our nation and our best ideals at home and abroad , i honor her .
last year , i called on congress and every citizen to mark the millennium by saving america 's treasures .
hillary has traveled all across the country to inspire recognition and support for saving places like thomas edison 's invention factory or harriet tubman 's home .
now we have to preserve our treasures in every community .
and tonight , before i close , i want to invite every town , every city , every community to become a nationally recognized " millennium community , " by launching projects that save our history , promote our arts and humanities , prepare our children for the 21st century .
already , the response has been remarkable .
and i want to say a special word of thanks to our private sector partners and to members in congress of both parties for their support .
just one example : because of you , the star - spangled banner will be preserved for the ages .
in ways large and small , as we look to the millennium we are keeping alive what george washington called " the sacred fire of liberty . "
six years ago , i came to office in a time of doubt for america , with our economy troubled , our deficit high , our people divided .
some even wondered whether our best days were behind us .
but across this country , in a thousand neighborhoods , i have seen , even amidst the pain and uncertainty of recession , the real heart and character of america .
i knew then that we americans could renew this country .
tonight , as i deliver the last state of the union address of the 20th century , no one anywhere in the world can doubt the enduring resolve and boundless capacity of the american people to work toward that " more perfect union " of our founders ' dream .
we 're now at the end of a century when generation after generation of americans answered the call to greatness , overcoming depression , lifting up the disposed , bringing down barriers to racial prejudice , building the largest middle class in history , winning two world wars and the long twilight struggle of the cold war .
we must all be profoundly grateful for the magnificent achievement of our forebears in this century .
yet , perhaps , in the daily press of events , in the clash of controversy , we do n't see our own time for what it truly is , a new dawn for america .
a hundred years from tonight , another american president will stand in this place and report on the state of the union .
he -- or she -- he or she will look back on a 21st century shaped in so many ways by the decisions we make here and now .
so let it be said of us then that we were thinking not only of our time but of their time , that we reached as high as our ideals , that we put aside our divisions and found a new hour of healing and hopefulness , that we joined together to serve and strengthen the land we love .
my fellow americans , this is our moment .
let us lift our eyes as one nation , and from the mountaintop of this american century , look ahead to the next one , asking god 's blessing on our endeavors and on our beloved country .
thank you , and good evening .

good evening .
this afternoon in this room , from this chair , i testified before the office of independent counsel and the grand jury .
i answered their questions truthfully , including questions about my private life , questions no american citizen would ever want to answer .
still i must take complete responsibility for all my actions , both public and private .
and that is why i am speaking to you tonight .
as you know , in a deposition in january i was asked questions about my relationship with monica lewinsky .
while my answers were legally accurate , i did not volunteer information .
indeed , i did have a relationship with ms. lewinsky that was not appropriate .
in fact , it was wrong .
it constituted a critical lapse in judgment and a personal failure on my part for which i am solely and completely responsible .
but i told the grand jury today , and i say to you now , that at no time did i ask anyone to lie , to hide or destroy evidence , or to take any other unlawful action .
i know that my public comments and my silence about this matter gave a false impression .
i misled people , including even my wife .
i deeply regret that .
i can only tell you i was motivated by many factors : first , by a desire to protect myself from the embarrassment of my own conduct .
i was also very concerned about protecting my family .
the fact that these questions were being asked in a politically inspired lawsuit which has since been dismissed was a consideration , too .
in addition , i had real and serious concerns about an independent counsel investigation that began with private business dealings 20 years ago , dealings , i might add , about which an independent federal agency found no evidence of any wrongdoing by me or my wife over 2 years ago .
the independent counsel investigation moved on to my staff and friends , then into my private life .
and now the investigation itself is under investigation .
this has gone on too long , cost too much , and hurt too many innocent people .
now this matter is between me , the two people i love most , my wife and our daughter , and our god .
i must put it right , and i am prepared to do whatever it takes to do so .
nothing is more important to me personally .
but it is private .
and i intend to reclaim my family life for my family .
it 's nobody 's business but ours .
even presidents have private lives .
it is time to stop the pursuit of personal destruction and the prying into private lives and get on with our national life .
our country has been distracted by this matter for too long .
and i take my responsibility for my part in all of this ; this is all i can do .
now it is time -- in fact , it is past time -- to move on .
we have important work to do , real opportunities to seize , real problems to solve , real security matters to face .
and so , tonight i ask you to turn away from the spectacle of the past 7 months , to repair the fabric of our national discourse , and to return our attention to all the challenges and all the promise of the next american century .
thank you for watching , and good night .

good afternoon , ladies and gentlemen .
i 'm sorry , we had a last - minute delay occasioned by another issue , not this one .
the debate over whether to lift the ban on homosexuals in the military has , to put it mildly , sparked a great deal of interest over the last few days .
today , as you know , i have reached an agreement , at least with senator nunn and senator mitchell , about how we will proceed in the next few days .
but first i would like to explain what i believe about this issue and why , and what i have decided to do after a long conversation , and a very good one , with the joint chiefs of staff and discussions with several members of congress .
the issue is not whether there should be homosexuals in the military .
everyone concedes that there are .
the issue is whether men and women who can and have served with real distinction should be excluded from military service solely on the basis of their status .
and i believe they should not .
the principle on which i base this position is this : i believe that american citizens who want to serve their country should be able to do so unless their conduct disqualifies them from doing so .
military life is fundamentally different from civilian society ; it necessarily has a different and stricter code of conduct , even a different code of justice .
nonetheless , individuals who are prepared to accept all necessary restrictions on their behavior , many of which would be intolerable in civilian society , should be able to serve their country honorably and well .
i have asked the secretary of defense to submit by july the 15th a draft executive order , after full consultation with military and congressional leaders and concerned individuals outside of the government , which would end the present policy of the exclusion from military service solely on the basis of sexual orientation and at the same time establish rigorous standards regarding sexual conduct to be applied to all military personnel .
this draft order will be accompanied by a study conducted during the next 6 months on the real , practical problems that would be involved in this revision of policy , so that we will have a practical , realistic approach consistent with the high standards of combat effectiveness and unit cohesion that our armed services must maintain .
i agree with the joint chiefs that the highest standards of conduct must be required .
the change can not and should not be accomplished overnight .
it does require extensive consultation with the joint chiefs , experts in the congress and in the legal community , joined by my administration and others .
we 've consulted closely to date and will do so in the future .
during that process , interim measures will be placed into effect which , i hope , again , sharpen the focus of this debate .
the joint chiefs of staff have agreed to remove the question regarding one 's sexual orientation from future versions of the enlistment application , and it will not be asked in the interim .
we also all agree that a very high standard of conduct can and must be applied .
so the single area of disagreement is this : should someone be able to serve their country in uniform if they say they are homosexuals , but they do nothing which violates the code of conduct or undermines unit cohesion or morale , apart from that statement ?
that is what all the furor of the last few days has been about .
and the practical and not insignificant issues raised by that issue are what will be studied in the next 6 months .
through this period ending july 15th , the department of justice will seek continuances in pending court cases involving reinstatement .
and administrative separation under current department of defense policies based on status alone will be stayed pending completion of this review .
the final discharge in cases based only on status will be suspended until the president has an opportunity to review and act upon the final recommendations of the secretary of defense with respect to the current policy .
in the meantime , a member whose discharge has been suspended by the attorney general will be separated from active duty and placed in standby reserve until the final report of the secretary of defense and the final action of the president .
this is the agreement that i have reached with senator nunn and senator mitchell .
during this review process , i will work with the congress .
and i believe the compromise announced today by the senators and by me shows that we can work together to end the gridlock that has plagued our city for too long .
this compromise is not everything i would have hoped for or everything that i have stood for , but it is plainly a substantial step in the right direction .
and it will allow us to move forward on other terribly important issues affecting far more americans .
my administration came to this city with a mission to bring critical issues of reform and renewal and economic revitalization to the public debate , issues that are central to the lives of all americans .
we are working on an economic reform agenda that will begin with an address to the joint session of congress on february 17th .
in the coming months the white house task force on health care , chaired by the first lady , will complete work on a comprehensive health care reform proposal to be submitted to congress within 100 days of the commencement of this administration .
we will be designing a system of national service to begin a season of service in which our nation 's unmet needs are addressed and we provide more young people the opportunity to go to college .
we will be proposing comprehensive welfare reform legislation and other important initiatives .
i applaud the work that has been done in the last 2 or 3 days by senator nunn , senator mitchell , and others to enable us to move forward on a principle that is important to me without shutting the government down and running the risk of not even addressing the family and medical leave issue , which is so important to america 's families , before congress goes into its recess .
i am looking forward to getting on with this issue over the next 6 months and with these other issues which were so central to the campaign and , far more importantly , are so important to the lives of all the american people .
well , it makes one point .
i think it strengthens my hand , if you will , in two ways .
one , i agree with the principle embodied in the case .
i have not read the opinion , but as i understand it , the opinion draws the distinction that i seek to draw between conduct and status .
and secondly , it makes the practical point i have been making all along , which is that there is not insignificant chance that this matter would ultimately be resolved in the courts in a way that would open admission into the military without the opportunity to deal with this whole range of practical issues , which everyone who has ever thought about it or talked it through concedes are there .
so i think it can -- it strengthens my hand on the principle as well as on the process .
well , i have n't given up on my real goals .
i think this is a dramatic step forward .
normally , in the history of civil rights advancements , presidents have not necessarily been in the forefront in the beginning .
so i think the fact that we actually have the joint chiefs of staff agreeing that it 's time to take this question off the enlistment form , that there ought to be a serious examination of how this would be done , even though they have n't agreed that it should be done ; that the senate , if they vote for the motion advocated by senators nunn and mitchell , will agree ; senators who do n't agree that the policy should be changed are agreeing that we ought to have a chance to work through this for 6 months and persuade them of that , i think , is very , very significant .
now , i would remind you that any president 's executive order can be overturned by an act of congress .
the president can then veto the act of congress and try to have his veto sustained if the act stands on its own as a simple issue that could always be vetoed .
but i always knew that there was a chance that congress would disagree with my position .
i can only tell you that i still think i 'm right ; i feel comfortable about the way we have done this ; and i 'm going to maintain the commitment that i have .
no , i had always planned to allow some period of time during which policies would be developed to deal with what i think are the significant practical problems .
this , in effect , may reverse the process over what i intended to do , but there has to be a time in which these issues , these practical issues are developed and policies are developed to deal with them .
i do n't know how i could have done that .
the joint chiefs asked for a meeting about a number of issues , in which this was only one .
we spent a lot of time talking about other things .
this issue was not put forward in this context by me ; it was put forward by those in the united states senate who sought to make it an issue early on .
and i do n't know how i could have stopped them from doing that .
well , i think it was pretty clear to me that we were talking about some sort of 6-month process days and days ago .
and the people who wanted it debated now were not deterred by that , and probably a lot of them wo n't be deterred by the agreement announced today .
i think that we must -- they have the perfect right to do this .
but the timing of this whole issue was clearly forced by the people in the senate who were opposed to any change of the policy no matter what the facts are .
and i think that was their right to do , but they control the timing of this , not me .
that is my position .
my position is that i still embrace the principle , and i think it should be done .
the position of those who are opposed to me is that they think that the problems will be so overwhelming everybody with good sense will change their position .
i do n't expect to do that .
i do n't expect to change my position , no .
for one thing , i think if you look at the last 10 years of experience here , according to the reports we have , this country spent $ 500 million in tax dollars to separate something under 16,500 homosexuals from the service and has dealt with complaints , at least , of sexual abuse , heterosexual abuse , largely against women , far greater volumes .
but during this period , we have plainly had the best educated , best trained , most cohesive military force in the history of the united states .
and everybody , ask anybody , and the joint chiefs will tell you that .
they agreed that we should stop asking the question .
this single thing that is dividing people on this debate , i want to make it very clear that this is a very narrow issue .
it is whether a person , in the absence of any other disqualifying conduct , can simply say that he or she is homosexual and stay in the service .
i do not expect that to spark this kind of problem .
and i certainly think in the next 6 months , as people start to work it through and talk it through , a lot of legitimate , practical issues will be raised and dealt with in a more rational environment that is less charged .
that is certainly what i hope will happen .
thank you .

thank you very much , thank you .
mrs. yandle , i never had a better introduction .
before we thank anyone else , i think all of us should acknowledge that it was america 's families who have beaten the gridlock in washington to pass family leave , people like this fine woman all over america who talked to members of congress , both democrat and republican , who laid their plight out , who asked that their voices be heard .
when senator gore and i ran in the election last year , we published a book called " putting people first . "
i 'm very proud that the first bill i am to sign as president truly puts people first .
i do want to thank the united states congress for moving expeditiously on this matter and for doing it before their first recess so that every member of congress who voted for this bill can go home and say , " we are up there working on your problems and your promise , trying to make a better future for you . "
this sends a clearer signal than any words any of us could utter , that we have tried to give this government back to the american people .
and i am very appreciative that the congress has moved so rapidly on this bill .
there are many , many members of congress here and many others who are not here who played a major role in this legislation .
time does not permit me to mention them all , but i do want to thank the senate majority leader for his heroic efforts in the 11th hour to make sure we passed this bill ; senator kennedy and senator dodd for their passionate and years - long commitment to this effort .
i want to thank the speaker , speaker foley , and congressman ford , the chairman of the committee that had jurisdiction over this bill , and congresswoman pat schroeder and all the other democrats who worked on this bill .
but i want to acknowledge , too , consistent with the promise i made in my inaugural to reach out to members of both parties who would try to push for progress , that this bill also had passionate support among republicans .
my old colleague in the governors ' association , senator kit bond from missouri , i thank you for your leadership .
senator jeffords and senator coats i do n't believe are here , but they supported this bill strongly ; and congresswoman marge roukema from new jersey , her commitment on this was unwavering ; congresswoman susan molinari from new york and many other republicans voted for , spoke for , and worked for this bill .
i thank them , the subcommittee chairs who are here , and all the others who worked so hard to make this bill a real live promise kept for the congress to the people of the united states .
family medical leave has always had the support of a majority of americans , from every part of the country , from every walk of life , from both political parties .
but some people opposed it .
and they were powerful , and it took 8 years and two vetoes to make this legislation the law of the land .
now millions of our people will no longer have to choose between their jobs and their families .
the law guarantees the right of up to 12 weeks of unpaid leave per year when it 's urgently needed at home to care for a newborn child or an ill family member .
this bill will strengthen our families , and i believe it will strengthen our businesses and our economy as well .
i have spent an enormous amount of time in the last 12 years in the factories and businesses of this country talking to employers and employees , watching the way people work , often working with them .
and i know that men and women are more productive when they are sure they wo n't lose their jobs because they 're trying to be good parents , good children .
our businesses should not lose the services of these dedicated americans .
and over the long run , the lessons of the most productive companies in the world , here at home and around the world , are that those who put their people first are those who will triumph in the global economy .
the business leaders who have already instituted family and medical leave understand this , and i 'm very proud of some of the business leaders who are here today who represent not only themselves but others all across america who were ahead of all of us who make laws in doing what is right by our families .
family and medical leave is a matter of pure common sense and a matter of common decency .
it will provide americans what they need most : peace of mind .
never again will parents have to fear losing their jobs because of their families .
just a week ago , i spoke to 10 people in families who had experienced the kinds of problems mrs. yandle has talked about today .
vice president gore and i talked to people all across america who moved us deeply .
we were saddened to hear their stories , but today all of us can be happy to think of their future .
now that we have won this difficult battle , let me ask all of you to think about what we must do ahead to put the public interest ahead of special interest , to pass a budget which will grow this economy and shrink our deficit , and to go on about the business of putting families first .
there 's a lot more we need to do to help people trapped in welfare move to work and independence ; to strengthen child support enforcement ; to reward those who work 40 hours a week and have children at home with an increase in the earned - income tax credit so we can really say we 're rewarding work instead of dependence ; to immunize all the children of this country so more parents wo n't have to take advantage of family leave because their children will be well and strong and healthy .
let all of us who care about our families , our people , the strength of our economy , and the future of our nation put our partisan and other interests aside and be inspired by this great victory today to have others when congress returns to this city and we go on about the people 's business .
thank you very much .

mr. speaker , mr. vice president , members of the 105th congress , distinguished guests , my fellow americans : since the last time we met in this chamber , america has lost two patriots and fine public servants .
though they sat on opposite sides of the aisle , representatives walter capps and sonny bono shared a deep love for this house and an unshakable commitment to improving the lives of all our people .
in the past few weeks they 've both been eulogized .
tonight i think we should begin by sending a message to their families and their friends that we celebrate their lives and give thanks for their service to our nation .
for 209 years it has been the president 's duty to report to you on the state of the union .
because of the hard work and high purpose of the american people , these are good times for america .
we have more than 14 million new jobs , the lowest unemployment in 24 years , the lowest core inflation in 30 years ; incomes are rising ; and we have the highest homeownership in history .
crime has dropped for a record five years in a row , and the welfare rolls are at their lowest levels in 27 years .
our leadership in the world is unrivaled .
ladies and gentlemen , the state of our union is strong .
but with barely 700 days left in the 20th century , this is not a time to rest .
it is a time to build , to build the america within reach , an america where everybody has a chance to get ahead with hard work ; where every citizen can live in a safe community ; where families are strong , schools are good , and all our young people can go on to college ; an america where scientists find cures for diseases , from diabetes to alzheimer 's to aids ; an america where every child can stretch a hand across a keyboard and reach every book ever written , every painting ever painted , every symphony ever composed ; where government provides opportunity and citizens honor the responsibility to give something back to their communities ; an america which leads the world to new heights of peace and prosperity .
this is the america we have begun to build ; this is the america we can leave to our children if we join together to finish the work at hand .
let us strengthen our nation for the 21st century .
rarely have americans lived through so much change in so many ways in so short a time .
quietly , but with gathering force , the ground has shifted beneath our feet as we have moved into an information age , a global economy , a truly new world .
for five years now , we have met the challenge of these changes , as americans have at every turning point in our history , by renewing the very idea of america : widening the circle of opportunity , deepening the meaning of our freedom , forging a more perfect union .
we shaped a new kind of government for the information age .
i thank the vice president for his leadership and the congress for its support in building a government that is leaner , more flexible , a catalyst for new ideas , and most of all , a government that gives the american people the tools they need to make the most of their own lives .
we have moved past the sterile debate between those who say government is the enemy and those who say government is the answer .
my fellow americans , we have found a third way .
we have the smallest government in 35 years , but a more progressive one .
we have a smaller government , but a stronger nation .
we are moving steadily toward an even stronger america in the 21st century : an economy that offers opportunity , a society rooted in responsibility , and a nation that lives as a community .
first , americans in this chamber and across our nation have pursued a new strategy for prosperity : fiscal discipline to cut interest rates and spur growth ; investments in education and skills , in science and technology and transportation , to prepare our people for the new economy ; new markets for american products and american workers .
when i took office , the deficit for 1998 was projected to be $ 357 billion and heading higher .
this year , our deficit is projected to be $ 10 billion and heading lower .
for three decades , six presidents have come before you to warn of the damage deficits pose to our nation .
tonight i come before you to announce that the federal deficit , once so incomprehensibly large that it had 11 zeros , will be , simply , zero .
i will submit to congress for 1999 the first balanced budget in 30 years .
and if we hold fast to fiscal discipline , we may balance the budget this year -- four years ahead of schedule .
you can all be proud of that , because turning a sea of red ink into black is no miracle .
it is the product of hard work by the american people and of two visionary actions in congress : the courageous vote in 1993 that led to a cut in the deficit of 90 percent , and the truly historic bipartisan balanced budget agreement passed by this congress .
here 's the really good news : if we maintain our resolve , we will produce balanced budgets as far as the eye can see .
we must not go back to unwise spending or untargeted tax cuts that risk reopening the deficit .
last year , together , we enacted targeted tax cuts so that the typical middle - class family will now have the lowest tax rates in 20 years .
my plan to balance the budget next year includes both new investments and new tax cuts targeted to the needs of working families , for education , for child care , for the environment .
but whether the issue is tax cuts or spending , i ask all of you to meet this test : approve only those priorities that can actually be accomplished without adding a dime to the deficit .
now , if we balance the budget for next year , it is projected that we 'll then have a sizable surplus in the years that immediately follow .
what should we do with this projected surplus ?
i have a simple four - word answer : save social security first .
thank you .
tonight i propose that we reserve 100 percent of the surplus -- that 's every penny of any surplus -- until we have taken all the necessary measures to strengthen the social security system for the 21st century .
let us say to all americans watching tonight -- whether you 're 70 or 50 , or whether you just started paying into the system -- social security will be there when you need it .
let us make this commitment : social security first .
let 's do that together .
i also want to say that all the american people who are watching us tonight should be invited to join in this discussion , in facing these issues squarely and forming a true consensus on how we should proceed .
we 'll start by conducting nonpartisan forums in every region of the country , and i hope that lawmakers of both parties will participate .
we 'll hold a white house conference on social security in december .
and one year from now i will convene the leaders of congress to craft historic , bipartisan legislation to achieve a landmark for our generation : a social security system that is strong in the 21st century .
thank you .
in an economy that honors opportunity , all americans must be able to reap the rewards of prosperity .
because these times are good , we can afford to take one simple , sensible step to help millions of workers struggling to provide for their families : we should raise the minimum wage .
the information age is , first and foremost , an education age , in which education must start at birth and continue throughout a lifetime .
last year , from this podium , i said that education has to be our highest priority .
i laid out a 10-point plan to move us forward and urged all of us to let politics stop at the schoolhouse door .
since then , this congress -- across party lines -- and the american people have responded , in the most important year for education in a generation , expanding public school choice , opening the way to 3,000 new charter schools , working to connect every classroom in the country to the information superhighway , committing to expand head start to a million children , launching america reads , sending literally thousands of college students into our elementary schools to make sure all our 8-year - olds can read .
last year i proposed and you passed 220,000 new pell grant scholarships for deserving students .
student loans , already less expensive and easier to repay -- now you get to deduct the interest .
families all over america now can put their savings into new tax - free education iras .
and this year , for the first two years of college , families will get a $ 1,500 tax credit -- a hope scholarship that will cover the cost of most community college tuition .
and for junior and senior year , graduate school , and job training , there is a lifetime learning credit .
you did that , and you should be very proud of it .
and because of these actions , i have something to say to every family listening to us tonight : your children can go on to college .
if you know a child from a poor family , tell her not to give up ; she can go on to college .
if you know a young couple struggling with bills , worried they wo n't be able to send their children to college , tell them not to give up ; their children can go on to college .
if you know somebody who 's caught in a dead - end job and afraid he ca n't afford the classes necessary to get better jobs for the rest of his life , tell him not to give up ; he can go on to college .
because of the things that have been done , we can make college as universal in the 21st century as high school is today .
and my friends , that will change the face and future of america .
we have opened wide the doors of the world 's best system of higher education .
now we must make our public elementary and secondary schools the world 's best as well by raising standards , raising expectations , and raising accountability .
thanks to the actions of this congress last year , we will soon have , for the very first time , a voluntary national test based on national standards in fourth grade reading and eighth grade math .
parents have a right to know whether their children are mastering the basics .
and every parent already knows the key : good teachers and small classes .
tonight i propose the first ever national effort to reduce class size in the early grades .
thank you .
my balanced budget will help to hire 100,000 new teachers who 've passed a state competency test .
now , with these teachers -- listen -- with these teachers , we will actually be able to reduce class size in the first , second , and third grades to an average of 18 students a class , all across america .
if i 've got the math right , more teachers teaching smaller classes requires more classrooms .
so i also propose a school construction tax cut to help communities modernize or build 5,000 schools .
we must also demand greater accountability .
when we promote a child from grade to grade who has n't mastered the work , we do n't do that child any favors .
it is time to end social promotion in america 's schools .
last year , in chicago , they made that decision -- not to hold our children back but to lift them up .
chicago stopped social promotion and started mandatory summer school to help students who are behind to catch up .
i propose to help other communities follow chicago 's lead .
let 's say to them : stop promoting children who do n't learn , and we will give you the tools to make sure they do .
i also ask this congress to support our efforts to enlist colleges and universities to reach out to disadvantaged children , starting in the sixth grade , so that they can get the guidance and hope they need so they can know that they , too , will be able to go on to college .
as we enter the 21st century , the global economy requires us to seek opportunity not just at home but in all the markets of the world .
we must shape this global economy , not shrink from it .
in the last five years , we have led the way in opening new markets , with 240 trade agreements that remove foreign barriers to products bearing the proud stamp " made in the usa . "
today , record high exports account for fully one - third of our economic growth .
i want to keep them going , because that 's the way to keep america growing and to advance a safer , more stable world .
all of you know , whatever your views are , that i think this is a great opportunity for america .
i know there is opposition to more comprehensive trade agreements .
i have listened carefully , and i believe that the opposition is rooted in two fears : first , that our trading partners will have lower environmental and labor standards which will give them an unfair advantage in our market and do their own people no favors , even if there 's more business ; and , second , that if we have more trade , more of our workers will lose their jobs and have to start over .
i think we should seek to advance worker and environmental standards around the world .
i have made it abundantly clear that it should be a part of our trade agenda .
but we can not influence other countries ' decisions if we send them a message that we 're backing away from trade with them .
this year i will send legislation to congress , and ask other nations to join us , to fight the most intolerable labor practice of all : abusive child labor .
we should also offer help and hope to those americans temporarily left behind by the global marketplace or by the march of technology , which may have nothing to do with trade .
that 's why we have more than doubled funding for training dislocated workers since 1993 .
and if my new budget is adopted , we will triple funding .
that 's why we must do more , and more quickly , to help workers who lose their jobs for whatever reason .
you know , we help communities in a special way when their military base closes ; we ought to help them in the same way if their factory closes .
again , i ask the congress to continue its bipartisan work to consolidate the tangle of training programs we have today into one single " gi bill " for workers , a simple skills grant so people can , on their own , move quickly to new jobs , to higher incomes , and brighter futures .
we all know , in every way in life , change is not always easy , but we have to decide whether we 're going to try to hold it back and hide from it or reap its benefits .
and remember the big picture here : while we 've been entering into hundreds of new trade agreements , we 've been creating millions of new jobs .
so this year we will forge new partnerships with latin america , asia , and europe .
and we should pass the new " african trade act " ; it has bipartisan support .
i will also renew my request for the fast - track negotiating authority necessary to open more new markets , create more new jobs , which every president has had for two decades .
you know , whether we like it or not , in ways that are mostly positive , the world 's economies are more and more interconnected and interdependent .
today , an economic crisis anywhere can affect economies everywhere .
recent months have brought serious financial problems to thailand , indonesia , south korea , and beyond .
now , why should americans be concerned about this ?
first , these countries are our customers .
if they sink into recession , they wo n't be able to buy the goods we 'd like to sell them .
second , they 're also our competitors .
so if their currencies lose their value and go down , then the price of their goods will drop , flooding our market and others with much cheaper goods , which makes it a lot tougher for our people to compete .
and finally , they are our strategic partners .
their stability bolsters our security .
the american economy remains sound and strong , and i want to keep it that way .
but because the turmoil in asia will have an impact on all the world 's economies , including ours , making that negative impact as small as possible is the right thing to do for america and the right thing to do for a safer world .
our policy is clear : no nation can recover if it does not reform itself .
but when nations are willing to undertake serious economic reform , we should help them do it .
so i call on congress to renew america 's commitment to the international monetary fund .
and i think we should say to all the people we 're trying to represent here that preparing for a far - off storm that may reach our shores is far wiser than ignoring the thunder till the clouds are just overhead .
a strong nation rests on the rock of responsibility .
a society rooted in responsibility must first promote the value of work , not welfare .
we can be proud that after decades of finger - pointing and failure , together we ended the old welfare system .
and we 're now replacing welfare checks with paychecks .
last year , after a record four - year decline in welfare rolls , i challenged our nation to move two million more americans off welfare by the year 2000 .
i 'm pleased to report we have also met that goal , two full years ahead of schedule .
this is a grand achievement , the sum of many acts of individual courage , persistence , and hope .
for 13 years , elaine kinslow of indianapolis , indiana , was on and off welfare .
today , she 's a dispatcher with a van company .
she 's saved enough money to move her family into a good neighborhood , and she 's helping other welfare recipients go to work .
elaine kinslow and all those like her are the real heroes of the welfare revolution .
there are millions like her all across america .
and i 'm happy she could join the first lady tonight .
elaine , we 're very proud of you .
please stand up .
we still have a lot more to do , all of us , to make welfare reform a success -- providing child care , helping families move closer to available jobs , challenging more companies to join our welfare - to - work partnership , increasing child support collections from deadbeat parents who have a duty to support their own children .
i also want to thank congress for restoring some of the benefits to immigrants who are here legally and working hard , and i hope you will finish that job this year .
we have to make it possible for all hard - working families to meet their most important responsibilities .
two years ago we helped guarantee that americans can keep their health insurance when they change jobs .
last year we extended health care to up to five million children .
this year , i challenge congress to take the next historic steps .
a hundred and sixty million of our fellow citizens are in managed care plans .
these plans save money , and they can improve care .
but medical decisions ought to be made by medical doctors , not insurance company accountants .
i urge this congress to reach across the aisle and write into law a consumer bill of rights that says this : you have the right to know all your medical options , not just the cheapest .
you have the right to choose the doctor you want for the care you need .
you have the right to emergency room care , wherever and whenever you need it .
you have the right to keep your medical records confidential .
traditional care or managed care , every american deserves quality care .
millions of americans between the ages of 55 and 65 have lost their health insurance .
some are retired ; some are laid off ; some lose their coverage when their spouses retire .
after a lifetime of work , they are left with nowhere to turn .
so i ask the congress , let these hard - working americans buy into the medicare system .
it wo n't add a dime to the deficit , but the peace of mind it will provide will be priceless .
next , we must help parents protect their children from the gravest health threat that they face : an epidemic of teen smoking , spread by multimillion - dollar marketing campaigns .
i challenge congress : let 's pass bipartisan , comprehensive legislation that will improve public health , protect our tobacco farmers , and change the way tobacco companies do business forever .
let 's do what it takes to bring teen smoking down .
let 's raise the price of cigarettes by up to a dollar and a half a pack over the next 10 years , with penalties on the tobacco industry if it keeps marketing to our children .
tomorrow , like every day , 3,000 children will start smoking , and 1,000 will die early as a result .
let this congress be remembered as the congress that saved their lives .
in the new economy , most parents work harder than ever .
they face a constant struggle to balance their obligations to be good workers and their even more important obligations to be good parents .
the family and medical leave act was the very first bill i was privileged to sign into law as president in 1993 .
since then , about 15 million people have taken advantage of it , and i 've met a lot of them all across this country .
i ask you to extend that law to cover 10 million more workers and to give parents time off when they have to go see their children 's teachers or take them to the doctor .
child care is the next frontier we must face to enable people to succeed at home and at work .
last year i cohosted the very first white house conference on child care with one of our foremost experts , america 's first lady .
from all corners of america , we heard the same message , without regard to region or income or political affiliation : we 've got to raise the quality of child care .
we 've got to make it safer .
we 've got to make it more affordable .
so here 's my plan : help families to pay for child care for a million more children ; scholarships and background checks for child care workers , and a new emphasis on early learning ; tax credits for businesses that provide child care for their employees ; and a larger child care tax credit for working families .
now , if you pass my plan , what this means is that a family of four with an income of $ 35,000 and high child care costs will no longer pay a single penny of federal income tax .
i think this is such a big issue with me because of my own personal experience .
i have often wondered how my mother , when she was a young widow , would have been able to go away to school and get an education and come back and support me if my grandparents had n't been able to take care of me .
she and i were really very lucky .
how many other families have never had that same opportunity ?
the truth is , we do n't know the answer to that question .
but we do know what the answer should be : not a single american family should ever have to choose between the job they need and the child they love .
a society rooted in responsibility must provide safe streets , safe schools , and safe neighborhoods .
we pursued a strategy of more police , tougher punishment , smarter prevention , with crimefighting partnerships with local law enforcement and citizen groups , where the rubber hits the road .
i can report to you tonight that it 's working .
violent crime is down ; robbery is down ; assault is down ; burglary is down -- for five years in a row , all across america .
we need to finish the job of putting 100,000 more police on our streets .
again , i ask congress to pass a juvenile crime bill that provides more prosecutors and probation officers , to crack down on gangs and guns and drugs , and bar violent juveniles from buying guns for life .
and i ask you to dramatically expand our support for after - school programs .
i think every american should know that most juvenile crime is committed between the hours of 3 in the afternoon and 8 at night .
we can keep so many of our children out of trouble in the first place if we give them someplace to go other than the streets , and we ought to do it .
drug use is on the decline .
i thank general mccaffrey for his leadership , and i thank this congress for passing the largest antidrug budget in history .
now i ask you to join me in a groundbreaking effort to hire 1,000 new border patrol agents and to deploy the most sophisticated available new technologies to help close the door on drugs at our borders .
police , prosecutors , and prevention programs , as good as they are , they ca n't work if our court system does n't work .
today there are large number of vacancies in the federal courts .
here is what the chief justice of the united states wrote : " judicial vacancies can not remain at such high levels indefinitely without eroding the quality of justice . "
i simply ask the united states senate to heed this plea and vote on the highly qualified judicial nominees before you , up or down .
we must exercise responsibility not just at home but around the world .
on the eve of a new century , we have the power and the duty to build a new era of peace and security .
but make no mistake about it , today 's possibilities are not tomorrow 's guarantees .
america must stand against the poisoned appeals of extreme nationalism .
we must combat an unholy axis of new threats from terrorists , international criminals , and drug traffickers .
these 21st century predators feed on technology and the free flow of information and ideas and people .
and they will be all the more lethal if weapons of mass destruction fall into their hands .
to meet these challenges , we are helping to write international rules of the road for the 21st century , protecting those who join the family of nations and isolating those who do not .
within days , i will ask the senate for its advice and consent to make hungary , poland , and the czech republic the newest members of nato .
for 50 years , nato contained communism and kept america and europe secure .
now these three formerly communist countries have said yes to democracy .
i ask the senate to say yes to them , our new allies .
by taking in new members and working closely with new partners , including russia and ukraine , nato can help to assure that europe is a stronghold for peace in the 21st century .
next , i will ask congress to continue its support of our troops and their mission in bosnia .
this christmas , hillary and i traveled to sarajevo with senator and mrs. dole and a bipartisan congressional delegation .
we saw children playing in the streets , where two years ago they were hiding from snipers and shells .
the shops are filled with food ; the cafes were alive with conversation .
the progress there is unmistakable , but it is not yet irreversible .
to take firm root , bosnia 's fragile peace still needs the support of american and allied troops when the current nato mission ends in june .
i think senator dole actually said it best .
he said , " this is like being ahead in the fourth quarter of a football game .
now is not the time to walk off the field and forfeit the victory . "
i wish all of you could have seen our troops in tuzla .
they 're very proud of what they 're doing in bosnia , and we 're all very proud of them .
one of those --   -- thank you -- one of those brave soldiers is sitting with the first lady tonight : army sergeant michael tolbert .
his father was a decorated vietnam vet .
after college in colorado , he joined the army .
last year he led an infantry unit that stopped a mob of extremists from taking over a radio station that is a voice of democracy and tolerance in bosnia .
thank you very much , sergeant , for what you represent .
please stand up .
in bosnia and around the world , our men and women in uniform always do their mission well .
our mission must be to keep them well - trained and ready , to improve their quality of life , and to provide the 21st century weapons they need to defeat any enemy .
i ask congress to join me in pursuing an ambitious agenda to reduce the serious threat of weapons of mass destruction .
this year , four decades after it was first proposed by president eisenhower , a comprehensive nuclear test ban is within reach .
by ending nuclear testing , we can help to prevent the development of new and more dangerous weapons and make it more difficult for non - nuclear states to build them .
i 'm pleased to announce that four former chairmen of the joint chiefs of staff -- generals john shalikashvili , colin powell , and david jones and admiral william crowe -- have endorsed this treaty .
and i ask the senate to approve it this year .
thank you .
together , we must confront the new hazards of chemical and biological weapons and the outlaw states , terrorists , and organized criminals seeking to acquire them .
saddam hussein has spent the better part of this decade and much of his nation 's wealth not on providing for the iraqi people but on developing nuclear , chemical , and biological weapons and the missiles to deliver them .
the united nations weapons inspectors have done a truly remarkable job finding and destroying more of iraq 's arsenal than was destroyed during the entire gulf war .
now saddam hussein wants to stop them from completing their mission .
i know i speak for everyone in this chamber , republicans and democrats , when i say to saddam hussein , " you can not defy the will of the world , " and when i say to him , " you have used weapons of mass destruction before .
we are determined to deny you the capacity to use them again . "
last year the senate ratified the chemical weapons convention to protect our soldiers and citizens from poison gas .
now we must act to prevent the use of disease as a weapon of war and terror .
the biological weapons convention has been in effect for 23 years now .
the rules are good , but the enforcement is weak .
we must strengthen it with a new international inspection system to detect and deter cheating .
in the months ahead , i will pursue our security strategy with old allies in asia and europe and new partners from africa to india and pakistan , from south america to china .
and from belfast to korea to the middle east , america will continue to stand with those who stand for peace .
finally , it 's long past time to make good on our debt to the united nations .
thank you .
more and more , we are working with other nations to achieve common goals .
if we want america to lead , we 've got to set a good example .
as we see so clearly in bosnia , allies who share our goals can also share our burdens .
in this new era , our freedom and independence are actually enriched , not weakened , by our increasing interdependence with other nations .
but we have to do our part .
our founders set america on a permanent course toward a more perfect union .
to all of you i say , it is a journey we can only make together , living as one community .
first , we have to continue to reform our government , the instrument of our national community .
everyone knows elections have become too expensive , fueling a fundraising arms race .
this year , by march 6 , at long last the senate will actually vote on bipartisan campaign finance reform proposed by senators mccain and feingold .
let 's be clear : a vote against mccain - feingold is a vote for soft money and for the status quo .
i ask you to strengthen our democracy and pass campaign finance reform this year .
at least equally important , we have to address the real reason for the explosion in campaign costs : the high cost of media advertising .
to the folks watching at home , those were the groans of pain in the audience .
i will formally request that the federal communications commission act to provide free or reduced - cost television time for candidates who observe spending limits voluntarily .
the airwaves are a public trust , and broadcasters also have to help us in this effort to strengthen our democracy .
under the leadership of vice president gore , we 've reduced the federal payroll by 300,000 workers , cut 16,000 pages of regulation , eliminated hundreds of programs , and improved the operations of virtually every government agency .
but we can do more .
like every taxpayer , i 'm outraged by the reports of abuses by the irs .
we need some changes there : new citizen advocacy panels , a stronger taxpayer advocate , phone lines open 24 hours a day , relief for innocent taxpayers .
last year , by an overwhelming bipartisan margin , the house of representatives passed sweeping irs reforms .
this bill must not now languish in the senate .
tonight i ask the senate : follow the house ; pass the bipartisan package as your first order of business .
i hope to goodness before i finish i can think of something to say " follow the senate " on , so i 'll be out of trouble .
a nation that lives as a community must value all its communities .
for the past five years , we have worked to bring the spark of private enterprise to inner city and poor rural areas , with community development banks , more commercial loans in the poor neighborhoods , cleanup of polluted sites for development .
under the continued leadership of the vice president , we propose to triple the number of empowerment zones to give business incentives to invest in those areas .
we should --   -- thank you -- we should also give poor families more help to move into homes of their own , and we should use tax cuts to spur the construction of more low - income housing .
last year , this congress took strong action to help the district of columbia .
let us renew our resolve to make our capital city a great city for all who live and visit here .
our cities are the vibrant hubs of great metropolitan areas .
they are still the gateways for new immigrants , from every continent , who come here to work for their own american dreams .
let 's keep our cities going strong into the 21st century ; they 're a very important part of our future .
our communities are only as healthy as the air our children breathe , the water they drink , the earth they will inherit .
last year we put in place the toughest - ever controls on smog and soot .
we moved to protect yellowstone , the everglades , lake tahoe .
we expanded every community 's right to know about the toxins that threaten their children .
just yesterday , our food safety plan took effect , using new science to protect consumers from dangers like e. coli and salmonella .
tonight i ask you to join me in launching a new clean water initiative , a far - reaching effort to clean our rivers , our lakes , and our coastal waters for our children .
thank you .
our overriding environmental challenge tonight is the worldwide problem of climate change , global warming , the gathering crisis that requires worldwide action .
the vast majority of scientists have concluded unequivocally that if we do n't reduce the emission of greenhouse gases , at some point in the next century , we 'll disrupt our climate and put our children and grandchildren at risk .
this past december , america led the world to reach a historic agreement committing our nation to reduce greenhouse gas emissions through market forces , new technologies , energy efficiency .
we have it in our power to act right here , right now .
i propose $ 6 billion in tax cuts and research and development to encourage innovation , renewable energy , fuel - efficient cars , energy - efficient homes .
every time we have acted to heal our environment , pessimists have told us it would hurt the economy .
well , today our economy is the strongest in a generation , and our environment is the cleanest in a generation .
we have always found a way to clean the environment and grow the economy at the same time .
and when it comes to global warming , we 'll do it again .
finally , community means living by the defining american value , the ideal heard ' round the world that we are all created equal .
throughout our history , we have n't always honored that ideal and we 've never fully lived up to it .
often it 's easier to believe that our differences matter more than what we have in common .
it may be easier , but it 's wrong .
what we have to do in our day and generation to make sure that america becomes truly one nation -- what do we have to do ?
we 're becoming more and more and more diverse .
do you believe we can become one nation ?
the answer can not be to dwell on our differences but to build on our shared values .
we all cherish family and faith , freedom and responsibility .
we all want our children to grow up in a world where their talents are matched by their opportunities .
i 've launched this national initiative on race to help us recognize our common interests and to bridge the opportunity gaps that are keeping us from becoming one america .
let us begin by recognizing what we still must overcome .
discrimination against any american is un - american .
we must vigorously enforce the laws that make it illegal .
i ask your help to end the backlog at the equal employment opportunity commission .
sixty thousand of our fellow citizens are waiting in line for justice , and we should act now to end their wait .
we also should recognize that the greatest progress we can make toward building one america lies in the progress we make for all americans , without regard to race .
when we open the doors of college to all americans , when we rid all our streets of crime , when there are jobs available to people from all our neighborhoods , when we make sure all parents have the child care they need , we 're helping to build one nation .
we , in this chamber and in this government , must do all we can to address the continuing american challenge to build one america .
but we 'll only move forward if all our fellow citizens , including every one of you at home watching tonight , is also committed to this cause .
we must work together , learn together , live together , serve together .
on the forge of common enterprise , americans of all backgrounds can hammer out a common identity .
we see it today in the united states military , in the peace corps , in americorps .
wherever people of all races and backgrounds come together in a shared endeavor and get a fair chance , we do just fine .
with shared values and meaningful opportunities and honest communication and citizen service , we can unite a diverse people in freedom and mutual respect .
we are many ; we must be one .
in that spirit , let us lift our eyes to the new millennium .
how will we mark that passage ?
it just happens once every 1,000 years .
this year hillary and i launched the white house millennium program to promote america 's creativity and innovation , and to preserve our heritage and culture into the 21st century .
our culture lives in every community , and every community has places of historic value that tell our stories as americans .
we should protect them .
i am proposing a public - private partnership to advance our arts and humanities and to celebrate the millennium by saving american 's treasures , great and small .
and while we honor the past , let us imagine the future .
now , think about this : the entire store of human knowledge now doubles every five years .
in the 1980s , scientists identified the gene causing cystic fibrosis ; it took nine years .
last year scientists located the gene that causes parkinson 's disease -- in only nine days .
within a decade , " gene chips " will offer a roadmap for prevention of illnesses throughout a lifetime .
soon we 'll be able to carry all the phone calls on mother 's day on a single strand of fiber the width of a human hair .
a child born in 1998 may well live to see the 22nd century .
tonight , as part of our gift to the millennium , i propose a 21st century research fund for path - breaking scientific inquiry , the largest funding increase in history for the national institutes of health , the national science foundation , the national cancer institute .
we have already discovered genes for breast cancer and diabetes .
i ask you to support this initiative so ours will be the generation that finally wins the war against cancer and begins a revolution in our fight against all deadly diseases .
as important as all this scientific progress is , we must continue to see that science serves humanity , not the other way around .
we must prevent the misuse of genetic tests to discriminate against any american .
and we must ratify the ethical consensus of the scientific and religious communities and ban the cloning of human beings .
we should enable all the world 's people to explore the far reaches of cyberspace .
think of this : the first time i made a state of the union speech to you , only a handful of physicists used the world wide web -- literally , just a handful of people .
now , in schools , in libraries , homes , and businesses , millions and millions of americans surf the ' net every day .
we must give parents the tools they need to help protect their children from inappropriate material on the internet , but we also must make sure that we protect the exploding global commercial potential of the internet .
we can do the kinds of things that we need to do and still protect our kids .
for one thing , i ask congress to step up support for building the next - generation internet .
it 's getting kind of clogged , you know , and the next - generation internet will operate at speeds up to 1,000 times faster than today .
even as we explore this inner space in the new millennium , we 're going to open new frontiers in outer space .
throughout all history , humankind has had only one place to call home , our planet , earth .
beginning this year , 1998 , men and women from 16 countries will build a foothold in the heavens , the international space station .
with its vast expanses , scientists and engineers will actually set sail on an uncharted sea of limitless mystery and unlimited potential .
and this october , a true american hero , a veteran pilot of 149 combat missions and one five - hour space flight that changed the world , will return to the heavens .
godspeed , john glenn .
john , you will carry with you america 's hopes .
and on your uniform , once again , you will carry america 's flag , marking the unbroken connection between the deeds of america 's past and the daring of america 's future .
nearly 200 years ago , a tattered flag , its broad stripes and bright stars still gleaming through the smoke of a fierce battle , moved francis scott key to scribble a few words on the back of an envelope , the words that became our national anthem .
today , that star - spangled banner , along with the declaration of independence , the constitution , and the bill of rights , are on display just a short walk from here .
they are america 's treasures , and we must also save them for the ages .
i ask all americans to support our project to restore all our treasures so that the generations of the 21st century can see for themselves the images and the words that are the old and continuing glory of america ; an america that has continued to rise through every age , against every challenge , a people of great works and greater possibilities , who have always , always found the wisdom and strength to come together as one nation -- to widen the circle of opportunity , to deepen the meaning of our freedom , to form that more perfect union .
let that be our gift to the 21st century .
god bless you , and god bless the united states .

mr. speaker , mr. president , members of congress , distinguished guests , my fellow americans , before i begin my words tonight i would like to ask that we all bow in a moment of silent prayer for the memory of those who were killed and those who have been injured in the tragic train accident in alabama today .
amen .
my fellow americans , tonight we come together to write a new chapter in the american story .
our forebears enshrined the american dream : life , liberty , the pursuit of happiness .
every generation of americans has worked to strengthen that legacy , to make our country a place of freedom and opportunity , a place where people who work hard can rise to their full potential , a place where their children can have a better future .
from the settling of the frontier to the landing on the moon , ours has been a continuous story of challenges defined , obstacles overcome , new horizons secured .
that is what makes america what it is and americans what we are .
now we are in a time of profound change and opportunity .
the end of the cold war , the information age , the global economy have brought us both opportunity and hope and strife and uncertainty .
our purpose in this dynamic age must be to make change our friend and not our enemy .
to achieve that goal , we must face all our challenges with confidence , with faith , and with discipline , whether we 're reducing the deficit , creating tomorrow 's jobs and training our people to fill them , converting from a high - tech defense to a high - tech domestic economy , expanding trade , reinventing government , making our streets safer , or rewarding work over idleness .
all these challenges require us to change .
if americans are to have the courage to change in a difficult time , we must first be secure in our most basic needs .
tonight i want to talk to you about the most critical thing we can do to build that security .
this health care system of ours is badly broken , and it is time to fix it .
despite the dedication of literally millions of talented health care professionals , our health care is too uncertain and too expensive , too bureaucratic and too wasteful .
it has too much fraud and too much greed .
at long last , after decades of false starts , we must make this our most urgent priority , giving every american health security , health care that can never be taken away , heath care that is always there .
that is what we must do tonight .
on this journey , as on all others of true consequence , there will be rough spots in the road and honest disagreements about how we should proceed .
after all , tills is a complicated issue .
but every successful journey is guided by fixed stars .
and if we can agree on some basic values and principles , we will reach tills destination , and we will reach it together .
so tonight i want to talk to you about the principles that i believe must embody our efforts to reform america 's health care system : security , simplicity , savings , choice , quality , and responsibility .
when i launched our nation on this journey to reform the health care system i knew we needed a talented navigator , someone with a rigorous mind , a steady compass , a caring heart .
luckily for me and for our nation , i did n't have to look very far .
over the last 8 months , hillary and those working with her have talked to literally thousands of americans to understand the strengths and the frailties of this system of ours .
they met with over 1,100 health care organizations .
they talked with doctors and nurses , pharmacists and drug company representatives , hospital administrators , insurance company executives , and small and large businesses .
they spoke with self - employed people .
they talked with people who had insurance and people who did n't .
they talked with union members and older americans and advocates for our children .
the first lady also consulted , as all of you know , extensively with governmental leaders in both parties in the states of our nation and especially here on capitol hill .
hillary and the task force received and read over 700,000 letters from ordinary citizens .
what they wrote and the bravery with which they told their stories is really what calls us all here tonight .
every one of us knows someone who 's worked hard and played by the rules and still been hurt by this system that just does n't work for too many people .
but i 'd like to tell you about just one .
kerry kennedy owns a small furniture store that employs seven people in titusville , florida .
like most small business owners , he 's poured his heart and soul , his sweat and blood into that business for years .
but over the last several years , again like most small business owners , he 's seen his health care premiums skyrocket , even in years when no claims were made .
and last year , he painfully discovered he could no longer afford to provide coverage for all his workers because his insurance company told him that two of his workers had become high risks because of their advanced age .
the problem wits that those two people were his mother and father , the people who founded the business and still work in the store .
this story speaks for millions of others .
and from them we have learned a powerful truth .
we have to preserve and strengthen what is right with the health care system , but we have got to fix what is wrong with it .
now , we all know what 's right .
we 're blessed with the best health care professionals on earth , the finest health care institutions , the best medical research , the most sophisticated technology .
my mother is a nurse .
i grew up around hospitals .
doctors and nurses were the first professional people i ever knew or learned to look up to .
they are what is right with this health care system .
but we also know that we can no longer afford to continue to ignore what is wrong .
millions of americans are just a pink slip away from losing their health insurance and one serious illness away from losing all their savings .
millions more are locked into the jobs they have now just because they or someone in their family has once been sick and they have what is called the preexisting condition .
and on any given day , over 37 million americans , most of them working people and their little children , have no health insurance at all .
and in spite of all this , our medical bills are growing at over twice the rate of inflation , and the united states spends over a third more of its income on health care than any other nation on earth .
and the gap is growing , causing many of our companies in global competition severe disadvantage .
there is no excuse for this kind of system .
we know other people have done better .
we know people in our own country are doing better .
we have no excuse .
my fellow americans , we must fix this system , and it has to begin with congressional action .
i believe as strongly as i can say that we can reform the costliest and most wasteful system on the face of the earth without enacting new broad - based taxes .
i believe it because of the conversations i have had with thousands of health care professionals around the country , with people who are outside this city but are inside experts on the way this system works and wastes money .
the proposal that i describe tonight borrows many of the principles and ideas that have been embraced in plans introduced by both republicans and democrats in this congress .
for the first time in this century , leaders of both political parties have joined together around the principle of providing universal , comprehensive health care .
it is a magic moment , and we must seize it .
i want to say to all of you i have been deeply moved by the spirit of this debate , by the openness of all people to new ideas and argument and information .
the american people would he proud to know that earlier this week when a health care university was held for members of congress just to try to give everybody the same amount of information , over 320 republicans and democrats signed up and showed up for 2 days just to learn the basic facts of the complicated problem before us .
both sides are willing to say , " we have listened to the people .
we know the cost of going forward with this system is far greater than the cost of change . "
both sides , i think , understand the literal ethical imperative of doing something about the system we have now .
rising above these difficulties and our past differences to solve this problem will go a long way toward defining who we are and who we intend to be as a people in this difficult and challenging era .
i believe we all understand that .
and so tonight , let me ask all of you , every member of the house , every member of the senate , each republican and each democrat , let us keep this spirit and let us keep this commitment until this job is done .
we owe it to the american people .
thank you .
thank you very much .
now , if i might , i would like to review the six principles i mentioned earlier and describe how we think we can best fulfill those principles .
first and most important , security .
this principle speaks to the human misery , to the costs , to the anxiety we hear about every day , all of us , when people talk about their problems with the present system .
security means that those who do not now have health care coverage will have it , and for those who have it , it will never be taken away .
we must achieve that security as soon as possible .
under our plan , every american would receive a health care security card that will guarantee a comprehensive package of benefits over the course of an entire lifetime , roughly comparable to the benefit package offered by most fortune 500 companies .
this health care security card will offer this package of benefits in a way that can never be taken away .
so let us agree on this : whatever else we disagree on , before this congress finishes its work next year , you will pass and i will sign legislation to guarantee this security to every citizen of this country .
with this card , if you lose your job or you switch jobs , you 're covered .
if you leave your job to start a small business , you 're covered .
if you 're an early retiree , you 're covered .
if someone in your family has unfortunately had an illness that qualifies as a preexisting condition , you 're still covered .
if you get sick or a member of your family gets sick , even if it 's a life - threatening illness , you 're covered .
and if an insurance company tries to drop you for any reason , you will still be covered , because that will be illegal .
this card will give comprehensive coverage .
it will cover people for hospital care , doctor visits , emergency and lab services , diagnostic services like pap smears and mammograms and cholesterol tests , substance abuse , and mental health treatment .
and equally important , for both health care and economic reasons , this program for the first time would provide a broad range of preventive services including regular checkups and well baby visits .
now , it 's just common sense .
we know , any family doctor will tell you , that people will stay healthier and long - term costs of the health system will be lower if we have comprehensive preventive services .
you know how all of our mothers told us that an ounce of prevention was worth a pound of cure ?
our mothers were right .
and it 's a lesson , like so many lessons from our mothers , that we have waited too long to live by .
it is time to start doing it .
health care security must also apply to older americans .
this is something i imagine all of us in this room feel very deeply about .
the first thing i want to say about that is that we must maintain the medicare program .
it works to provide that kind of security .
but this time and for the first time , i believe medicare should provide coverage for the cost of prescription drugs .
yes , it will cost some more in the beginning .
but again , any physician who deals with the elderly will tell you that there are thousands of elderly people in every state who are not poor enough to be on medicaid but just above that line and on medicare , who desperately need medicine , who make decisions every week between medicine and food .
any doctor who deals with the elderly will tell you that there are many elderly people who do n't get medicine , who get sicker and sicker and eventually go to the doctor and wind up spending more money and draining more money from the health care system than they would if they had regular treatment in the way that only adequate medicine can provide .
i also believe that over time , we should phase in long - term care for the disabled and the elderly on a comprehensive basis .
as we proceed with this health care reform , we can not forget that the most rapidly growing percentage of americans are those over 80 .
we can not break faith with them .
we have to do better by them .
the second principle is simplicity .
our heath care system must be simpler for the patients and simpler for those who actually deliver health care : our doctors , our nurses , our other medical professionals .
today we have more than 1,500 insurers , with hundreds and hundreds of different forms .
no other nation has a system like this .
these forms are time consuming for health care providers .
they 're expensive for health care consumers .
they 're exasperating for anyone who 's ever tried to sit down around a table and wade through them and figure them out .
the medical care industry is literally drowning in paperwork .
in recent years , the number of administrators in our hospitals has grown by 4 times the rate that the number of doctors has grown .
a hospital ought to be a house of healing , not a monument to paperwork and bureaucracy .
just a few days ago , the vice president and i had the honor of visiting the children 's hospital here in washington where they do wonderful , often miraculous things for very sick children .
a nurse named debbie freiberg told us that she was in the cancer and bone marrow unit .
the other day a little boy asked her just to stay at his side during his chemotherapy .
and she had to walk away from that child because she had been instructed to go to yet another class to learn how to fill out another form for something that did n't have a lick to do with the health care of the children she was helping .
that is wrong , and we can stop it , and we ought to do it .
we met a very compelling doctor named lillian beard , a pediatrician , who said that she did n't get into her profession to spend hours and hours -- some doctors up to 25 hours a week -- just filling out forms .
she told us she became a doctor to keep children well and to help save those who got sick .
we can relieve people like her of this burden .
we learned , the vice president and i did , that in the washington children 's hospital alone , the administrators told us they spend $ 2 million a year in one hospital filling out forms that have nothing whatever to do with keeping up with the treatment of the patients .
and the doctors there applauded when i was told and i related to them that they spend so much time filling out paperwork , that if they only had to fill out those paperwork requirements necessary to monitor the heath of the children , each doctor on that one hospital staff , 200 of them , could see another 500 children a year .
that is 10,000 children a year .
i think we can save money in this system if we simplify it .
and we can make the doctors and the nurses and the people that are giving their lives to help us all be healthier a whole lot happier , too , on their jobs .
under our proposal there would be one standard insurance form , not hundreds of them .
we will simplify also -- and we must -- the government 's rules and regulations , because they are a big part of this problem .
this is one of those cases where the physician should heal thyself .
we have to reinvent the way we relate to the health care system , along with reinventing government .
a doctor should not have to check with a bureaucrat in an office thousands of miles away before ordering a simple blood test .
that 's not right , and we can change it .
and doctors , nurses , and consumers should n't have to worry about the fine print .
if we have this one simple form , there wo n't be any fine print .
people will know what it means .
the third principle is savings .
reform must produce savings in this health care system .
it has to .
we 're spending over 14 percent of our income on health care .
canada 's at 10 .
nobody else is over 9 .
we 're competing with all these people for the future .
and the other major countries , they cover everybody , and they cover them with services as generous as the best company policies here in this country .
rampant medical inflation is eating away at our wages , our savings , our investment capital , our ability to create new jobs in the private sector , and this public treasury .
you know the budget we just adopted had steep cuts in defense , a 5-year freeze on the discretionary spending , so critical to reeducating america and investing in jobs and helping us to convert from a defense to a domestic economy .
but we passed a budget which has medicaid increases of between 16 and 11 percent a year over the next 5 years and medicare increases of between 11 and 9 percent in an environment where we assume inflation will be at 4 percent or less .
we can not continue to do this .
our competitiveness , our whole economy , the integrity of the way the government works , and ultimately , our living standards depend upon our ability to achieve savings without harming the quality of heath care .
unless we do this , our workers will lose $ 655 in income each year by the end of the decade .
small businesses will continue to face skyrocketing premiums .
and a full third of small businesses now covering their employees say they will be forced to drop their insurance .
large corporations will bear bigger disadvantages in global competition .
and health care costs devour more and more and more of our budget .
pretty soon all of you or the people who succeed you will be showing up here and writing out checks for health care and interest on the debt and worrying about whether we 've got enough defense , and that will be it , unless we have the courage to achieve the savings that are plainly there before us .
every state and local government will continue to cut back on everything from education to law enforcement to pay more and more for the same health care .
these rising costs are a special nightmare for our small businesses , the engine of our entrepreneurship and our job creation in america today .
health care premiums for small businesses are 35 percent higher than those of large corporations today .
and they will keep rising at double - digit rates unless we act .
so how will we achieve these savings ?
rather than looking at price control or looking away as the price spiral continues , rather than using the heavy hand of government to try to control what 's happening or continuing to ignore what 's happening , we believe there is a third way to achieve these savings .
first , to give groups of consumers and small businesses the same market bargaining power that large corporations and large groups of public employees now have , we want to let market forces enable plans to compete .
we want to force these plans to compete on the basis of price and quality , not simply to allow them to continue making money by turning people away who are sick or old or performing mountains of unnecessary procedures .
but we also believe we should back this system up with limits on how much plans can raise their premiums year - in and year - out , forcing people , again , to continue to pay more for the same health care , without regard to inflation or the rising population needs .
we want to create what has been missing in this system for too long and what every successful nation who has dealt with this problem has already had to do : to have a combination of private market forces and a sound public policy that will support that competition , but limit the rate at which prices can exceed the rate of inflation and population growth , if the competition does n't work , especially in the early going .
the second thing i want to say is that unless everybody is covered -- and this is a very important thing -- unless everybody is covered , we will never be able to fully put the brakes on health care inflation .
why is that ?
because when people do n't have any health insurance , they still get health care , but they get it when it 's too late , when it 's too expensive , often from the most expensive place of all , the emergency room .
usually by the time they show up , their illnesses are more severe , and their mortality rates are much higher in our hospitals than those who have insurance .
so they cost us more .
and what else happens ?
since they get the care but they do n't pay , who does pay ?
all the rest of us .
we pay in higher hospital bills and higher insurance premiums .
this cost shifting is a major problem .
the third thing we can do to save money is simply by simplifying the system , what we 've already discussed .
freeing the health care providers from these costly and unnecessary paperwork and administrative decisions will save tens of billions of dollars .
we spend twice as much as any other major country does on paperwork .
we spend at least a dime on the dollar more than any other major country .
that is a stunning statistic .
it is something that every republican and every democrat ought to be able to say , we agree that we 're going to squeeze this out .
we can not tolerate this .
this has nothing to do with keeping people well or helping them when they 're sick .
we should invest the money in something else .
we also have to crack down on fraud and abuse in the system .
that drains billions of dollars a year .
it is a very large figure , according to every health care expert i 've ever spoken with .
so i believe we can achieve large savings .
and that large savings can be used to cover the unemployed , uninsured and will be used for people who realize those savings in the private sector to increase their ability to invest and grow , to hire new workers or to give their workers pay raises , many of them for the first time in years .
now , nobody has to take my word for this .
you can ask dr. koop .
he 's up here with us tonight , and i thank him for being here .
since he left his distinguished tenure as our surgeon general , he has spent an enormous amount of time studying our health care system , how it operates , what 's right and wrong with it .
he says we could spend $ 200 billion every year , more than 20 percent of the total budget , without sacrificing the high quality of american medicine .
ask the public employees in california , who 've held their own premiums down by adopting the same strategy that i want every american to be able to adopt , bargaining within the limits of a strict budget .
ask xerox , which saved an estimated $ 1,000 per worker on their health insurance premium .
ask the staff of the mayo clinic , who we all agree provides some of the finest health care in the world .
they are holding their cost increases to less than half the national average .
ask the people of hawaii , the only state that covers virtually all of their citizens and has still been able to keep costs below the national average .
people may disagree over the best way to fix this system .
we may all disagree about how quickly we can do the thing that we have to do .
but we can not disagree that we can find tens of billions of dollars in savings in what is clearly the most costly and the most bureaucratic system in the entire world .
and we have to do something about that , and we have to do it now .
the fourth principle is choice .
americans believe they ought to be able to choose their own health care plan and keep their own doctors .
and i think all of us agree .
under any plan we pass , they ought to have that right .
but today , under our broken heath care system , in spite of the rhetoric of choice , the fact is that that power is slipping away for more and more americans .
of course , it is usually the employer , not the employee , who makes the initial choice of what health care plan the employee will be in .
and if your employer offers only one plan , as nearly three - quarters of small or medium - sized firms do today , you 're stuck with that plan and the doctors that it covers .
i propose to give every american a choice among high quality plans .
you can stay with your current doctor , join a network of doctors and hospitals , or join a health maintenance organization .
if you do n't like your plan , every year you 'll have a chance to choose a new one .
the choice will be left to the american citizen , the worker , not the boss and certainly not some government bureaucrat .
we also believe that doctors should have a choice as to what plans they practice in .
otherwise , citizens may have their own choices limited .
we want to end the discrimination that is now growing against doctors and to permit them to practice in several different plans .
choice is important for doctors , and it is absolutely critical for our consumers .
we 've got to have it in whatever plan we pass .
the fifth principle is quality .
if we reformed everything else in health care but failed to preserve and enhance the high quality of our medical care , we will have taken a step backward , not forward .
quality is something that we simply ca n't leave to chance .
when you board an airplane , you feel better knowing that the plane had to meet standards designed to protect your safety .
and we ca n't ask any less of our health care system .
our proposal will create report cards on health plans , so that consumers can choose the highest quality health care providers and reward them with their business .
at the same time , our plan will track quality indicators , so that doctors can make better and smarter choices of the kind of care they provide .
we have evidence that more efficient delivery of health care does n't decrease quality .
in fact , it may enhance it .
let me just give you one example of one commonly performed procedure , the coronary bypass operation .
pennsylvania discovered that patients who were charged $ 21,000 for this surgery received as good or better care as patients who were charged $ 84,000 for the same procedure in the same state .
high prices simply do n't always equal good quality .
our plan will guarantee that high quality information is available in even the most remote areas of this country so that we can have high quality service , linking rural doctors , for example , with hospitals with high - tech urban medical centers .
and our plan will ensure the quality of continuing progress on a whole range of issues by speeding research on effective prevention and treatment measures for cancer , for aids , for alzheimer 's , for heart disease , and for other chronic diseases .
we have to safeguard the finest medical research establishment in the entire world .
and we will do that with this plan .
indeed , we will even make it better .
the sixth and final principle is responsibility .
we need to restore a sense that we 're all in this together and that we all have a responsibility to be a part of the solution .
responsibility has to start with those who profit from the current system .
responsibility means insurance companies should no longer be allowed to cast people aside when they get sick .
it should apply to laboratories that submit fraudulent bills , to lawyers who abuse malpractice claims , to doctors who order unnecessary procedures .
it means drug companies should no longer charge 3 times more per prescription drugs , made in america here in the united states , than they charge for the same drugs overseas .
in short , responsibility should apply to anybody who abuses this system and drives up the cost for honest , hard - working citizens and undermines confidence in the honest , gifted health care providers we have .
responsibility also means changing some behaviors in this country that drive up our costs like crazy .
and without changing it we 'll never bare the system we ought to have , we will never .
let me just mention a few and start with the most important : the outrageous costs of violence in this country stein in large measure from the fact that this is the only country in the world where teenagers can rout the streets at random with semiautomatic weapons and be better armed than the police .
but let 's not kid ourselves ; it 's not that simple .
we also have higher rates of aids , of smoking and excessive drinking , of teen pregnancy , of low birth weight babies .
and we have the third worst immunization rate of any nation in the western hemisphere .
we have to change our ways if we ever really want to be healthy as a people and have an affordable health care system .
and no one can deny that .
but let me say this -- and i hope every american will listen , because this is not an easy thing to hear -- responsibility in our health care system is n't just about them .
it 's about you .
it 's about me .
it 's about each of us .
too many of us have not taken responsibility for our own health care and for our own relations to the health care system .
many of us who have had fully paid health care plans have used the system whether we needed it or not without thinking what the costs were .
many people who use this system do n't pay a penny for their care even though they can afford to .
i think those who do n't have any health insurance should be responsible for paying a portion of their new coverage .
there ca n't be any something for nothing , and we have to demonstrate that to people .
this is not a free system .
even small contributions , as small as the $ 10 copayment when you visit a doctor , illustrates that this is something of value .
there is a cost to it .
it is not free .
and i want to tell you that i believe that all of us should have insurance .
why should the rest of us pick up the tab when a guy who does n't think he needs insurance or says he ca n't afford it gets in an accident , winds up in an emergency room , gets good care , and everybody else pays ?
why should the small business people who are struggling to keep afloat and take care of their employees have to pay to maintain this wonderful health care infrastructure for those who refuse to do anything ?
if we 're going to produce a better health care system for every one of us , every one of us is going to have to do our part .
there can not be any such thing as a free ride .
we have to pay for it .
we have to pay for it .
tonight i want to say plainly how i think we should do that .
most of the money will come , under my way of thinking , as it does today , from premiums paid by employers and individuals .
that 's the way it happens today .
but under this health care security plan , every employer and every individual will be asked to contribute something to health care .
this concept was first conveyed to the congress about 20 years ago by president nixon .
and today , a lot of people agree with the concept of shared responsibility between employers and employees and that the best thing to do is to ask every employer and every employee to share that .
the chamber of commerce has said that , and they 're not in the business of hurting small business .
the american medical association has said that .
some call it an employer mandate , but i think it 's the fairest way to achieve responsibility in the heath care system .
and it 's the easiest for ordinary americans to understand because it builds on what we already have and what already works for so many americans .
it is the reform that is not only easiest to understand but easiest to implement in a way that is fair to small business , because we can give a discount to help struggling small businesses meet the cost of covering their employees .
we should require the east bureaucracy or disruption and create the cooperation we need to make the system cost conscious , even as we expand coverage .
and we should do it in a way that does not cripple small businesses and low - wage workers .
every employer should provide coverage , just as three - quarters do now .
those that pay are picking up the tab for those who do n't today .
i do n't think that 's right .
to finance the rest of reform , we can achieve new savings , as i have outlined , in both the federal government and the private sector through better decision making and increased competition .
and we will impose new taxes on tobacco .
i do n't think that should be the only source of revenues .
i believe we should also ask for a modest contribution from big employers who opt out of the system to make up for what those who are in the system pay for medical research , for health education centers , for all the subsidies to small business , for all the things that everyone else is contributing to .
but between those two things , we believe we can pay for this package of benefits and universal coverage and a subsidy program that will help small business .
these sources can cover the cost of the proposal that i have described tonight .
we subjected the numbers in our proposal to the scrutiny of not only all the major agencies in government -- i know a lot of people do n't trust them , but it would be interesting for the american people to know that this was the first time that the financial experts on health care in all of the different government agencies have ever been required to sit in the room together and agree on numbers .
it had never happened before .
but obviously , that 's not enough .
so then we gave these numbers to actuaries from major accounting firms and major fortune 500 companies who have no stake in this other than to see that our efforts succeed .
so i believe our numbers are good and achievable .
now , what does this mean to an individual american citizen ?
some will be asked to pay more .
if you 're an employer and you are n't insuring your workers at all , you 'll have to pay more .
but if you 're a small business with fewer than 50 employees , you 'll get a subsidy .
if you 're a firm that provides only very limited coverage , you may have to pay more .
but some firms will pay the same or less for more coverage .
if you 're a young , single person in your twenties and you 're already insured , your rates may go up somewhat because you 're going to go into a big pool with middle - aged people and older people , and we want to enable people to keep their insurance even when someone in their family gets sick .
but i think that 's fair because when the young get older they will benefit from it , first , and secondly , even those who pay a little more today will benefit 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 years from now by our bringing health care costs closer to inflation .
over the long run , we can all win .
but some will have to pay more in the short run .
nevertheless , the vast majority of the americans watching this tonight will pay the same or less for health care coverage that will be the same or better than the coverage they have tonight .
that is the central reality .
if you currently get your health insurance through your job , under our plan you still will .
and for the first time , everybody will get to choose from among at least three plans to belong to .
if you 're a small business owner who wants to provide health insurance to your family and your employees , but you ca n't afford it because the system is stacked against you , this plan will give you a discount that will finally make insurance affordable .
if you 're already providing insurance , your rates may well drop because we 'll help you as a small business person join thousands of others to get the same benefits big corporations get at the same price they get those benefits .
if you 're self - employed , you 'll pay less , and you will get to deduct from your taxes 100 percent of your health care premiums .
if you 're a large employer , your health care costs wo n't go up as fast , so that you will have more money to put into higher wages and new jobs and to put into the work of being competitive in this tough global economy .
now , these , my fellow americans , are the principles on which i think we should base our efforts : security , simplicity , savings , choice , quality , and responsibility .
these are the guiding stars that we should follow on our journey toward health care reform .
over the coming months , you 'll be bombarded with information from all kinds of sources .
there will be some who will stoutly disagree with what i have proposed and with all other plans in the congress , for that matter .
and some of the arguments will be genuinely sincere and enlightening .
others may simply be scare tactics by those who are motivated by the self - interest they have in the waste the system now generates , because that waste is providing jobs , incomes , and money for some people .
i ask you only to think of this when you hear all of these arguments : ask yourself whether the cost of staying on this same course is n't greater than the cost of change .
and ask yourself , when you hear the arguments , whether the arguments are in your interest or someone else 's .
this is something we have got to try to do together .
i want also to say to the representatives in congress , you have a special duty to look beyond these arguments .
i ask you instead to look into the eyes of the sick child who needs care , to think of the face of the woman who 's been told not only that her condition is malignant but not covered by her insurance , to look at the bottom lines of the businesses driven to bankruptcy by health care costs , to look at the " for sale " signs in front of the homes of families who have lost everything because of their health care costs .
i ask you to remember the kind of people i met over the last year and a half : the elderly couple in new hampshire that broke down and cried because of their shame at having an empty refrigerator to pay for their drags ; a woman who lost a $ 50,000 job that she used to support her six children because her youngest child was so ill that she could n't keep health insurance , and the only way to get care for the child was to get public assistance ; a young couple that had a sick child and could only get insurance from one of the parents ' employers that was a nonprofit corporation with 20 employees , and so they had to face the question of whether to let this poor person with a sick child go or raise the premiums of every employee in the firm by $ 200 ; and on and on and on .
i know we have differences of opinion , but we are here tonight in a spirit that is animated by the problems of those people and by the sheer knowledge that if we can look into our heart , we will not be able to say that the greatest nation in the history of the world is powerless to confront this crisis .
our history and our heritage tell us that we can meet this challenge .
everything about america 's past tells us we will do it .
so i say to you , let us write that new chapter in the american story .
let us guarantee every american comprehensive health benefits that can never be taken away .
you know , in spite of all the work we 've done together and all the progress we 've made , there 's still a lot of people who say it would be an outright miracle if we passed health care reform .
but my fellow americans , in a time of change you have to have miracles .
and miracles do happen .
i mean , just a few days ago we saw a simple handshake shatter decades of deadlock in the middle east .
we 've seen the walls crumble in berlin and south africa .
we see the ongoing brave struggle of the people of russia to seize freedom and democracy .
and now it is our turn to strike a blow for freedom in this country , the freedom of americans to live without fear that their own nation 's health care system wo n't be there for them when they need it .
it 's hard to believe that there was once a time in this century when that kind of fear gripped old age , when retirement was nearly synonymous with poverty and older americans died in the street .
that 's unthinkable today , because over a half a century ago americans had the courage to change , to create a social security system that ensures that no americans will be forgotten in their later years .
forty years from now , our grandchildren will also find it unthinkable that there was a time in this country when hardworking families lost their homes , their savings , their businesses , lost everything simply because their children got sick or because they had to change jobs .
our grandchildren will find such things unthinkable tomorrow if we have the courage to change today .
this is our chance .
this is our journey .
and when our work is done , we will know that we have answered the call of history and met the challenge of our time .
thank you very much , and god bless america .

this is one of those occasions where i really feel that all that needs to be said has already been said .
i thank catherine and david for introducing me , for all the schoolchildren of northern ireland who are here today , and for all whom they represent .
a big part of peace is children growing up safely , learning together , and growing together .
i thank patrick dougan and ronnie lewis for their remarks , for their work here , for all the members of the mackie team who are with us today in welcoming us to this factory .
i was hoping we could have an event like this in northern ireland at a place where people work and reach out to the rest of the world in a positive way , because a big part of peace is working together for family and community and for the welfare of the common enterprise .
it is good to be among the people of northern ireland who have given so much to america and the world , and good to be here with such a large delegation of my fellow americans , including of course my wife .
and i see the secretary of commerce here and the ambassador to great britain , and a number of others .
but we have quite a large delegation from both parties in the united states congress , so we 've sort of got a truce of our own going on here today .
and i 'd like to ask the members of congress who have come all the way from washington , dc , to stand up and be recognized .
would you all stand ?
many of you perhaps know that one in four of america 's presidents trace their roots to ireland 's shores , beginning with andrew jackson , the son of immigrants from carrickfergus , to john fitzgerald kennedy , whose forebears came from county wexford .
i know i am only the latest in this time - honored tradition , but i 'm proud to be the first sitting american president to make it back to belfast .
at this holiday season all around the world , the promise of peace is in the air .
the barriers of the cold war are giving way to a global village where communication and cooperation are the order of the day .
from south africa to the middle east , and now to troubled bosnia , conflicts long thought impossible to solve are moving along the road to resolution .
once - bitter foes are clasping hands and changing history , and long - suffering people are moving closer to normal lives .
here in northern ireland , you are making a miracle , a miracle symbolized by those two children who held hands and told us what this whole thing is all about .
in the land of the harp and the fiddle , the fife and the lambeg drum , two proud traditions are coming together in the harmonies of peace .
the cease - fire and negotiations have sparked a powerful transformation .
mackie 's plant is a symbol of northern ireland 's rebirth .
it has long been a symbol of world - class engineering .
the textile machines you make permit people to weave disparate threads into remarkable fabrics .
that is now what you must do here with the people of northern ireland .
here we lie along the peace line , the wall of steel and stone separating protestant from catholic .
but today , under the leadership of pat dougan , you are bridging the divide , overcoming a legacy of discrimination where fair employment and integration are the watchwords of the future .
on this shop floor , men and women of both traditions are working together to achieve common goals .
peace , once a distant dream , is now making a difference in everyday life in this land .
soldiers have left the streets of belfast ; many have gone home .
people can go to the pub or the store without the burden of the search or the threat of a bomb .
as barriers disappear along the border , families and communities divided for decades are becoming whole once more .
this year in armagh on st. patrick 's day , protestant and catholic children led the parade together for the first time since the troubles began .
a bystander 's words marked the wonder of the occasion when he said , " even the normal is beginning to seem normal . "
the economic rewards of peace are evident as well .
unemployment has fallen here to its lowest level in 14 years , while retail sales and investment are surging .
for from the gleaming city center to the new shop fronts of belfast , to the enterprise center in east belfast , business is thriving , and opportunities are expanding .
with every extra day that the guns are still , business confidence grows stronger , and the promise of prosperity grows as well .
as the shroud of terror melts away , northern ireland 's beauty has been revealed again to all the world , the castles and coasts , the giant 's causeway , the lush green hills , the high white cliffs , a magical backdrop to your greatest asset which i saw all along the way from the airport here today , the warmth and good feeling of your people .
visitors are now coming in record numbers .
indeed , today the air route between belfast and london is the second busiest in all of europe .
i want to honor those whose courage and vision have brought us to this point : prime minister major , prime minister bruton , and before him , prime minister reynolds , laid the background and the basis for this era of reconciliation .
from the downing street declaration to the joint framework document , they altered the course of history .
now , just in the last few days , by launching the twin - track initiative , they have opened a promising new gateway to a just and lasting peace .
foreign minister spring , sir patrick mayhew , david trimble , and john hume all have labored to realize the promise of peace .
and gerry adams , along with loyalist leaders such as david ervine and gary mcmichael , helped to silence the guns on the streets and to bring about the first peace in a generation .
but most of all , america salutes all the people of northern ireland who have shown the world in concrete ways that here the will for peace is now stronger than the weapons of war .
with mixed sporting events encouraging competition on the playing field , not the battlefield , with women 's support groups , literacy programs , job training centers that served both communities , these and countless other initiatives bolster the foundations of peace as well .
last year 's cease - fire of the irish republican army , joined by the combined loyalist military command , marked a turning point in the history of northern ireland .
now is the time to sustain that momentum and lock in the gains of peace .
neither community wants to go back to the violence of the past .
the children told of that today .
both parties must do their part to move this process forward now .
let me begin by saying that the search for common ground demands the courage of an open mind .
this twin - track initiative gives the parties a chance to begin preliminary talks in ways in which all views will be represented and all voices will be heard .
it also establishes an international body to address the issue of arms decommissioning .
i hope the parties will seize this opportunity .
engaging in honest dialog is not an act of surrender , it is an act of strength and common sense .
moving from cease - fire to peace requires dialog .
for 25 years now , the history of northern ireland has been written in the blood of its children and their parents .
the cease - fire turned the page on that history .
it must not be allowed to turn back .
there must also be progress away from the negotiating table .
violence has lessened , but it has not disappeared .
the leaders of the four main churches recently condemned the so - called punishment beatings and called for an end to such attacks .
i add my voice to theirs .
as the church leaders said , this is a time when the utmost efforts on all sides are needed to build a peaceful and confident community in the future .
but true peace requires more than a treaty , even more than the absence of violence .
those who have suffered most in the fighting must share fairly in the fruits of renewal .
the frustration that gave rise to violence must give way to faith in the future .
the united states will help to secure the tangible benefits of peace .
ours is the first american administration ever to support in the congress the international fund for ireland , which has become an engine for economic development and for reconciliation .
we will continue to encourage trade and investment and to help end the cycle of unemployment .
we are proud to support northern ireland .
you have given america a very great deal .
irish - protestant and irish - catholic together have added to america 's strength .
from our battle for independence down to the present day , the irish have not only fought in our wars , they have built our nation , and we owe you a very great debt .
let me say that of all the gifts we can offer in return , perhaps the most enduring and the most precious is the example of what is possible when people find unity and strength in their diversity .
we know from our own experience even today how hard that is to do .
after all , we fought a great civil war over the issue of race and slavery in which hundreds of thousands of our people were killed .
today , in one of our counties alone , in los angeles , there are over 150 different ethnic and racial groups represented .
we know we can become stronger if we bridge our differences .
but we learned in our own civil war that that has to begin with a change of the heart .
i grew up in the american south , in one of the states that tried to break from the american union .
my forebears on my father 's side were soldiers in the confederate army .
i was reading the other day a book about our first governor after the civil war who fought for the union army and who lost members of his own family .
they lived the experience so many of you have lived .
when this governor took office and looked out over a sea of his fellow citizens who fought on the other side , he said these words : " we have all done wrong .
no one can say his heart is altogether clean and his hands altogether pure .
thus , as we wish to be forgiven , let us forgive those who have sinned against us and ours . "
that was the beginning of america 's reconciliation , and it must be the beginning of northern ireland 's reconciliation .
it is so much easier to believe that our differences matter more than what we have in common .
it is easier , but it is wrong .
we all cherish family and faith , work and community .
we all strive to live lives that are free and honest and responsible .
we all want our children to grow up in a world where their talents are matched by their opportunities .
and i believe those values are just as strong in county londonderry as they are in londonderry , new hampshire ; in belfast , northern ireland as in belfast , maine .
i am proud to be of ulster scots stock .
i am proud to be , also , of irish stock .
i share these roots with millions and millions of americans , now over 40 million americans .
and we rejoice at things being various , as louis macneice once wrote .
it is one of the things that makes america special .
because our greatness flows from the wealth of our diversity as well as the strength of the ideals we share in common , we feel bound to support others around the world who seek to bridge their own divides .
this is an important part of our country 's mission on the eve of the 21st century , because we know that the chain of peace that protects us grows stronger with every new link that is forged .
for the first time in half a century now , we can put our children to bed at night knowing that the nuclear weapons of the former soviet union are no longer pointed at those children .
in south africa , the long night of apartheid has given way to a new freedom for all peoples .
in the middle east , arabs and israelis are stepping beyond war to peace in an area where many believed peace would never come .
in haiti , a brutal dictatorship has given way to a fragile new democracy .
in europe , the dream of a stable , undivided free continent seems finally within reach as the people of bosnia have the first real hope for peace since the terrible fighting began there nearly 4 years ago .
the united states looks forward to working with our allies here in europe and others to help the people in bosnia , the muslims , the croats , the serbs , to move beyond their divisions and their destructions to make the peace agreement they have made a reality in the lives of their people .
those who work for peace have got to support one another .
we know that when leaders stand up for peace , they place their forces on the line and sometimes their very lives on the line , as we learned so recently in the tragic murder of the brave prime minister of israel .
for , just as peace has its pioneers , peace will always have its rivals .
even when children stand up and say what these children said today , there will always be people who , deep down inside , will never be able to give up the past .
over the last 3 years , i have had the privilege of meeting with and closely listening to both nationalists and unionists from northern ireland , and i believe that the greatest struggle you face now is not between opposing ideas or opposing interests .
the greatest struggle you face is between those who deep down inside are inclined to be peacemakers and those who deep down inside can not yet embrace the cause of peace , between those who are in the ship of peace and those who are trying to sink it .
old habits die hard .
there will always be those who define the worth of their lives not by who they are but by who they are n't , not by what they 're for but by what they are against .
they will never escape the dead - end street of violence .
but you , the vast majority , protestant and catholic alike , must not allow the ship of peace to sink on the rocks of old habits and hard grudges .
you must stand firm against terror .
you must say to those who still would use violence for political objectives , " you are the past .
your day is over .
violence has no place at the table of democracy and no role in the future of this land . "
by the same token , you must also be willing to say to those who renounce violence and who do take their own risks for peace that they are entitled to be full participants in the democratic process .
those who do show the courage to break with the past are entitled to their stake in the future .
as leaders for peace become invested in the process , as leaders make compromises and risk the backlash , people begin more and more -- i have seen this all over the world -- they begin more and more to develop a common interest in each other 's success , in standing together rather than standing apart .
they realize that the sooner they get to true peace , with all the rewards it brings , the sooner it will be easy to discredit and destroy the forces of destruction .
we will stand with those who takes risks for peace in northern ireland and around the world .
i pledge that we will do all we can , through the international fund for ireland and in many other ways , to ease your load .
if you walk down this path continually , you will not walk alone .
we are entering an era of possibility unparalleled in all of human history .
if you enter that era determined to build a new age of peace , the united states of america will proudly stand with you .
but at the end of the day , as with all free people , your future is for you to decide .
your destiny is for you to determine .
only you can decide between division and unity , between hard lives and high hopes .
only you can create a lasting peace .
it takes courage to let go of familiar divisions .
it takes faith to walk down a new road .
but when we see the bright gaze of these children , we know the risk is worth the reward .
i have been so touched by the thousands of letters i have received from schoolchildren here , telling me what peace means to them .
one young girl from ballymena wrote , and i quote , " it is not easy to forgive and forget , especially for those who have lost a family member or a close friend .
however , if people could look to the future with hope instead of the past with fear , we can only be moving in the right direction . "
i could n't have said it nearly as well .
i believe you can summon the strength to keep moving forward .
after all , you have come so far already .
you have braved so many dangers .
you have endured so many sacrifices .
surely , there can be no turning back .
but peace must be waged with a warrior 's resolve , bravely , proudly , and relentlessly , secure in the knowledge of the single greatest difference between war and peace : in peace , everybody can win .
i was overcome today , when i landed in my plane and i drove with hillary up the highway to come here , by the phenomenal beauty of the place and the spirit and the good will of the people .
northern ireland has a chance not only to begin anew but to be a real inspiration to the rest of the world , a model of progress through tolerance .
let us join our efforts together as never before to make that dream a reality .
let us join our prayers in this season of peace for a future of peace in this good land .
thank you very much .

my fellow americans , tonight for the first time in 79 days , the skies over yugoslavia are silent .
the serb army and police are withdrawing from kosovo .
the one million men , women , and children driven from their land are preparing to return home .
the demands of an outraged and united international community have been met .
i can report to the american people that we have achieved a victory for a safer world , for our democratic values , and for a stronger america .
our pilots have returned to base .
the airstrikes have been suspended .
aggression against an innocent people has been contained and is being turned back .
when i ordered our armed forces into combat , we had three clear goals : to enable the kosovar people , the victims of some of the most vicious atrocities in europe since the second world war , to return to their homes with safety and self - government ; to require serbian forces responsible for those atrocities to leave kosovo ; and to deploy an international security force , with nato at its core , to protect all the people of that troubled land , serbs and albanians , alike .
those goals will be achieved .
a necessary conflict has been brought to a just and honorable conclusion .
the result will be security and dignity for the people of kosovo , achieved by an alliance that stood together in purpose and resolve , assisted by the diplomatic efforts of russia .
this victory brings a new hope that when a people are singled out for destruction because of their heritage and religious faith and we can do something about it , the world will not look the other way .
i want to express my profound gratitude to the men and women of our armed forces and those of our allies .
day after day , night after night , they flew , risking their lives to attack their targets and to avoid civilian casualties when they were fired upon from populated areas .
i ask every american to join me in saying to them , thank you , you 've made us very proud .
i 'm also grateful to the american people for standing against the awful ethnic cleansing , for sending generous assistance to the refugees , and for opening your hearts and your homes to the innocent victims who came here .
i want to speak with you for a few moments tonight about why we fought , what we achieved , and what we have to do now to advance the peace , and together with the people of the balkans , forge a future of freedom , progress , and harmony .
we should remember that the violence we responded to in kosovo was the culmination of a 10-year campaign by slobodan milosevic , the leader of serbia , to exploit ethnic and religious differences in order to impose his will on the lands of the former yugoslavia .
that 's what he tried to do in croatia and in bosnia , and now in kosovo .
the world saw the terrifying consequences : 500 villages burned ; men of all ages separated from their loved ones to be shot and buried in mass graves ; women raped ; children made to watch their parents die ; a whole people forced to abandon , in hours , communities their families had spent generations building .
for these atrocities , mr. milosevic and his top aides have been indicted by the international war crimes tribunal for war crimes and crimes against humanity .
i will never forget the kosovar refugees i recently met .
some of them could barely talk about what they had been through .
all they had left was hope that the world would not turn its back .
when our diplomatic efforts to avert this horror were rebuffed and the violence mounted , we and our allies chose to act .
mr. milosevic continued to do terrible things to the people of kosovo , but we were determined to turn him back .
our firmness finally has brought an end to a vicious campaign of ethnic cleansing , and we acted early enough to reverse it , to enable the kosovars to go home .
when they do , they will be safe .
they will be able to reopen their schools , speak their language , practice their religion , choose their leaders , and shape their destiny .
there 'll be no more days of foraging for food in the cold of mountains and forests , no more nights of hiding in cellars , wondering if the next day will bring death or deliverance .
they will know that mr. milosevic 's army and paramilitary forces will be gone , his 10-year campaign of repression finished .
nato has achieved this success as a united alliance , ably led by secretary general solana and general clark .
nineteen democracies came together and stayed together through the stiffest military challenge in nato 's 50-year history .
we also preserved our critically important partnership with russia , thanks to president yeltsin , who opposed our military effort but supported diplomacy to end the conflict on terms that met our conditions .
i 'm grateful to russian envoy chernomyrdin and finnish president ahtisaari for their work , and to vice president gore for the key role he played in putting their partnership together .
now , i hope russian troops will join us in the force that will keep the peace in kosovo , just as they have in bosnia .
finally , we have averted the wider war this conflict might well have sparked .
the countries of southeastern europe backed the nato campaign , helped the refugees , and showed the world there is more compassion than cruelty in this troubled region .
this victory makes it all the more likely that they will choose a future of democracy , fair treatment of minorities , and peace .
now we 're entering a new phase , building that peace , and there are formidable challenges .
first , we must be sure the serbian authorities meet their commitments .
we are prepared to resume our military campaign should they fail to do so .
next , we must get the kosovar refugees home safely ; mine fields will have to be cleared ; homes destroyed by serb forces will have to be rebuilt ; homeless people in need of food and medicine will have to get them ; the fate of the missing will have to be determined ; the kosovar liberation army will have to demilitarize , as it has agreed to do .
and we in the peacekeeping force will have to ensure that kosovo is a safe place to live for all its citizens , ethnic serbs as well as ethnic albanians .
for these things to happen , security must be established .
to that end , some 50,000 troops from almost 30 countries will deploy to kosovo .
our european allies will provide the vast majority of them ; america will contribute about 7,000 .
we are grateful that during nato 's air campaign we did not lose a single serviceman in combat .
but this next phase also will be dangerous .
bitter memories will still be fresh , and there may well be casualties .
so we have made sure that the force going into kosovo will have nato command and control and rules of engagement set by nato .
it will have the means and the mandate to protect itself while doing its job .
in the meantime , the united nations will organize a civilian administration while preparing the kosovars to govern and police themselves .
as local institutions take hold , nato will be able to turn over increasing responsibility to them and draw down its forces .
a third challenge will be to put in place a plan for lasting peace and stability in kosovo and through all the balkans .
for that to happen , the european union and the united states must plan for tomorrow , not just today .
we must help to give the democracies of southeastern europe a path to a prosperous , shared future , a unifying magnet more powerful than the pull of hatred and destruction that has threatened to tear them apart .
our european partners must provide most of the resources for this effort , but it is in america 's interest to do our part , as well .
a final challenge will be to encourage serbia to join its neighbors in this historic journey to a peaceful , democratic , united europe .
i want to say a few words to the serbian people tonight .
i know that you , too , have suffered in mr. milosevic 's wars .
you should know that your leaders could have kept kosovo as a part of your country without driving a single kosovar family from its home , without killing a single adult or child , without inviting a single nato bomb to fall on your country .
you endured 79 days of bombing , not to keep kosovo a province of serbia , but simply because mr. milosevic was determined to eliminate kosovar albanians from kosovo , dead or alive .
as long as he remains in power , as long as your nation is ruled by an indicted war criminal , we will provide no support for the reconstruction of serbia .
but we are ready to provide humanitarian aid now and to help to build a better future for serbia , too , when its government represents tolerance and freedom , not repression and terror .
my fellow americans , all these challenges are substantial , but they are far preferable to the challenges of war and continued instability in europe .
we have sent a message of determination and hope to all the world .
think of all the millions of innocent people who died in this bloody century because democracies reacted too late to evil and aggression .
because of our resolve , the 20th century is ending not with helpless indignation but with a hopeful affirmation of human dignity and human rights for the 21st century .
in a world too divided by fear among people of different racial , ethnic , and religious groups , we have given confidence to the friends of freedom and pause to those who would exploit human difference for inhuman purposes .
america still faces great challenges in this world , but we look forward to meeting them .
so , tonight i ask you to be proud of your country and very proud of the men and women who serve it in uniform .
for in kosovo , we did the right thing ; we did it the right way ; and we will finish the job .
good night , and may god bless our wonderful united states of america .

to all of our distinguished guests from all the services , to general powell and the joint chiefs , secretary aspin , mr. vice president , ladies and gentlemen , and especially to general johnston and the men and women of the unified task force in somalia .
general johnston has just reported to me : mission accomplished .
and so , on behalf of all the american people , i say to you , general , and to all whom you brought with you : welcome home , and thank you for a job very , very well done .
you represent the thousands who served in this crucial operation , in the first marine expeditionary force , in the army 10th mountain division , aboard the navy 's tripoli amphibious ready group , in the air force and air national guard airlift squadrons , and in other units in each of our services .
over 30,000 american military personnel served at sometime in these last 5 months in somalia .
and serving alongside you were thousands of others from 20 nations .
although your mission was humanitarian and not combat , you nonetheless faced difficult and dangerous conditions .
you sometimes were subjected to abuse and forced to dodge rocks and even bullets .
you saw firsthand the horror of hunger , disease , and death .
but you pressed on with what you set out to do , and you were successful .
you have served in the best tradition of the armed forces of the united states , and you have made the american people very , very proud .
in the weeks to come , we will formally recognize the contributions of those who participated in operation restore hope .
but earlier today , to honor their accomplishments and that of all who supported that effort , i awarded to general johnston the defense distinguished service medal in recognition not only of his extraordinary service but also of all those who served with him so well .
thank you all for your dedicated work .
to understand the magnitude of what our forces in somalia accomplished , the world need only look back at somalia 's condition just 6 months ago .
hundreds of thousands of people were starving ; armed anarchy ruled the land and the streets of every city and town .
today , food is flowing ; crops are growing ; schools and hospitals are reopening .
although there is still much to be done if enduring peace is to prevail , one can now envision a day when somalia will be reconstructed as a functioning civil society .
if all of you who served had not gone , it is absolutely certain that tens of thousands would have died by now .
you saved their lives .
you gave the people of somalia the opportunity to look beyond starvation and focus on their future and the future of their children .
although you went on a mission of peace , eight americans did not return .
we salute each of them .
we thank them and their families .
america will never forget what they did or what they gave .
to their loved ones we extend our hearts and our prayers .
as we honor the service of those who have returned and those who did not , it is fitting that we reflect on what the successful mission signifies for the future .
this , the largest humanitarian relief operation in history , has written an important new chapter in the international annals of peacekeeping and humanitarian assistance .
you have shown that the work of the just can prevail over the arms of the warlords .
you have demonstrated that the world is ready to mobilize its resources in new ways to face the challenges of a new age .
and you have proved yet again that american leadership can help to mobilize international action to create a better world .
you also leave behind a u. n. peacekeeping force with a significant american component .
this force is a reflection of the new era we have entered , for it has americans participating in new ways .
just hours ago , general johnston turned over command to general bir of turkey as untaf became unosom ii .
you set the stage and made it possible for that force to do its mission and for the somalis to complete the work of rebuilding and creating a peaceful , self - sustaining , and democratic civil society .
your successful return reminds us that other missions lie ahead for our nation .
some we can foresee , and others we can not .
as always we stand ready to defend our interests , working with others where possible and by ourselves where necessary .
but increasingly in this new era , we will need to work with an array of multinational partners , often in new arrangements .
you have proved again that that is possible .
you have proved again that our involvement in multilateral efforts need not be open - ended or illdefined , that we can go abroad and accomplish some distinct objectives , and then come home again when the mission is accomplished .
some will ask why , if the cold war ended , we must still support the world 's greatest military forces , the kind that general johnston and his comrades represent .
i say it is because we still have interests ; we still face threats ; we still have responsibilities .
the word has not seen the end of evil , and america can lead other countries to share more of the responsibilities that they ought to be shouldering .
some will ask why we must so often be the one to lead .
well , of course we can not be the world 's policeman , but we are , and we must continue to be , the world 's leader .
that is the job of the united states of america .
and so today , america opens its arms in a hearty welcome home .
general , to you and all the men and women who served with you , you have the admiration of the world and the thanks of your country for continuing the tradition of our armed forces and the values that make us proud to be americans and for proving that we can lead and serve in new ways in a new world .
in the words of the scriptures : blessed are the peacemakers .
thank you very much .

thank you .
president and mrs. rawlings , honorable ministers , honorable members of the council of state , honorable members of parliament , honorable members of the judiciary , nananom , and the people of ghana .
mitsea mu .
america fuo kyia mo .
now you have shown me what akwaaba   really means .
thank you , thank you so much .
i am proud to be the first american president ever to visit ghana and to go on to uganda , rwanda , south africa , botswana , and senegal .
it is a journey long overdue .
america should have done it before , and i am proud to be on that journey .
thank you for welcoming me .
i want to listen and to learn .
i want to build a future partnership between our two people , and i want to introduce the people of the united states , through my trip , to the new face of africa .
from kampala to cape town , from dakar to dar - es - salaam , africans are being stirred by new hopes for democracy and peace and prosperity .
challenges remain , but they must be to all of you a call to action , not a cause for despair .
you must draw strength from the past and energy from the promise of a new future .
my dream for this trip is that together we might do the things so that , 100 years from now , your grandchildren and mine will look back and say this was the beginning of a new african renaissance .
with a new century coming into view , old patterns are fading away : the cold war is gone ; colonialism is gone ; apartheid is gone .
remnants of past troubles remain .
but surely , there will come a time when everywhere reconciliation will replace recrimination .
now , nations and individuals finally are free to seek a newer world where democracy and peace and prosperity are not slogans but the essence of a new africa .
africa has changed so much in just 10 years .
dictatorship has been replaced so many places .
half of the 48 nations in sub - saharan africa choose their own governments , leading a new generation willing to learn from the past and imagine a future .
though democracy has not yet gained a permanent foothold even in most successful nations , there is everywhere a growing respect for tolerance , diversity , and elemental human rights .
a decade ago , business was stifled .
now , africans are embracing economic reform .
today from ghana to mozambique , from cote d'ivoire to uganda , growing economies are fueling a transformation in africa .
for all this promise , you and i know africa is not free from peril : the genocide in rwanda ; civil wars in sierra leone , liberia , both congos ; pariah states that export violence and terror ; military dictatorship in nigeria ; and high levels of poverty , malnutrition , disease , illiteracy , and unemployment .
to fulfill the vast promise of a new era , africa must face these challenges .
we must build classrooms and companies , increase the food supply and save the environment , and prevent disease before deadly epidemics break out .
the united states is ready to help you .
first , my fellow americans must leave behind the stereotypes that have warped our view and weakened our understanding of africa .
we need to come to know africa as a place of new beginning and ancient wisdom from which , as my wife , our first lady , said in her book , we have so much to learn .
it is time for americans to put a new africa on our map .
here in independence square , ghana blazed the path of that new africa .
more than four decades ago , kwame nkrumah proposed what he called a " motion of destiny " as ghana stepped forward as a free and independent nation .
today , ghana again lights the way for africa .
democracy is spreading .
business is growing .
trade and investment are rising .
ghana has the only african - owned company today on our new york stock exchange .
you have worked hard to preserve the peace in africa and around the world -- from liberia to lebanon , from croatia to cambodia .
and you have given the world a statesman and peacemaker in kofi annan to lead the united nations .
the world admires your success .
the united states admires your success .
we see it taking root throughout the new africa .
and we stand ready to support it .
first , we want to work with africa to nurture democracy , knowing it is never perfect or complete .
we have learned in over 200 years that every day democracy must be defended and a more perfect union can always lie ahead .
democracy requires more than the insults and injustice and inequality that so many societies have known and america has known .
democracy requires human rights for everyone , everywhere , for men and women , for children and the elderly , for people of different cultures and tribes and backgrounds .
a good society honors its entire family .
second , democracy must have prosperity .
americans of both political parties want to increase trade and investment in africa .
we have an " african growth and opportunity act " now before congress .
both parties ' leadership are supporting it .
by opening markets and building businesses and creating jobs , we can help and strengthen each other .
by supporting the education of your people , we can strengthen your future and help each other .
for centuries , other nations exploited africa 's gold , africa 's diamonds , africa 's minerals .
now is the time for africans to cultivate something more precious , the mind and heart of the people of africa , through education .
third , we must allow democracy and prosperity to take root without violence .
we must work to resolve the war and genocide that still tear at the heart of africa .
we must help africans to prevent future conflicts .
here in ghana , you have shown the world that different peoples can live together in harmony .
you have proved that africans of different countries can unite to help solve disputes in neighboring countries .
peace everywhere in africa will give more free time and more money to the pressing needs of our children 's future .
the killing must stop if a new future is to begin .
fourth and finally , for peace and prosperity and democracy to prevail , you must protect your magnificent natural domain .
africa is mankind 's first home .
we all came out of africa .
we must preserve the magnificent natural environment that is left .
we must manage the water and forest .
we must learn to live in harmony with other species .
you must learn how to fight drought and famine and global warming .
and we must share with you the technology that will enable you to preserve your environment and provide more economic opportunity to your people .
america has good reason to work with africa : 30 million americans , more than one in ten , proudly trace their heritage here .
the first peace corps volunteers from america came to ghana over 35 years ago ; over 57,000 have served in africa since then .
through blood ties and common endeavors , we know we share the same hopes and dreams to provide for ourselves and our children , to live in peace and worship freely , to build a better life than our parents knew and pass a brighter future on to our children .
america needs africa , america needs ghana as a partner in the fight for a better future .
so many of our problems do not stop at any nation 's border , international crime and terrorism and drug trafficking , the degradation of the environment , the spread of diseases like aids and malaria , and so many of our opportunities can not stop at a nation 's border .
we need partners to deepen the meaning of democracy in america , in africa , and throughout the world .
we need partners to build prosperity .
we need partners to live in peace .
we will not build this new partnership overnight , but perseverance creates its own reward .
an ashanti proverb tells us that by coming and going , a bird builds its nest .
we will come and go with you and do all we can as you build the new africa , a work that must begin here in africa , not with aid or trade , though they are important , but first with ordinary citizens , especially the young people in this audience today .
you must feel the winds of freedom blowing at your back , pushing you onward to a brighter future .
there are roughly 700 days left until the end of this century and the beginning of a new millennium .
there are roughly 700 million africans in sub - saharan africa .
every day and every individual is a precious opportunity .
we do not have a moment to lose , and we do not have a person to lose .
i ask you , my friends , to let me indulge a moment of our shared history in closing .
in 1957 our great civil rights leader , martin luther king , came to accra to help represent our country as ghana celebrated its independence .
he was deeply moved by the birth of your nation .
six years later , on the day after w. e.b. du bois died here in ghana in 1963 , dr. king spoke to an enormous gathering like this in washington .
he said these simple words : " i have a dream , a dream that all americans might live free and equal as brothers and sisters . "
his dream became the dream of our nation and changed us in ways we could never have imagined .
we are hardly finished , but we have traveled a long way on the wings of that dream .
dr. du bois , a towering african - american intellectual , died here as a citizen of ghana and a friend of kwame nkrumah .
he once wrote , " the habit of democracy must be to encircle the earth . "
let us together resolve to complete the circle of democracy , to dream the dream that all people on the entire earth will be free and equal , to begin a new century with that commitment to freedom and justice for all , to redeem the promise inscribed right here on independence arch .
let us find a future here in africa , the cradle of humanity .
medase .
america dase .
thank you , and god bless you .

thank you very much .
first , let me thank all of you who are here .
many of us have been working together now for 20 years on a lot of these issues , and this is a very happy day for us .
i thank the first lady for all she has done on this issue , for as long as i have known her .
i thank the vice president and mrs. gore for their family conference and the light it has shed on the announcement we 're here to emphasize today .
thank you , secretary riley , for the community learning centers , and i 'm very proud of what we 've done there .
thank you , bill white .
i 'll talk more about your contribution in a moment , but it is truly remarkable .
and i thank rand and debra bass for giving us a living , breathing example of the best of america -- parents who are working hard to do their jobs , but also determined to do their most important job very well with their children .
i thank senator feinstein , senator dodd , and senator boxer for being here .
tomorrow , in the state of the union address , i will spell out what we seek to do on behalf of our children to prepare them for the 21st century .
but i want to talk a little bit about education today and about this announcement in that context .
education must be our nation 's highest priority .
last year , in the state of the union address , i set out a 10-point plan to move us forward and urged the american people to make sure that politics stops at the schoolhouse door .
well , we 've made a lot of progress on that 10-point plan : a remarkable -- a remarkable -- array of initiatives to open the doors of college to every american who 's willing to work for it ; strong progress toward high national standards in the basics , the america reads challenge to teach every 8-year - old to read ; continued progress in the vice president 's program to hook up all of our classrooms and libraries to the internet by the year 2000 .
this has been the most important year in a generation for education reform .
tomorrow i 'll set out the next steps on our continuing road .
first , i will propose the first - ever national effort to reduce class size in the early grades .
hillary and i worked very hard 15 years ago now to have very strict class sizes at home in the early grades , and it was quite controversial and i think enormously beneficial when we did it .
our balanced budget will help to hire 100,000 teachers who must pass state competency tests but who will be able to reduce class size in the first , second , and third grades to an average of 18 nationwide .
second , since there are more students and there will be more teachers , there must be more classrooms .
so i will propose a school construction tax cut to help communities modernize and build new schools .
third , i will promote a national effort to help schools that follow the lead of the chicago system in ending social promotion but helping students with summer school and other programs to give them the tools they need to get ahead .
all these steps will help our children get the future they deserve .
and that 's why what we 're announcing here is so important as well .
every child needs someplace to go after school .
with after - school programs , we can not only keep our kids healthy and happy and safe , we can help to teach them to say no to drugs , alcohol , and crime , yes to reading , sports , and computers .
my balanced budget plan includes a national initiative to spark private sector and local community efforts to provide after - school care , as the secretary of education said , to half a million more children .
now , let me say , in addition to all the positive benefits , i think it 's important to point out that the hours between 3 and 7 at night are the most vulnerable hours for young people to get in trouble , for juvenile crime .
there is this sort of assumption that everybody that gets in trouble when they 're young has just already been abandoned .
that 's not true .
most of the kids that get in trouble get in trouble after school closes and before their parents get home from work .
so in the adolescent years , in the later years , it is profoundly important to try to give kids something to say yes to and something positive to do .
but we ca n't do it alone .
as i said , our plan involves a public - private partnership .
so it has fallen to me to announce that our distinguished guest from the mott foundation of flint , michigan , has pledged up to $ 55 million to help ensure that after - school programs supported by federal funds are of the highest quality .
that is an astonishing gift .
thank you , bill white .
thank you .
we are determined to help americans succeed in the workplace , to raise well - educated , healthy kids , and to help americans succeed at the toughest job of all , that of being a parent .
and the mott foundation has gone a long way toward helping us .
i thank them .
now , i have to go back to work on my state of the union speech .
and i worked on it until pretty late last night .
but i want to say one thing to the american people .
i want you to listen to me .
i 'm going to say this again .
i did not have sexual relations with that woman , miss lewinsky .
i never told anybody to lie , not a single time -- never .
these allegations are false .
and i need to go back to work for the american people .
thank you .

thank you very much .
mr. speaker , mr. president , members of the 103rd congress , my fellow americans : 
 i 'm not at all sure what speech is in the teleprompter tonight   but i hope we can talk about the state of the union .
i ask you to begin by recalling the memory of the giant who presided over this chamber with such force and grace .
tip o'neill liked to call himself " a man of the house . "
and he surely was that .
but even more , he was a man of the people , a bricklayer 's son who helped to build the great american middle class .
tip o'neill never forgot who he was , where he came from , or who sent him here .
tonight he 's smiling down on us for the first time from the lord 's gallery .
but in his honor , may we , too , always remember who we are , where we come from , and who sent us here .
if we do that we will return over and over again to the principle that if we simply give ordinary people equal opportunity , quality education , and a fair shot at the american dream , they will do extraordinary things .
we gather tonight in a world of changes so profound and rapid that all nations are tested .
our american heritage has always been to master such change , to use it to expand opportunity at home and our leadership abroad .
but for too long and in too many ways , that heritage was abandoned , and our country drifted .
for 30 years , family life in america has been breaking down .
for 20 years , the wages of working people have been stagnant or declining .
for the 12 years of trickle - down economics , we built a false prosperity on a hollow base as our national debt quadrupled .
from 1989 to 1992 , we experienced the slowest growth in a half century .
for too many families , even when both parents were working , the american dream has been slipping away .
in 1992 , the american people demanded that we change .
a year ago i asked all of you to join me in accepting responsibility for the future of our country .
well , we did .
we replaced drift and deadlock with renewal and reform .
and i want to thank every one of you here who heard the american people , who broke gridlock , who gave them the most successful teamwork between a president and a congress in 30 years .
this congress produced a budget that cut the deficit by half a trillion dollars , cut spending , and raised income taxes on only the wealthiest americans .
this congress produced tax relief for millions of low - income workers to reward work over welfare .
it produced nafta .
it produced the brady bill , now the brady law .
and thank you , jim brady , for being here , and god bless you , sir .
this congress produced tax cuts to reduce the taxes of nine out of 10 small businesses who use the money to invest more and create more jobs .
it produced more research and treatment for aids , more childhood immunizations , more support for women 's health research , more affordable college loans for the middle class , a new national service program for those who want to give something back to their country and their communities for higher education , a dramatic increase in high - tech investments to move us from a defense to a domestic high - tech economy .
this congress produced a new law , the motor voter bill , to help millions of people register to vote .
it produced family and medical leave .
all passed .
all signed into law with not one single veto .
these accomplishments were all commitments i made when i sought this office .
and in fairness , they all had to be passed by you in this congress .
but i am persuaded that the real credit belongs to the people who sent us here , who pay our salaries , who hold our feet to the fre .
but what we do here is really beginning to change lives .
let me just give you one example .
i will never forget what the family and medical leave law meant to just one father i met early one sunday morning in the white house .
it was unusual to see a family there touring early sunday morning , but he had his wife and his three children there , one of them in a wheelchair .
i came up , and after we had our picture taken and had a little visit , i was walking off and that man grabbed me by the arm and he said , " mr. president , let me tell you something .
my little girl here is desperately ill .
she 's probably not going to make it .
but because of the family leave law , i was able to take time off to spend with her , the most important time i ever spent in my life , without losing my job and hurting the rest of my family .
it means more to me than i will ever be able to say .
do n't you people up here ever think what you do does n't make a difference .
it does . "
though we are making a difference , our work has just begun .
many americans still have n't felt the impact of what we 've done .
the recovery still has n't touched every community or created enough jobs .
incomes are still stagnant .
there 's still too much violence and not enough hope in too many places .
abroad , the young democracies we are strongly supporting still face very difficult times and look to us for leadership .
and so tonight , let us resolve to continue the journey of renewal , to create more and better jobs , to guarantee health security for all , to reward work over welfare , to promote democracy abroad , and to begin to reclaim our streets from violent crime and drugs and gangs , to renew our own american community .
last year we began to put our house in order by tackling the budget deficit that was driving us toward bankruptcy .
we cut $ 255 billion in spending , including entitlements , and over 340 separate budget items .
we froze domestic spending and used honest budget numbers .
led by the vice president , we launched a campaign to reinvent government .
we cut staff , cut perks , even trimmed the fleet of federal limousines .
after years of leaders whose rhetoric attacked bureaucracy but whose action expanded it , we will actually reduce it by 252,000 people over the next five years .
by the time we have finished , the federal bureaucracy will be at its lowest point in 30 years .
because the deficit was so large and because they benefited from tax cuts in the 1980s , we did ask the wealthiest americans to pay more to reduce the deficit .
so on april 15 , the american people will discover the truth about what we did last year on taxes .
only the top 1 --   -- yes , listen , the top 1.2 percent of americans , as i said all along , will pay higher income tax rates .
let me repeat : only the wealthiest 1.2 percent of americans will face higher income tax rates , and no one else will .
and that is the truth .
of course , there were , as there always are in politics , naysayers who said this plan would n't work .
but they were wrong .
when i became president , the experts predicted that next year 's deficit would be $ 300 billion .
but because we acted , those same people now say the deficit is going to be under $ 180 billion , 40 percent lower than was previously predicted .
our economic program has helped to produce the lowest core inflation rate and the lowest interest rates in 20 years .
and because those interest rates are down , business investment and equipment is growing at seven times the rate of the previous four years .
auto sales are way up .
home sales are at a record high .
millions of americans have refinanced their homes , and our economy has produced 1.6 million private sector jobs in 1993 , more than were created in the previous four years combined .
the people who supported this economic plan should be proud of its early results .
proud .
but everyone in this chamber should know and acknowledge that there is more to do .
next month i will send you one of the toughest budgets ever presented to congress .
it will cut spending in more than 300 programs , eliminate 100 domestic programs , and reform the ways in which governments buy goods and services .
this year we must again make the hard choices to live within the hard spending ceilings we have set .
we must do it .
we have proved we can bring the deficit down without choking off recovery , without punishing seniors or the middle class , and without putting our national security at risk .
if you will stick with this plan , we will post three consecutive years of declining deficits for the first time since harry truman lived in the white house .
and once again , the buck stops here .
our economic plan also bolsters our strength and our credibility around the world .
once we reduced the deficit and put the steel back into our competitive edge , the world echoed with the sound of falling trade barriers .
in one year , with nafta , with gatt , with our efforts in asia and the national export strategy , we did more to open world markets to american products than at any time in the last two generations .
that means more jobs and rising living standards for the american people , low deficits , low inflation , low interest rates , low trade barriers , and high investments .
these are the building blocks of our recovery .
but if we want to take full advantage of the opportunities before us in the global economy , you all know we must do more .
as we reduce defense spending , i ask congress to invest more in the technologies of tomorrow .
defense conversion will keep us strong militarily and create jobs for our people here at home .
as we protect our environment , we must invest in the environmental technologies of the future which will create jobs .
this year we will fight for a revitalized clean water act and a safe drinking water act and a reformed superfund program .
and the vice president is right , we must also work with the private sector to connect every classroom , every clinic , every library , every hospital in america into a national information super highway by the year 2000 .
think of it , instant access to information will increase productivity , will help to educate our children .
it will provide better medical care .
it will create jobs .
and i call on the congress to pass legislation to establish that information super highway this year .
as we expand opportunity and create jobs , no one can be left out .
we must continue to enforce fair lending and fair housing and all civil rights laws , because america will never be complete in its renewal until everyone shares in its bounty .
but we all know , too , we can do all these things , put our economic house in order , expand world trade , target the jobs of the future , guarantee equal opportunity , but if we 're honest , we 'll all admit that this strategy still can not work unless we also give our people the education , training , and skills they need to seize the opportunities of tomorrow .
we must set tough , world - class academic and occupational standards for all our children and give our teachers and students the tools they need to meet them .
our goals 2000 proposal will empower individual school districts to experiment with ideas like chartering their schools to be run by private corporations or having more public school choice , to do whatever they wish to do as long as we measure every school by one high standard : are our children learning what they need to know to compete and win in the global economy ?
goals 2000 links world - class standards to grassroots reforms .
and i hope congress will pass it without delay .
our school to work initiative will for the first time link school to the world of work , providing at least one year of apprenticeship beyond high school .
after all , most of the people we 're counting on to build our economic future wo n't graduate from college .
it 's time to stop ignoring them and start empowering them .
we must literally transform our outdated unemployment system into a new reemployment system .
the old unemployment system just sort of kept you going while you waited for your old job to come back .
we 've got to have a new system to move people into new and better jobs , because most of those old jobs just do n't come back .
and we know that the only way to have real job security in the future , to get a good job with a growing income , is to have real skills and the ability to learn new ones .
so we 've got to streamline today 's patchwork of training programs and make them a source of new skills for our people who lose their jobs .
reemployment , not unemployment , must become the centerpiece of our economic renewal .
i urge you to pass it in this session of congress .
and just as we must transform our unemployment system , so must we also revolutionize our welfare system .
it does n't work .
it defies our values as a nation .
if we value work , we ca n't justify a system that makes welfare more attractive than work if people are worried about losing their health care .
if we value responsibility , we ca n't ignore the $ 34 billion in child support absent parents ought to be paying to millions of parents who are taking care of their children .
if we value strong families , we ca n't perpetuate a system that actually penalizes those who stay together .
can you believe that a child who has a child gets more money from the government for leaving home than for staying home with a parent or a grandparent ?
that 's not just bad policy , it 's wrong .
and we ought to change it .
i worked on this problem for years before i became president , with other governors and with members of congress of both parties and with the previous administration of another party .
i worked on it with people who were on welfare , lots of them .
and i want to say something to everybody here who cares about this issue .
the people who most want to change this system are the people who are dependent on it .
they want to get off welfare .
they want to go back to work .
they want to do right by their kids .
i once had a hearing when i was a governor , and i brought in people on welfare from all over america who had found their way to work .
the woman from my state who testified was asked this question : what 's the best thing about being off welfare and in a job ?
and without blinking an eye , she looked at 40 governors , and she said , " when my boy goes to school and they say what does you mother do for a living , he can give an answer . "
these people want a better system , and we ought to give it to them .
last year we began this .
we gave the states more power to innovate because we know that a lot of great ideas come from outside washington , and many states are already using it .
then this congress took a dramatic step .
instead of taxing people with modest incomes into poverty , we helped them to work their way out of poverty by dramatically increasing the earned - income tax credit .
it will lift 15 million working families out of poverty , rewarding work over welfare , making it possible for people to be successful workers and successful parents .
now that 's real welfare reform .
but there is more to be done .
this spring i will send you a comprehensive welfare reform bill that builds on the family support act of 1988 and restores the basic values of work and responsibility .
we 'll say to teenagers , " if you have a child out of wedlock , we will no longer give you a check to set up a separate household .
we want families to stay together ; " say to absent parents who are n't paying their child support , " if you 're not providing for your children , we 'll garnish your wages , suspend your license , track you across state lines , and if necessary , make some of you work off what you owe . "
people who bring children into this world can not and must not walk away from them .
but to all those who depend on welfare , we should offer ultimately a simple compact .
we 'll provide the support , the job training , the child care you need for up to two years .
but after that , anyone who can work , must , in the private sector wherever possible , in community service , if necessary .
that 's the only way we 'll ever make elfare what it ought to be , a second chance , not a way of life .
i know it will be difficult to tackle welfare reform in 1994 at the same time we tackle health care .
but let me point out , i think it is inevitable and imperative .
it is estimated that one million people are on welfare today because it 's the only way they can get health care coverage for their children .
those who choose to leave welfare for jobs without health benefits , and many entry - level jobs do n't have health benefits , find themselves in the incredible position of paying taxes that help to pay for health care coverage for those who made the other choice to stay on welfare .
no wonder people leave work and go back to welfare to get health care coverage .
we 've got to solve the health care problem to have real welfare reform .
so this year , we will make history by reforming the health care system .
and i would say to you , all of you , my fellow public servants , this is another issue where the people are way ahead of the politicians .
that may not be popular with either party , but it happens to be the truth .
you know , the first lady has received now almost a million letters from people all across america and from all walks of life .
i 'd like to share just one of them with you .
richard anderson of reno , nevada , lost his job and with it , his health insurance .
two weeks later his wife , judy , suffered a cerebral aneurysm .
he rushed her to the hospital , where she stayed in intensive care for 21 days .
the andersons ' bills were over $ 120,000 .
although judy recovered and richard went back to work at $ 8 an hour , the bills were too much for them , and they were literally forced into bankruptcy . "
mrs. clinton , " he wrote to hillary , " no one in the united states of america should have to lose everything they 've worked for all their lives because they were unfortunate enough to become ill . "
it was to help the richard and judy andersons of america that the first lady and so many others have worked so hard and so long on this health care reform issue .
we owe them our thanks and our action .
i know there are people here who say there 's no health care crisis .
tell it to richard and judy anderson .
tell it to the 58 million americans who have no coverage at all for some time each year .
tell it to the 81 million americans with those preexisting conditions .
those folks are paying more , or they ca n't get insurance at all .
or they ca n't ever change their jobs because they or someone in their family has one of those preexisting conditions .
tell it to the small businesses burdened by the skyrocketing cost of insurance .
most small businesses cover their employees , and they pay on average 35 percent more in premiums than big businesses or government .
or tell it to the 76 percent of insured americans , three out of four whose policies have lifetime limits .
and that means they can find themselves without any coverage at all just when they need it the most .
so if any of you believe there 's no crisis , you tell it to those people , because i ca n't .
there are some people who literally do not understand the impact of this problem on people 's lives .
and all you have to do is go out and listen to them .
just go talk to them anywhere in any congressional district in this country .
they 're republicans and democrats and independents ; it does n't have a lick to do with party .
they think we do n't get it .
and it 's time we show them that we do get it .
from the day we began , our health care initiative has been designed to strengthen what is good about our health care system : the world 's best health care professionals , cutting - edge research and wonderful research institutions , medicare for older americans .
none of this , none of it should be put at risk .
but we 're paying more and more money for less and less care .
every year fewer and fewer americans even get to choose their doctors .
every year doctors and nurses spend more time on paperwork and less time with patients because of the absolute bureaucratic nightmare the present system has become .
this system is riddled with inefficiency , with abuse , with fraud , and everybody knows it .
in today 's health care system , insurance companies call the shots .
they pick whom they cover and how they cover them .
they can cut off your benefits when you need your coverage the most .
they are in charge .
what does it mean ?
it means every night millions of well - insured americans go to bed just an illness , an accident , or a pink slip away from having no coverage or financial ruin .
it means every morning millions of americans go to work without any health insurance at all , something the workers in no other advanced country in the world do .
it means that every year , more and more hard - working people are told to pick a new doctor because their boss has had to pick a new plan .
and countless others turn down better jobs because they know if they take the better job , they will lose their health insurance .
if we just let the health care system continue to drift , our country will have people with less care , fewer choices , and higher bills .
now , our approach protects the quality of care and people 's choices .
it builds on what works today in the private sector , to expand employer - based coverage , to guarantee private insurance for every american .
and i might say , employer - based private insurance for every american was proposed 20 years ago by president richard nixon to the united states congress .
it was a good idea then , and it 's a better idea today .
why do we want guaranteed private insurance ?
because right now nine out of 10 people who have insurance get it through their employers .
and that should continue .
and if your employer is providing good benefits at reasonable prices , that should continue , too .
that ought to make the congress and the president feel better .
our goal is health insurance everybody can depend on : comprehensive benefits that cover preventive care and prescription drugs ; health premiums that do n't just explode when you get sick or you get older ; the power , no matter how small your business is , to choose dependable insurance at the same competitive rates governments and big business get today ; one simple form for people who are sick ; and most of all , the freedom to choose a plan and the right to choose your own doctor .
our approach protects older americans .
every plan before the congress proposes to slow the growth of medicare .
the difference is this : we believe those savings should be used to improve health care for senior citizens .
medicare must be protected , and it should cover prescription drugs , and we should take the first steps in covering long - term care .
to those who would cut medicare without protecting seniors , i say the solution to today 's squeeze on middle - class working people 's health care is not to put the squeeze on middle - class retired people 's health care .
we can do better than that .
when it 's all said and done , it 's pretty simple to me .
insurance ought to mean what it used to mean : you pay a fair price for security , and when you get sick , health care 's always there , no matter what .
along with the guarantee of health security , we all have to admit , too , there must be more responsibility on the part of all of us in how we use this system .
people have to take their kids to get immunized .
we should all take advantage of preventive care .
we must all work together to stop the violence that explodes our emergency rooms .
we have to practice better health habits , and we ca n't abuse the system .
and those who do n't have insurance under our approach will get coverage , but they 'll have to pay something for it , too .
the minority of businesses that provide no insurance at all and in so doing shift the cost of the care of their employees to others , should contribute something .
people who smoke should pay more for a pack of cigarettes .
everybody can contribute something if we want to solve the health care crisis .
there ca n't be any more something for nothing .
it will not be easy but it can be done .
now , in the coming months i hope very much to work with both democrats and republicans to reform a health care system by using the market to bring down costs and to achieve lasting health security .
but if you look at history we see that for 60 years this country has tried to reform health care .
president roosevelt tried .
president truman tried .
president nixon tried .
president carter tried .
every time the special interests were powerful enough to defeat them .
but not this time .
i know that facing up to these interests will require courage .
it will raise critical questions about the way we finance our campaigns and how lobbyists yield their influence .
the work of change , frankly , will never get any easier until we limit the influence of well - financed interests who profit from this current system .
so i also must now call on you to finish the job both houses began last year by passing tough and meaningful campaign finance reform and lobby reform legislation this year .
you know , my fellow americans , this is really a test for all of us .
the american people provide those of us in government service with terrific health care benefits at reasonable costs .
we have health care that 's always there .
i think we need to give every hard - working , tax - paying american the same health care security they have already given to us .
i want to make this very clear .
i am open , as i have said repeatedly , to the best ideas of concerned members of both parties .
i have no special brief for any specific approach , even in our own bill , except this : if you send me legislation that does not guarantee every american private health insurance that can never be taken away , you will force me to take this pen , veto the legislation , and we 'll come right back here and start all over again .
but i do n't think that 's going to happen .
i think we 're ready to act now .
i believe that you 're ready to act now .
and if you 're ready to guarantee every american the same health care that you have , health care that can never be taken away , now , not next year or the year after , now is the time to stand with the people who sent us here .
now .
as we take these steps together to renew our strength at home , we can not turn away from our obligation to renew our leadership abroad .
this is a promising moment .
because of the agreements we have reached this year , last year , russia 's strategic nuclear missiles soon will no longer be pointed at the united states , nor will we point ours at them .
instead of building weapons in space , russian scientists will help us to build the international space station .
of course , there are still dangers in the world : rampant arms proliferation , bitter regional conflicts , ethnic and nationalist tensions in many new democracies , severe environmental degradation the world over , and fanatics who seek to cripple the world 's cities with terror .
as the world 's greatest power , we must , therefore , maintain our defenses and our responsibilities .
this year , we secured indictments against terrorists and sanctions against those who harbor them .
we worked to promote environmentally sustainable economic growth .
we achieved agreements with ukraine , with belarus , with kazahkstan to eliminate completely their nuclear arsenal .
we are working to achieve a korean peninsula free of nuclear weapons .
we will seek early ratification of a treaty to ban chemical weapons worldwide .
and earlier today , we joined with over 30 nations to begin negotiations on a comprehensive ban to stop all nuclear testing .
but nothing , nothing is more important to our security than our nation 's armed forces .
we honor their contributions , including those who are carrying out the longest humanitarian air lift in history in bosnia , those who will complete their mission in somalia this year and their brave comrades who gave their lives there .
our forces are the finest military our nation has ever had .
and i have pledged that as long as i am president , they will remain the best equipped , the best trained , and the best prepared fighting force on the face of the earth .
last year i proposed a defense plan that maintains our post - cold - war security at a lower cost .
this year many people urged me to cut our defense spending further to pay for other government programs .
i said , no .
the budget i send to congress draws the line against further defense cuts .
it protects the readiness and quality of our forces .
ultimately , the best strategy is to do that .
we must not cut defense further .
i hope the congress , without regard to party , will support that position .
ultimately , the best strategy to ensure our security and to build a durable peace is to support the advance of democracy elsewhere .
democracies do n't attack each other , they make better trading partners and partners in diplomacy .
that is why we have supported , you and i , the democratic reformers in russia and in the other states of the former soviet bloc .
i applaud the bipartisan support this congress provided last year for our initiatives to help russia , ukraine , and the other states through their epic transformations .
our support of reform must combine patience for the enormity of the task and vigilance for our fundamental interest and values .
we will continue to urge russia and the other states to press ahead with economic reforms .
and we will seek to cooperate with russia to solve regional problems , while insisting that if russian troops operate in neighboring states , they do so only when those states agree to their presence and in strict accord with international standards .
but we must also remember as these nations chart their own futures -- and they must chart their own futures -- how much more secure and more prosperous our own people will be if democratic and market reforms succeed all across the former communist bloc .
our policy has been to support that move , and that has been the policy of the congress .
we should continue it .
that is why i went to europe earlier this month , to work with our european partners , to help to integrate all the former communist countries into a europe that has a possibility of becoming unified for the first time in its entire history , its entire history , based on the simple commitments of all nations in europe to democracy , to free markets , and to respect for existing borders .
with our allies we have created a partnership for peace that invites states from the former soviet bloc and other non - nato members to work with nato in military cooperation .
when i met with central europe 's leaders , including lech walesa and vaclav havel , men who put their lives on the line for freedom , i told them that the security of their region is important to our country 's security .
this year we must also do more to support democratic renewal and human rights and sustainable development all around the world .
we will ask congress to ratify the new gatt accord .
we will continue standing by south africa as it works its way through its bold and hopeful and difficult transition to democracy .
we will convene a summit of the western hemisphere 's democratic leaders from canada to the tip of south america .
and we will continue to press for the restoration of true democracy in haiti .
and as we build a more constructive relationship with china , we must continue to insist on clear signs of improvement in that nation 's human rights record .
we will also work for new progress toward the middle east peace .
last year the world watched yitzhak rabin and yasser arafat at the white house when they had their historic handshake of reconciliation .
but there is a long , hard road ahead .
and on that road i am determined that i and our administration will do all we can to achieve a comprehensive and lasting peace for all the peoples of the region .
now , there are some in our country who argue that with the cold war , america should turn its back on the rest of the world .
many around the world were afraid we would do just that .
but i took this office on a pledge that had no partisan tinge , to keep our nation secure by remaining engaged in the rest of the world .
and this year , because of our work together , enacting nafta , keeping our military strong and prepared , supporting democracy abroad , we have reaffirmed america 's leadership , america 's engagement .
and as a result , the american people are more secure than they were before .
but while americans are more secure from threats abroad , i think we all know that in many ways we are less secure from threats here at home .
every day the national peace is shattered by crime .
in petaluma , california , an innocent slumber party gives way to agonizing tragedy for the family of polly klaas .
an ordinary train ride on long island ends in a hail of 9-millimeter rounds .
a tourist in florida is nearly burned alive by bigots simply because he is black .
right here in our nation 's capital , a brave young man named jason white , a policeman , the son and grandson of policemen , is ruthlessly gunned down .
violent crime and the fear it provokes are crippling our society , limiting personal freedom , and fraying the ties that bind us .
the crime bill before congress gives you a chance to do something about it , a chance to be tough and smart .
what does that mean ?
let me begin by saying i care a lot about this issue .
many years ago , when i started out in public life , i was the attorney general of my state .
i served as a governor for a dozen years .
i know what it 's like to sign laws increasing penalties , to build more prison cells , to carry out the death penalty .
i understand this issue .
and it is not a simple thing .
first , we must recognize that most violent crimes are committed by a small percentage of criminals who too often break the laws even when they are on parole .
now those who commit crimes should be punished .
and those who commit repeated , violent crimes should be told , " when you commit a third violent crime , you will be put away , and put away for good .
three strikes , and you are out . "
second , we must take serious steps to reduce violence and prevent crime , beginning with more police officers and more community policing .
we know right now that police who work the streets , know the folks , have the respect of the neighborhood kids , focus on high crime areas , we know that they are more likely to prevent crime as well as catch criminals .
look at the experience of houston , where the crime rate dropped 17 percent in one year when that approach was taken .
here tonight is one of those community policemen , a brave , young detective , kevin jett , whose beat is eight square blocks in one of the toughest neighborhoods in new york .
every day he restores some sanity and safety and a sense of values and connections to the people whose lives he protects .
i 'd like to ask him to stand up and be recognized tonight .
thank you , sir .
you will be given a chance to give the children of this country , the law - abiding working people of this country -- and do n't forget , in the toughest neighborhoods in this country , in the highest crime neighborhoods in this country , the vast majority of people get up every day and obey the law , pay their taxes , do their best to raise their kids .
they deserve people like kevin jett .
and you 're going to be given a chance to give the american people another 100,000 of them , well trained .
and i urge you to do it .
you have before you crime legislation which also establishes a police corps to encourage young people to get an education and pay it off by serving as police officers ; which encourages retiring military personnel to move into police forces , an inordinate resource for our country ; one which has a safe schools provision which will give our young people the chance to walk to school in safety and to be in school in safety instead of dodging bullets .
these are important things .
the third thing we have to do is to build on the brady bill , the brady law , to take further steps to keep guns out of the hands of criminals .
i want to say something about this issue .
hunters must always be free to hunt .
law - abiding adults should always be free to own guns and protect their homes .
i respect that part of our culture ; i grew up in it .
but i want to ask the sportsmen and others who lawfully own guns to join us in this campaign to reduce gun violence .
i say to you , i know you did n't create this problem , but we need your help to solve it .
there is no sporting purpose on earth that should stop the united states congress from banishing assault weapons that out - gun police and cut down children .
fourth , we must remember that drugs are a factor in an enormous percentage of crimes .
recent studies indicate , sadly , that drug use is on the rise again among our young people .
the crime bill contains -- all the crime bills contain -- more money for drug treatment for criminal addicts and boot camps for youthful offenders that include incentives to get off drugs and to stay off drugs .
our administration 's budget , with all its cuts , contains a large increase in funding for drug treatment and drug education .
you must pass them both .
we need them desperately .
my fellow americans , the problem of violence is an american problem .
it has no partisan or philosophical element .
therefore , i urge you to find ways as quickly as possible to set aside partisan differences and pass a strong , smart , tough crime bill .
but further , i urge you to consider this : as you demand tougher penalties for those who choose violence , let us also remember how we came to this sad point .
in our toughest neighborhoods , on our meanest streets , in our poorest rural areas , we have seen a stunning and simultaneous breakdown of community , family , and work , the heart and soul of civilized society .
this has created a vast vacuum which has been filled by violence and drugs and gangs .
so i ask you to remember that even as we say " no " to crime , we must give people , especially our young people , something to say " yes " to .
many of our initiatives , from job training to welfare reform to health care to national service , will help to rebuild distressed communities , to strengthen families , to provide work .
but more needs to be done .
that 's what our community empowerment agenda is all about , challenging businesses to provide more investment through empowerment zones , ensuring banks will make loans in the same communities their deposits come from , passing legislation to unleash the power of capital through community development banks to create jobs , opportunity , and hope where they 're needed most .
i think you know that to really solve this problem , we 'll all have to put our heads together , leave our ideological armor aside , and find some new ideas to do even more .
and let 's be honest , we all know something else too : our problems go way beyond the reach of government .
they 're rooted in the loss of values , in the disappearance of work , and the breakdown of our families and our communities .
my fellow americans , we can cut the deficit , create jobs , promote democracy around the world , pass welfare reform and health care , pass the toughest crime bill in history , but still leave too many of our people behind .
the american people have got to want to change from within if we 're going to bring back work and family and community .
we can not renew our country when within a decade more than half of the children will be born into families where there has been no marriage .
we can not renew this country when 13-year - old boys get semi - automatic weapons to shoot 9-year - olds for kicks .
we ca n't renew our country when children are having children , and the fathers walk away as if the kids do n't amount to anything .
we ca n't renew the country when our businesses eagerly look for new investments and new customers abroad but ignore those people right here at home who would give anything to have their jobs and would gladly buy their products if they had the money to do it .
we ca n't renew our country unless more of us -- i mean , all of us -- are willing to join the churches and the other good citizens , people like all the ministers i 've worked with over the years or the priests and the nuns i met at our lady of help in east los angeles or my good friend tony campollo in philadelphia , unless we 're willing to work with people like that , people who are saving kids , adopting schools , making streets safer .
all of us can do that .
we ca n't renew our country until we realize that governments do n't raise children , parents do .
parents who know their children 's teachers and turn off the television and help with the homework and teach their kids right from wrong , those kinds of parents can make all the difference .
i know , i had one .
i 'm telling you , we have got to stop pointing our fingers at these kids who have no future and reach our hands out to them .
our country needs it , we need it , and they deserve it .
so i say to you tonight , let 's give our children a future .
let us take away their guns and give them books .
let us overcome their despair and replace it with hope .
let us , by our example , teach them to obey the law , respect our neighbors , and cherish our values .
let us weave these sturdy threads into a new american community that can once more stand strong against the forces of despair and evil because everybody has a chance to walk into a better tomorrow .
oh , there will be naysayers who fear that we wo n't be equal to the challenges of this time .
but they misread our history , our heritage .
even today 's headlines , all those things tell us we can and we will overcome any challenge .
when the earth shook and fires raged in california , when i saw the mississippi deluge the farmlands of the midwest in a 500-year flood , when the century 's bitterest cold swept from north dakota to newport news , it seemed as though the world itself was coming apart at the seams .
but the american people , they just came together .
they rose to the occasion , neighbor helping neighbor , strangers risking life and limb to save total strangers , showing the better angels of our nature .
let us not reserve the better angels only for natural disasters , leaving our deepest and most profound problems to petty political fighting .
let us instead be true to our spirit , facing facts , coming together , bringing hope , and moving forward .
tonight , my fellow americans , we are summoned to answer a question as old as the republic itself : what is the state of our union ?
it is growing stronger , but it must be stronger still .
with your help , and god 's help , it will be .
thank you , and god bless america .

thank you .
wait a minute , folks , i 've got to get these crutches right here .
thank you , general hess .
let me begin by thanking everyone who is a part of the grand forks air force base for what you do for our national security and especially for what you have done to support the people of the grand forks communities in these last few days .
i 'm very proud of you .
thank you .
as i think all of you know , i have just come from touring the devastation of the floods as well as a very moving community meeting , presided over by mayor owens , attended by mayor stauss and other mayors , the entire congressional delegation from north dakota and from south dakota , senator grams and senator wellstone from minnesota , congressman collin peterson from minnesota , and the governors from north dakota and minnesota .
it has been a very moving experience for all of us .
five members of my cabinet are here , the secretaries of agriculture , health and human services , housing and urban development , transportation , and the administrator of the small business administration .
the secretary of the army is here .
we have all come , first of all , to see firsthand what it is you 've been going through ; secondly , to pledge to do our part to help make you whole ; and thirdly , to tell you that we 're for you .
we have hardly ever seen such a remarkable demonstration of courage and commitment and cooperation and basic human strength , and we are very impressed and proud to be americans when we see what you have done in the face of this terrible disaster .
we know that this rebuilding is going to be a long - term prospect , and we also know that there are some very immediate and pressing human needs that many people have .
before i left this morning , i took some steps i wanted to tell you about .
first , i authorized james lee witt and the federal emergency management agency to provide 100 percent of the direct federal assistance for all the emergency --   -- work going to be undertaken here .
the second thing we did was to add to the counties already covered another 18 counties in minnesota and 53 in south dakota who need help .
the third thing i did was to ask congress to approve another $ 200 million in emergency funds for north dakota , south dakota , and minnesota .
these funds will be available for both short - term emergency response activities and for long - term efforts to help you rebuild .
if approved , this action will bring to $ 488 million the total amount of disaster assistance that i have requested for the people of these three states .
now , let me say there are -- i say again , i know there are short - term , immediate concerns , people who need a place to sleep , people who do n't know where their next check is coming from , even people who do n't have access to basic sanitary facilities except here on the air base .
we are working to restore those things with your local community folks .
and we had some specific talks about what we could do to get proper housing available while you 're rebuilding your communities .
that 's up there .
anybody hurt ?
well , we 've had a fire , a flood , a blizzard --   -- i guess we can take a -- .
so anyway , we 'll have our folks here , and there will be lots of them .
and let me just say , this is going to be -- these next few days -- our fema director , james lee witt , and i have been working on these things a long time .
he was my emergency director when i was governor of arkansas .
i know what 's going to happen .
i 've been through floods and tornadoes and terrible losses .
the next few days are going to be very , very hard on a lot of people .
a lot of you who have been very , very brave and courageous , helped your friends and neighbors , are going to -- it 's going to sink in on you what you have been through and what has been lost .
and i want to encourage all of you to really look out for each other in the next few days and be sensitive to the enormous emotional pressures that some of you will feel and also kind of be good to yourselves .
understand you do n't have to be ashamed if you 're heartbroken .
but it 's going to be tough in the next few days .
but i also want you to feel very resolute about the long run .
i have asked director witt to head an interagency task force to develop a long - term plan for what our responsibilities are to help you rebuild and be stronger and better than ever .
and believe me , it may be hard to believe now , but you can rebuild stronger and better than ever .
and we 're going to help you do that .
and we want you to keep your eyes on that future .
let me also say , as i go back to washington to ask the congress to approve this emergency package , i will never forget what i have seen and heard here .
four of your community leaders who played various roles in the last several weeks , ken vein , jim shothorse , randy johnson , and curt kruen , talked to me and to others in the meeting a few moments ago .
i have seen the pictures of people battling the flames of the fire in the rising floods .
i have seen rescue workers working around the clock even as they lost their own homes .
i have seen people pitching in to rescue books from the university of north dakota library .
i have read the last 3 days editions of this newspaper .
how in the world they kept producing the newspaper for you is beyond me .
and you ought to be very proud of them for doing that .
i read this morning that there 's a message board right here that 's covered with offers for free housing all around .
and that 's the kind of spirit that will get everyone through this .
with all the losses , i hope when this is bearing down on you in the next few days , you will remember the enormous courage and shared pride and values and support that all of you have given each other .
you have shown that when we think of our duties to one another , our own lives are better , that we 're all stronger when we try to make sure our friends and neighbors are safe and strong as well .
and no matter what you have lost in this terrible flood , what you have saved and strengthened and sharpened and shown to the world is infinitely better .
and you should be very , very proud of that .
i saw something your mayor said the other day that struck me in particular .
she said , " what makes a community a place to live in is not the buildings .
it 's the people , the spirit , and faith that are in those people .
water can not wash that away , and fire can not burn that away , and a blizzard can not freeze that away . "
and if you do n't give it away , it will bring you back better than ever .
and we 'll be there with you every step of the way .
thank you , and god bless you .

citizens of free berlin , citizens of united germany , chancellor kohl , mayor diepgen , berliners the world over , thank you for this wonderful welcome to your magnificent city .
we stand together where europe 's heart was cut in half and we celebrate unity .
we stand where crude walls of concrete separated mother from child and we meet as one family .
we stand where those who sought a new life instead found death .
and we rejoice in renewal .
berliners , you have won your long struggle .
you have proved that no wall can forever contain the mighty power of freedom .
within a few years , an american president will visit a berlin that is again the seat of your government .
and i pledge to you today a new american embassy will also stand in berlin .
half a century has passed since berlin was first divided , 33 years since the wall went up .
in that time , one - half of this city lived encircled and the other half enslaved .
but one force endured , your courage .
your courage has taken many forms : the bold courage of june 17th , 1953 , when those trapped in the east threw stones at the tanks of tyranny ; the quiet courage to lift children above the wall so that their grandparents on the other side could see those they loved but could not touch ; the inner courage to reach for the ideas that make you free ; and the civil courage , civil courage of 5 years ago when , starting in the strong hearts and candlelit streets of leipzig , you turned your dreams of a better life into the chisels of liberty .
now , you who found the courage to endure , to resist , to tear down the wall , must found a new civil courage , the courage to build .
the berlin wall is gone .
now our generation must decide , what will we build in its place ?
standing here today , we can see the answer : a europe where all nations are independent and democratic ; where free markets and prosperity know no borders ; where our security is based on building bridges , not walls ; where all our citizens can go as far as their god - given abilities will take them and raise their children in peace and hope .
the work of freedom is not easy .
it requires discipline , responsibility , and a faith strong enough to endure failure and criticism .
and it requires vigilance .
here in germany , in the united states , and throughout the entire world , we must reject those who would divide us with scalding words about race , ethnicity , or religion .
i appeal especially to the young people of this nation ; believe you can live in peace with those who are different from you .
believe in your own future .
believe you can make a difference and summon your own courage to build , and you will .
there is reason for you to believe .
already , the new future is taking shape in the growing chorus of voices that speak the common language of democracy ; in the growing economies of western europe , the united states , and our partners ; in the progress of economic reform , democracy , and freedom in lands that were not free ; in nato 's partnership for peace where 21 nations have joined in military cooperation and pledge to respect each other 's borders .
it is to all of you in pursuit of that new future that i say in the name of the pilots whose airlift kept berlin alive , in the name of the sentries at checkpoint charlie who stood face - to - face with enemy tanks , in the name of every american president who has come to berlin , in the name of the american forces who will stay in europe to guard freedom 's future , in all of their names i say , amerika steht an ihrer seite , jetzt und fuer immer .
america is on your side now and forever .
moments ago , with my friend chancellor kohl , i walked where my predecessors could not , through the brandenburg gate .
for over two centuries in every age , that gate has been a symbol of the time .
sometimes it has been a monument to conquest and a tower of tyranny .
but in our own time , you , courageous berliners , have again made the brandenburg what its builders meant it to be , a gateway .
now , together , we can walk through that gateway to our destiny , to a europe united , united in peace , united in freedom , united in progress for the first time in history .
nothing will stop us .
all things are possible .
nichts wird uns aufhalten .
alles ist moeglich .
berlin ist frei .
berlin is free .

mr. speaker , mr. vice president , members of the 104th congress , distinguished guests , my fellow americans all across our land : let me begin tonight by saying to our men and women in uniform around the world , and especially those helping peace take root in bosnia and to their families , i thank you .
america is very , very proud of you .
my duty tonight is to report on the state of the union , not the state of our government but of our american community , and to set forth our responsibilities , in the words of our founders , to form a more perfect union .
the state of the union is strong .
our economy is the healthiest it has been in three decades .
we have the lowest combined rates of unemployment and inflation in 27 years .
we have completed -- created nearly eight million new jobs , over a million of them in basic industries like construction and automobiles .
america is selling more cars than japan for the first time since the 1970s .
and for three years in a row , we have had a record number of new businesses started in our country .
our leadership in the world is also strong , bringing hope for new peace .
and perhaps most important , we are gaining ground in restoring our fundamental values .
the crime rate , the welfare and food stamp rolls , the poverty rate , and the teen pregnancy rate are all down .
and as they go down , prospects for america 's future go up .
we live in an age of possibility .
a hundred years ago we moved from farm to factory .
now we move to an age of technology , information , and global competition .
these changes have opened vast new opportunities for our people , but they have also presented them with stiff challenges .
while more americans are living better , too many of our fellow citizens are working harder just to keep up , and they are rightly concerned about the security of their families .
we must answer here three fundamental questions : first , how do we make the american dream of opportunity for all a reality for all americans who are willing to work for it ?
second , how do we preserve our old and enduring values as we move into the future ?
and third , how do we meet these challenges together , as one america ?
we know big government does not have all the answers .
we know there 's not a program for every problem .
we know , and we have worked to give the american people a smaller , less bureaucratic government in washington .
and we have to give the american people one that lives within its means .
the era of big government is over .
but we can not go back to the time when our citizens were left to fend for themselves .
instead , we must go forward as one america , one nation working together to meet the challenges we face together .
self - reliance and teamwork are not opposing virtues ; we must have both .
i believe our new , smaller government must work in an old - fashioned american way , together with all of our citizens through state and local governments , in the workplace , in religious , charitable , and civic associations .
our goal must be to enable all our people to make the most of their own lives , with stronger families , more educational opportunity , economic security , safer streets , a cleaner environment in a safer world .
to improve the state of our union , we must ask more of ourselves , we must expect more of each other , and we must face our challenges together .
here , in this place , our responsibility begins with balancing the budget in a way that is fair to all americans .
there is now broad bipartisan agreement that permanent deficit spending must come to an end .
i compliment the republican leadership and the membership for the energy and determination you have brought to this task of balancing the budget .
and i thank the democrats for passing the largest deficit reduction plan in history in 1993 , which has already cut the deficit nearly in half in three years .
since 1993 , we have all begun to see the benefits of deficit reduction .
lower interest rates have made it easier for businesses to borrow and to invest and to create new jobs .
lower interest rates have brought down the cost of home mortgages , car payments , and credit card rates to ordinary citizens .
now , it is time to finish the job and balance the budget .
though differences remain among us which are significant , the combined total of the proposed savings that are common to both plans is more than enough , using the numbers from your congressional budget office to balance the budget in seven years and to provide a modest tax cut .
these cuts are real .
they will require sacrifice from everyone .
but these cuts do not undermine our fundamental obligations to our parents , our children , and our future , by endangering medicare or medicaid or education or the environment or by raising taxes on working families .
i have said before , and let me say again , many good ideas have come out of our negotiations .
i have learned a lot about the way both republicans and democrats view the debate before us .
i have learned a lot about the good ideas that each side has that we could all embrace .
we ought to resolve our remaining differences .
i am willing to work to resolve them .
i am ready to meet tomorrow .
but i ask you to consider that we should at least enact these savings that both plans have in common and give the american people their balanced budget , a tax cut , lower interest rates , and a brighter future .
we should do that now and make permanent deficits yesterday 's legacy .
now it is time for us to look also to the challenges of today and tomorrow , beyond the burdens of yesterday .
the challenges are significant .
but our nation was built on challenges .
america was built on challenges , not promises .
and when we work together to meet them , we never fail .
that is the key to a more perfect union .
our individual dreams must be realized by our common efforts .
tonight i want to speak to you about the challenges we all face as a people .
our first challenge is to cherish our children and strengthen america 's families .
family is the foundation of american life .
if we have stronger families , we will have a stronger america .
before i go on , i 'd like to take just a moment to thank my own family , and to thank the person who has taught me more than anyone else over 25 years about the importance of families and children , a wonderful wife , a magnificent mother , and a great first lady .
thank you , hillary .
all strong families begin with taking more responsibility for our children .
i 've heard mrs. gore say that it 's hard to be a parent today , but it 's even harder to be a child .
so all of us , not just as parents but all of us in our other roles -- our media , our schools , our teachers , our communities , our churches and synagogues , our businesses , our governments -- all of us have a responsibility to help our children to make it and to make the most of their lives and their god - given capacities .
to the media , i say you should create movies and cds and television shows you 'd want your own children and grandchildren to enjoy .
i call on congress to pass the requirement for a v - chip in tv sets so that parents can screen out programs they believe are inappropriate for their children .
when parents control what their young children see , that is not censorship ; that is enabling parents to assume more personal responsibility for their children 's upbringing .
and i urge them to do it .
the v - chip requirement is part of the important telecommunications bill now pending in this congress .
it has bipartisan support , and i urge you to pass it now .
to make the v - chip work , i challenge the broadcast industry to do what movies have done , to identify your program in ways that help parents to protect their children .
and i invite the leaders of major media corporations in the entertainment industry to come to the white house next month to work with us in a positive way on concrete ways to improve what our children see on television .
i am ready to work with you .
i say to those who make and market cigarettes , every year a million children take up smoking , even though it 's against the law .
three hundred thousand of them will have their lives shortened as a result .
our administration has taken steps to stop the massive marketing campaigns that appeal to our children .
we are simply saying : market your products to adults , if you wish , but draw the line on children .
i say to those who are on welfare , and especially to those who have been trapped on welfare for a long time : for too long our welfare system has undermined the values of family and work , instead of supporting them .
the congress and i are near agreement on sweeping welfare reform .
we agree on time limits , tough work requirements , and the toughest possible child support enforcement .
but i believe we must also provide child care so that mothers who are required to go to work can do so without worrying about what is happening to their children .
i challenge this congress to send me a bipartisan welfare reform bill that will really move people from welfare to work and do the right thing by our children .
i will sign it immediately .
let us be candid about this difficult problem .
passing a law , even the best possible law , is only a first step .
the next step is to make it work .
i challenge people on welfare to make the most of this opportunity for independence .
i challenge american businesses to give people on welfare the chance to move into the work force .
i applaud the work of religious groups and others who care for the poor .
more than anyone else in our society , they know the true difficulty of the task before us , and they are in a position to help .
every one of us should join them .
that is the only way we can make real welfare reform a reality in the lives of the american people .
to strengthen the family we must do everything we can to keep the teen pregnancy rate going down .
i am gratified , as i 'm sure all americans are , that it has dropped for two years in a row .
but we all know it is still far too high .
tonight i am pleased to announce that a group of prominent americans is responding to that challenge by forming an organization that will support grassroots community efforts all across our country in a national campaign against teen pregnancy .
and i challenge all of us and every american to join their efforts .
i call on american men and women in families to give greater respect to one another .
we must end the deadly scourge of domestic violence in our country .
and i challenge america 's families to work harder to stay together .
for families who stay together not only do better economically , their children do better as well .
in particular , i challenge the fathers of this country to love and care for their children .
if your family has separated , you must pay your child support .
we 're doing more than ever to make sure you do , and we 're going to do more .
but let 's all admit something about that , too : a check will not substitute for a parent 's love and guidance .
and only you -- only you can make the decision to help raise your children .
no matter who you are , how low or high your station in life , it is the most basic human duty of every american to do that job to the best of his or her ability .
our second challenge is to provide americans with the educational opportunities we 'll all need for this new century .
in our schools , every classroom in america must be connected to the information superhighway , with computers and good software and well - trained teachers .
we are working with the telecommunications industry , educators , and parents to connect 20 percent of california 's classrooms by this spring , and every classroom and every library in the entire united states by the year 2000 .
i ask congress to support this education technology initiative so that we can make sure this national partnership succeeds .
every diploma ought to mean something .
i challenge every community , every school , and every state to adopt national standards of excellence , to measure whether schools are meeting those standards , to cut bureaucratic red tape so that schools and teachers have more flexibility for grassroots reform , and to hold them accountable for results .
that 's what our goals 2000 initiative is all about .
i challenge every state to give all parents the right to choose which public school their children will attend , and to let teachers form new schools with a charter they can keep only if they do a good job .
i challenge all our schools to teach character education , to teach good values and good citizenship .
and if it means that teenagers will stop killing each other over designer jackets , then our public schools should be able to require their students to wear school uniforms .
i challenge our parents to become their children 's first teachers .
turn off the tv .
see that the homework is done .
and visit your children 's classroom .
no program , no teacher , no one else can do that for you .
my fellow americans , higher education is more important today than ever before .
we 've created a new student loan program that 's made it easier to borrow and repay those loans , and we have dramatically cut the student loan default rate .
that 's something we should all be proud of because it was unconscionably high just a few years ago .
through americorps , our national service program , this year 25,000 young people will earn college money by serving their local communities to improve the lives of their friends and neighbors .
these initiatives are right for america , and we should keep them going .
and we should also work hard to open the doors of college even wider .
i challenge congress to expand work - study and help one million young americans work their way through college by the year 2000 , to provide a $ 1,000 merit scholarship for the top 5 percent of graduates in every high school in the united states , to expand pell grant scholarships for deserving and needy students , and to make up to $ 10,000 a year of college tuition tax deductible .
it 's a good idea for america .
our third challenge is to help every american who is willing to work for it , achieve economic security in this new age .
people who work hard still need support to get ahead in the new economy .
they need education and training for a lifetime .
they need more support for families raising children .
they need retirement security .
they need access to health care .
more and more americans are finding that the education of their childhood simply does n't last a lifetime .
so i challenge congress to consolidate 70 overlapping , antiquated job - training programs into a simple voucher worth $ 2,600 for unemployed or underemployed workers to use as they please for community college tuition or other training .
this is a " gi bill " for america 's workers we should all be able to agree on .
more and more americans are working hard without a raise .
congress sets the minimum wage .
within a year , the minimum wage will fall to a 40-year low in purchasing power .
four dollars and 25 cents an hour is no longer a minimum wage , but millions of americans and their children are trying to live on it .
i challenge you to raise their minimum wage .
in 1993 , congress cut the taxes of 15 million hard - pressed working families to make sure that no parents who work full - time would have to raise their children in poverty and to encourage people to move from welfare to work .
this expanded earned - income tax credit is now worth about $ 1,800 a year to a family of four living on $ 20,000 .
the budget bill i vetoed would have reversed this achievement and raised taxes on nearly eight million of these people .
we should not do that .
we should not do that .
i also agree that the people who are helped under this initiative are not all those in our country who are working hard to do a good job raising their children and at work .
i agree that we need a tax credit for working families with children .
that 's one of the things most of us in this chamber , i hope , can agree on .
i know it is strongly supported by the republican majority .
and it should be part of any final budget agreement .
i want to challenge every business that can possibly afford it to provide pensions for your employees .
and i challenge congress to pass a proposal recommended by the white house conference on small business that would make it easier for small businesses and farmers to establish their own pension plans .
that is something we should all agree on .
we should also protect existing pension plans .
two years ago , with bipartisan support that was almost unanimous on both sides of the aisle , we moved to protect the pensions of eight million working people and to stabilize the pensions of 32 million more .
congress should not now let companies endanger those workers ' pension funds .
i know the proposal to liberalize the ability of employers to take money out of pension funds for other purposes would raise money for the treasury .
but i believe it is false economy .
i vetoed that proposal last year , and i would have to do so again .
finally , if our working families are going to succeed in the new economy , they must be able to buy health insurance policies that they do not lose when they change jobs or when someone in their family gets sick .
over the past two years , over one million americans in working families have lost their health insurance .
we have to do more to make health care available to every american .
and congress should start by passing the bipartisan bill sponsored by senator kennedy and senator kassebaum that would require insurance companies to stop dropping people when they switch jobs and stop denying coverage for preexisting conditions .
let 's all do that .
and even as we enact savings in these programs , we must have a common commitment to preserve the basic protections of medicare and medicaid , not just to the poor but to people in working families , including children , people with disabilities , people with aids , senior citizens in nursing homes .
in the past three years , we 've saved $ 15 billion just by fighting health care fraud and abuse .
we have all agreed to save much more .
we have all agreed to stabilize the medicare trust fund .
but we must not abandon our fundamental obligations to the people who need medicare and medicaid .
america can not become stronger if they become weaker .
the " gi bill " for workers , tax relief for education and child rearing , pension availability and protection , access to health care , preservation of medicare and medicaid , these things , along with the family and medical leave act passed in 1993 , these things will help responsible , hard - working american families to make the most of their own lives .
but employers and employees must do their part , as well , as they are doing in so many of our finest companies , working together , putting the long - term prosperity ahead of the short - term gain .
as workers increase their hours and their productivity , employers should make sure they get the skills they need and share the benefits of the good years , as well as the burdens of the bad ones .
when companies and workers work as a team they do better , and so does america .
our fourth great challenge is to take our streets back from crime and gangs and drugs .
at last we have begun to find a way to reduce crime , forming community partnerships with local police forces to catch criminals and prevent crime .
this strategy , called community policing , is clearly working .
violent crime is coming down all across america .
in new york city murders are down 25 percent , in st. louis , 18 percent , in seattle , 32 percent .
but we still have a long way to go before our streets are safe and our people are free from fear .
the crime bill of 1994 is critical to the success of community policing .
it provides funds for 100,000 new police in communities of all sizes .
we 're already a third of the way there .
and i challenge the congress to finish the job .
let us stick with a strategy that 's working and keep the crime rate coming down .
community policing also requires bonds of trust between citizens and police .
i ask all americans to respect and support our law enforcement officers .
and to our police , i say , our children need you as role models and heroes .
do n't let them down .
the brady bill has already stopped 44,000 people with criminal records from buying guns .
the assault weapons ban is keeping 19 kinds of assault weapons out of the hands of violent gangs .
i challenge the congress to keep those laws on the books .
our next step in the fight against crime is to take on gangs the way we once took on the mob .
i 'm directing the fbi and other investigative agencies to target gangs that involve juveniles and violent crime , and to seek authority to prosecute as adults teenagers who maim and kill like adults .
and i challenge local housing authorities and tenant associations : criminal gang members and drug dealers are destroying the lives of decent tenants .
from now on , the rule for residents who commit crime and pedal drugs should be one strike and you 're out .
i challenge every state to match federal policy to assure that serious violent criminals serve at least 85 percent of their sentence .
more police and punishment are important , but they 're not enough .
we have got to keep more of our young people out of trouble , with prevention strategies not dictated by washington but developed in communities .
i challenge all of our communities , all of our adults , to give our children futures to say yes to .
and i challenge congress not to abandon the crime bill 's support of these grassroots prevention efforts .
finally , to reduce crime and violence we have to reduce the drug problem .
the challenge begins in our homes , with parents talking to their children openly and firmly .
it embraces our churches and synagogues , our youth groups and our schools .
i challenge congress not to cut our support for drug - free schools .
people like the d. a.r. e. officers are making a real impression on grade schoolchildren that will give them the strength to say no when the time comes .
meanwhile , we continue our efforts to cut the flow of drugs into america .
for the last two years , one man in particular has been on the front lines of that effort .
tonight i am nominating him , a hero of the persian gulf war and the commander in chief of the united states military southern command , general barry mccaffrey , as america 's new drug czar .
general mccaffrey has earned three purple hearts and two silver stars fighting for this country .
tonight i ask that he lead our nation 's battle against drugs at home and abroad .
to succeed , he needs a force far larger than he has ever commanded before .
he needs all of us .
every one of us has a role to play on this team .
thank you , general mccaffrey , for agreeing to serve your country one more time .
our fifth challenge : to leave our environment safe and clean for the next generation .
because of a generation of bipartisan effort we do have cleaner water and air , lead levels in children 's blood has been cut by 70 percent , toxic emissions from factories cut in half .
lake erie was dead , and now it 's a thriving resource .
but 10 million children under 12 still live within four miles of a toxic waste dump .
a third of us breathe air that endangers our health .
and in too many communities the water is not safe to drink .
we still have much to do .
yet congress has voted to cut environmental enforcement by 25 percent .
that means more toxic chemicals in our water , more smog in our air , more pesticides in our food .
lobbyists for polluters have been allowed to write their own loopholes into bills to weaken laws that protect the health and safety of our children .
some say that the taxpayer should pick up the tab for toxic waste and let polluters who can afford to fix it off the hook .
i challenge congress to reexamine those policies and to reverse them .
this issue has not been a partisan issue .
the most significant environmental gains in the last 30 years were made under a democratic congress and president richard nixon .
we can work together .
we have to believe some basic things .
do you believe we can expand the economy without hurting the environment ?
i do .
do you believe we can create more jobs over the long run by cleaning the environment up ?
i know we can .
that should be our commitment .
we must challenge businesses and communities to take more initiative in protecting the environment , and we have to make it easier for them to do it .
to businesses this administration is saying : if you can find a cheaper , more efficient way than government regulations require to meet tough pollution standards , do it , as long as you do it right .
to communities we say : we must strengthen community right - to - know laws requiring polluters to disclose their emissions , but you have to use the information to work with business to cut pollution .
people do have a right to know that their air and their water are safe .
our sixth challenge is to maintain america 's leadership in the fight for freedom and peace throughout the world .
because of american leadership , more people than ever before live free and at peace .
and americans have known 50 years of prosperity and security .
we owe thanks especially to our veterans of world war ii .
i would like to say to senator bob dole and to all others in this chamber who fought in world war ii , and to all others on both sides of the aisle who have fought bravely in all our conflicts since : i salute your service and so do the american people .
all over the world , even after the cold war , people still look to us and trust us to help them seek the blessings of peace and freedom .
but as the cold war fades into memory , voices of isolation say america should retreat from its responsibilities .
i say they are wrong .
the threats we face today as americans respect no nation 's borders .
think of them : terrorism , the spread of weapons of mass destruction , organized crime , drug trafficking , ethnic and religious hatred , aggression by rogue states , environmental degradation .
if we fail to address these threats today , we will suffer the consequences in all our tomorrows .
of course , we ca n't be everywhere .
of course , we ca n't do everything .
but where our interests and our values are at stake , and where we can make a difference , america must lead .
we must not be isolationist .
we must not be the world 's policeman .
but we can and should be the world 's very best peacemaker .
by keeping our military strong , by using diplomacy where we can and force where we must , by working with others to share the risk and the cost of our efforts , america is making a difference for people here and around the world .
for the first time since the dawn of the nuclear age -- for the first time since the dawn of the nuclear age -- there is not a single russian missile pointed at america 's children .
north korea has now frozen its dangerous nuclear weapons program .
in haiti , the dictators are gone , democracy has a new day , the flow of desperate refugees to our shores has subsided .
through tougher trade deals for america , over 80 of them , we have opened markets abroad , and now exports are at an all - time high , growing faster than imports and creating good american jobs .
we stood with those taking risks for peace : in northern ireland , where catholic and protestant children now tell their parents , violence must never return ; in the middle east , where arabs and jews who once seemed destined to fight forever now share knowledge and resources and even dreams .
and we stood up for peace in bosnia .
remember the skeletal prisoners , the mass graves , the campaign to rape and torture , the endless lines of refugees , the threat of a spreading war .
all these threats , all these horrors have now begun to give way to the promise of peace .
now our troops and a strong nato , together with our new partners from central europe and elsewhere , are helping that peace to take hold .
as all of you know , i was just there with a bipartisan congressional group , and i was so proud not only of what our troops were doing but of the pride they evidenced in what they were doing .
they knew what america 's mission in this world is , and they were proud to be carrying it out .
through these efforts , we have enhanced the security of the american people , but make no mistake about it : important challenges remain .
the start ii treaty with russia will cut our nuclear stockpiles by another 25 percent .
i urge the senate to ratify it now .
we must end the race to create new nuclear weapons by signing a truly comprehensive nuclear test ban treaty this year .
as we remember what happened in the japanese subway , we can outlaw poison gas forever if the senate ratifies the chemical weapons convention this year .
we can intensify the fight against terrorists and organized criminals at home and abroad if congress passes the antiterrorism legislation i proposed after the oklahoma city bombing , now .
we can help more people move from hatred to hope all across the world in our own interest if congress gives us the means to remain the world 's leader for peace .
my fellow americans , the six challenges i have just discussed are for all of us .
our seventh challenge is really america 's challenge to those of us in this hallowed hall tonight : to reinvent our government and make our democracy work for them .
last year this congress applied to itself the laws it applies to everyone else .
this congress banned gifts and meals from lobbyists .
this congress forced lobbyists to disclose who pays them and what legislation they are trying to pass or kill .
this congress did that , and i applaud you for it .
now i challenge congress to go further , to curb special interest influence in politics by passing the first truly bipartisan campaign finance reform bill in a generation .
you , republicans and democrats alike , can show the american people that we can limit spending and we can open the airwaves to all candidates .
i also appeal to congress to pass the line - item veto you promised the american people .
our administration is working hard to give the american people a government that works better and costs less .
thanks to the work of vice president gore , we are eliminating 16,000 pages of unnecessary rules and regulations , shifting more decisionmaking out of washington , back to states and local communities .
as we move into the era of balanced budgets and smaller government , we must work in new ways to enable people to make the most of their own lives .
we are helping america 's communities , not with more bureaucracy but with more opportunities .
through our successful empowerment zones and community development banks , we 're helping people to find jobs , to start businesses .
and with tax incentives for companies that clean up abandoned industrial property , we can bring jobs back to places that desperately , desperately need them .
but there are some areas that the federal government should not leave and should address and address strongly .
one of these areas is the problem of illegal immigration .
after years of neglect , this administration has taken a strong stand to stiffen the protection of our borders .
we are increasing border controls by 50 percent .
we are increasing inspections to prevent the hiring of illegal immigrants .
and tonight , i announce i will sign an executive order to deny federal contracts to businesses that hire illegal immigrants .
let me be very clear about this : we are still a nation of immigrants ; we should be proud of it .
we should honor every legal immigrant here , working hard to be a good citizen , working hard to become a new citizen .
but we are also a nation of laws .
i want to say a special word now to those who work for our federal government .
today the federal work force is 200,000 employees smaller than it was the day i took office as president .
our federal government today is the smallest it has been in 30 years , and it 's getting smaller every day .
most of our fellow americans probably do n't know that .
and there 's a good reason -- a good reason : the remaining federal work force is composed of hard - working americans who are now working harder and working smarter than ever before to make sure the quality of our services does not decline .
i 'd like to give you one example .
his name is richard dean .
he 's a 49-year - old vietnam veteran who 's worked for the social security administration for 22 years now .
last year he was hard at work in the federal building in oklahoma city when the blast killed 169 people and brought the rubble down all around him .
he reentered that building four times .
he saved the lives of three women .
he 's here with us this evening , and i want to recognize richard and applaud both his public service and his extraordinary personal heroism .
but richard dean 's story does n't end there .
this last november , he was forced out of his office when the government shut down .
and the second time the government shut down he continued helping social security recipients , but he was working without pay .
on behalf of richard dean and his family , and all the other people who are out there working every day doing a good job for the american people , i challenge all of you in this chamber : let 's never , ever shut the federal government down again .
on behalf of all americans , especially those who need their social security payments at the beginning of march , i also challenge the congress to preserve the full faith and credit of the united states , to honor the obligations of this great nation as we have for 220 years , to rise above partisanship and pass a straightforward extension of the debt limit and show people america keeps its word .
i know that this evening i have asked a lot of congress and even more from america .
but i am confident : when americans work together in their homes , their schools , their churches , their synagogues , their civic groups , their workplace , they can meet any challenge .
i say again , the era of big government is over .
but we ca n't go back to the era of fending for yourself .
we have to go forward to the era of working together as a community , as a team , as one america , with all of us reaching across these lines that divide us -- the division , the discrimination , the rancor -- we have to reach across it to find common ground .
we have got to work together if we want america to work .
i want you to meet two more people tonight who do just that .
lucius wright is a teacher in the jackson , mississippi , public school system .
a vietnam veteran , he has created groups to help inner - city children turn away from gangs and build futures they can believe in .
sergeant jennifer rodgers is a police officer in oklahoma city .
like richard dean , she helped to pull her fellow citizens out of the rubble and deal with that awful tragedy .
she reminds us that in their response to that atrocity the people of oklahoma city lifted all of us with their basic sense of decency and community .
lucius wright and jennifer rodgers are special americans .
and i have the honor to announce tonight that they are the very first of several thousand americans who will be chosen to carry the olympic torch on its long journey from los angeles to the centennial of the modern olympics in atlanta this summer , not because they are star athletes but because they are star citizens , community heroes meeting america 's challenges .
they are our real champions .
please stand up .
now each of us must hold high the torch of citizenship in our own lives .
none of us can finish the race alone .
we can only achieve our destiny together , one hand , one generation , one american connecting to another .
there have always been things we could do together , dreams we could make real which we could never have done on our own .
we americans have forged our identity , our very union , from the very point of view that we can accommodate every point on the planet , every different opinion .
but we must be bound together by a faith more powerful than any doctrine that divides us , by our belief in progress , our love of liberty , and our relentless search for common ground .
america has always sought and always risen to every challenge .
who would say that having come so far together , we will not go forward from here ?
who would say that this age of possibility is not for all americans ?
our country is and always has been a great and good nation .
but the best is yet to come if we all do our parts .
thank you .
god bless you , and god bless the united states of america .
thank you .

