in this spring of 1953 the free world weighs one question above all others : the chance for a just peace for all peoples .
to weigh this chance is to summon instantly to mind another recent moment of great decision .
it came with that yet more hopeful spring of 1945 , bright with the promise of victory and of freedom .
the hope of all just men in that moment too was a just and lasting peace .
the 8 years that have passed have seen that hope waver , grow dim , and almost die .
and the shadow of fear again has darkly lengthened across the world .
today the hope of free men remains stubborn and brave , but it is sternly disciplined by experience .
it shuns not only all crude counsel of despair but also the self - deceit of easy illusion .
it weighs the chance for peace with sure , clear knowledge of what happened to the vain hope of 1945 .
in that spring of victory the soldiers of the western allies met the soldiers of russia in the center of europe .
they were triumphant comrades in arms .
their peoples shared the joyous prospect of building , in honor of their dead , the only fitting monument -- an age of just peace .
all these war - weary peoples shared too this concrete , decent purpose : to guard vigilantly against the domination ever again of any part of the world by a single , unbridled aggressive power .
this common purpose lasted an instant and perished .
the nations of the world divided to follow two distinct roads .
the united states and our valued friends , the other free nations , chose one road .
the leaders of the soviet union chose another .
the way chosen by the united states was plainly marked by a few clear precepts , which govern its conduct in world affairs .
first : no people on earth can be held , as a people , to be an enemy , for all humanity shares the common hunger for peace and fellowship and justice .
second : no nation 's security and well - being can be lastingly achieved in isolation but only in effective cooperation with fellow nations .
third : any nation 's right to a form of government and an economic system of its own choosing is inalienable .
fourth : any nation 's attempt to dictate to other nations their form of government is indefensible .
and fifth : a nation 's hope of lasting peace can not be firmly based upon any race in armaments but rather upon just relations and honest understanding with all other nations .
in the light of these principles the citizens of the united states defined the way they proposed to follow , through the aftermath of war , toward true peace .
this way was faithful to the spirit that inspired the united nations : to prohibit strife , to relieve tensions , to banish fears .
this way was to control and to reduce armaments .
this way was to allow all nations to devote their energies and resources to the great and good tasks of healing the war 's wounds , of clothing and feeding and housing the needy , of perfecting a just political life , of enjoying the fruits of their own free toil .
the soviet government held a vastly different vision of the future .
in the world of its design , security was to be found , not in mutual trust and mutual aid but in force : huge armies , subversion , rule of neighbor nations .
the goal was power superiority at all cost .
security was to be sought by denying it to all others .
the result has been tragic for the world and , for the soviet union , it has also been ironic .
the amassing of soviet power alerted free nations to a new danger of aggression .
it compelled them in self - defense to spend unprecedented money and energy for armaments .
it forced them to develop weapons of war now capable of inflicting instant and terrible punishment upon any aggressor .
it instilled in the free nations -- and let none doubt this -- the unshakable conviction that , as long as there persists a threat to freedom , they must , at any cost , remain armed , strong , and ready for the risk of war .
it inspired them -- and let none doubt this -- to attain a unity of purpose and will beyond the power of propaganda or pressure to break , now or ever .
there remained , however , one thing essentially unchanged and unaffected by soviet conduct : the readiness of the free nations to welcome sincerely any genuine evidence of peaceful purpose enabling all peoples again to resume their common quest of just peace .
the free nations , most solemnly and repeatedly , have assured the soviet union that their firm association has never had any aggressive purpose whatsoever .
soviet leaders , however , have seemed to persuade themselves , or tried to persuade their people , otherwise .
and so it has come to pass that the soviet union itself has shared and suffered the very fears it has fostered in the rest of the world .
this has been the way of life forged by 8 years of fear and force .
what can the world , or any nation in it , hope for if no turning is found on this dread road ?
the worst to be feared and the best to be expected can be simply stated .
the worst is atomic war .
the best would be this : a life of perpetual fear and tension ; a burden of arms draining the wealth and the labor of all peoples ; a wasting of strength that defies the american system or the soviet system or any system to achieve true abundance and happiness for the peoples of this earth .
every gun that is made , every warship launched , every rocket fired signifies , in the final sense , a theft from those who hunger and are not fed , those who are cold and are not clothed .
this world in arms is not spending money alone .
it is spending the sweat of its laborers , the genius of its scientists , the hopes of its children .
the cost of one modern heavy bomber is this : a modern brick school in more than 30 cities .
it is two electric power plants , each serving a town of 60,000 population .
it is two fine , fully equipped hospitals .
it is some 50 miles of concrete highway .
we pay for a single fighter plane with a half million bushels of wheat .
we pay for a single destroyer with new homes that could have housed more than 8,000 people .
this , i repeat , is the best way of life to be found on the road the world has been taking .
this is not a way of life at all , in any true sense .
under the cloud of threatening war , it is humanity hanging from a cross of iron .
these plain and cruel truths define the peril and point the hope that come with this spring of 1953 .
this is one of those times in the affairs of nations when the gravest choices must be made , if there is to be a turning toward a just and lasting peace .
it is a moment that calls upon the governments of the world to speak their intentions with simplicity and with honesty .
it calls upon them to answer the question that stirs the hearts of all sane men : is there no other way the world may live ?
the world knows that an era ended with the death of joseph stalin .
the extraordinary 30-year span of his rule saw the soviet empire expand to reach from the baltic sea to the sea of japan , finally to dominate 800 million souls .
the soviet system shaped by stalin and his predecessors was born of one world war .
it survived with stubborn and often amazing courage a second world war .
it has lived to threaten a third .
now a new leadership has assumed power in the soviet union .
its links to the past , however strong , can not bind it completely .
its future is , in great part , its own to make .
this new leadership confronts a free world aroused , as rarely in its history , by the will to stay free .
this free world knows , out of the bitter wisdom of experience , that vigilance and sacrifice are the price of liberty .
it knows that the defense of western europe imperatively demands the unity of purpose and action made possible by the north atlantic treaty organization , embracing a european defense community .
it knows that western germany deserves to be a free and equal partner in this community and that this , for germany , is the only safe way to full , final unity .
it knows that aggression in korea and in southeast asia are threats to the whole free community to be met by united action .
this is the kind of free world which the new soviet leadership confronts .
it is a world that demands and expects the fullest respect of its rights and interests .
it is a world that will always accord the same respect to all others .
so the new soviet leadership now has a precious opportunity to awaken , with the rest of the world , to the point of peril reached and to help turn the tide of history .
will it do this ?
we do not yet know .
recent statements and gestures of soviet leaders give some evidence that they may recognize this critical moment .
we welcome every honest act of peace .
we care nothing for mere rhetoric .
we are only for sincerity of peaceful purpose attested by deeds .
the opportunities for such deeds are many .
the performance of a great number of them waits upon no complex protocol but upon the simple will to do them .
even a few such clear and specific acts , such as the soviet union 's signature upon an austrian treaty or its release of thousands of prisoners still held from world war ii , would be impressive signs of sincere intent .
they would carry a power of persuasion not to be matched by any amount of oratory .
this we do know : a world that begins to witness the rebirth of trust among nations can find its ' way to a peace that is neither partial nor punitive .
with all who will work in good faith toward such a peace , we are ready , with renewed resolve , to strive to redeem the near - lost hopes of our day .
the first great step along this way must be the conclusion of an honorable armistice in korea .
this means the immediate cessation of hostilities and the prompt initiation of political discussions leading to the holding of free elections in a united korea .
it should mean , no less importantly , an end to the direct and indirect attacks upon the security of indochina and malaya .
for any armistice in korea that merely released aggressive armies to attack elsewhere would be a fraud .
we seek , throughout asia as throughout the world , a peace that is true and total .
out of this can grow a still wider task -- the achieving of just political settlements for the other serious and specific issues between the free world and the soviet union .
none of these issues , great or small , is insoluble -- given only the will to respect the rights of all nations .
again we say : the united states is ready to assume its just part .
we have already done all within our power to speed conclusion of a treaty with austria , which will free that country from economic exploitation and from occupation by foreign troops .
we are ready not only to press forward with the present plans for closer unity of the nations of western europe but also , upon that foundation , to strive to foster a broader european community , conducive to the free movement of persons , of trade , and of ideas .
this community would include a free and united germany , with a government based upon free and secret elections .
this free community and the full independence of the east european nations could mean the end of the present unnatural division of europe .
as progress in all these areas strengthens world trust , we could proceed concurrently with the next great work -- the reduction of the burden of armaments now weighing upon the world .
to this end we would welcome and enter into the most solemn agreements .
these could properly include : 
 1 .
the limitation , by absolute numbers or by an agreed international ratio , of the sizes of the military and security forces of all nations .
2 .
a commitment by all nations to set an agreed limit upon that proportion of total production of certain strategic materials to be devoted to military purposes .
3 .
international control of atomic energy to promote its use for peaceful purposes only and to insure the prohibition of atomic weapons .
4 .
a limitation or prohibition of other categories of weapons of great destructiveness .
5 .
the enforcement of all these agreed limitations and prohibitions by adequate safeguards , including a practical system of inspection under the united nations .
the details of such disarmament programs are manifestly critical and complex .
neither the united states nor any other nation can properly claim to possess a perfect , immutable formula .
but the formula matters less than the faith -- the good faith without which no formula can work justly and effectively .
the fruit of success in all these tasks would present the world with the greatest task , and the greatest opportunity , of all .
it is this : the dedication of the energies , the resources , and the imaginations of all peaceful nations to a new kind of war .
this would be a declared total war , not upon any human enemy but upon the brute forces of poverty and need .
the peace we seek , rounded upon decent trust and cooperative effort among nations , can be fortified , not by weapons of war but by wheat and by cotton , by milk and by wool , by meat and by timber and by rice .
these are words that translate into every language on earth .
these are needs that challenge this world in arms .
this idea of a just and peaceful world is not new or strange to us .
it inspired the people of the united states to initiate the european recovery program in 1947 .
that program was prepared to treat , with like and equal concern , the needs of eastern and western europe .
we are prepared to reaffirm , with the most concrete evidence , our readiness to help build a world in which all peoples can be productive and prosperous .
this government is ready to ask its people to join with all nations in devoting a substantial percentage of the savings achieved by disarmament to a fund for world aid and reconstruction .
the purposes of this great work would be to help other peoples to develop the undeveloped areas of the world , to stimulate profitable and fair world trade , to assist all peoples to know the blessings of productive freedom .
the monuments to this new kind of war would be these : roads and schools , hospitals and homes , food and health .
we are ready , in short , to dedicate our strength to serving the needs , rather than the fears , of the world .
we are ready , by these and all such actions , to make of the united nations an institution that can effectively guard the peace and security of all peoples .
i know of nothing i can add to make plainer the sincere purpose of the united states .
i know of no course , other than that marked by these and similar actions , that can be called the highway of peace .
i know of only one question upon which progress waits .
it is this : 
 what is the soviet union ready to do ?
whatever the answer be , let it be plainly spoken .
again we say : the hunger for peace is too great , the hour in history too late , for any government to mock men 's hopes with mere words and promises and gestures .
the test of truth is simple .
there can be no persuasion but by deeds .
is the new leadership of the soviet union prepared to use its decisive influence in the communist world , including control of the flow of arms , to bring not merely an expedient truce in korea but genuine peace in asia ?
is it prepared to allow other nations , including those of eastern europe , the free choice of their own forms of government ?
is it prepared to act in concert with others upon serious disarmament proposals to be made firmly effective by stringent u. n. control and inspection ?
if not , where then is the concrete evidence of the soviet union 's concern for peace ?
the test is clear .
there is , before all peoples , a precious chance to turn the black tide of events .
if we failed to strive to seize this chance , the judgment of future ages would be harsh and just .
if we strive but fail and the world remains armed against itself , it at least need be divided no longer in its clear knowledge of who has condemned humankind to this fate .
the purpose of the united states , in stating these proposals , is simple and clear .
these proposals spring , without ulterior purpose or political passion , from our calm conviction that the hunger for peace is in the hearts of all peoples -- those of russia and of china no less than of our own country .
they conform to our firm faith that god created men to enjoy , not destroy , the fruits of the earth and of their own toil .
they aspire to this : the lifting , from the backs and from the hearts of men , of their burden of arms and of fears , so that they may find before them a golden age of freedom and of peace .

chairman martin , delegates and alternates to this great convention , distinguished guests and my fellow americans wherever they may be in this broad land : 
 i should first tell you that i have no words in which to express the gratitude that mrs. eisenhower and i feel for the warmth of your welcome .
the cordiality you have extended to us and to the members of our family , our son and daughter , my brothers and their wives , touches our hearts deeply .
thank you very much indeed .
i thank you additionally and personally for the high honor you have accorded me in entrusting me once more with your nomination for the presidency .
and i should like to say that it is a great satisfaction to me that the team of individuals you selected in 1952 you have selected to keep intact for this campaign .
i am not here going to attempt a eulogy of mr. nixon .
you have heard his qualifications described in the past several days .
i merely want to say this : that whatever dedication to country , loyalty and patriotism and great ability can do for america , he will do -- and that i know .
ladies and gentlemen , when abraham lincoln was nominated in 1860 , and a committee brought the news to him at his home in springfield , illinois , his reply was two sentences long .
then , while his friends and neighbors waited in the street , and while bonfires lit up the may evening , he said simply , " and now i will not longer defer the pleasure of taking you , and each of you , by the hand . "
i wish i could do the same -- speak two sentences , and then take each one of you by the hand , all of you who are in sound of my voice .
if i could do so , i would first thank you individually for your confidence and your trust .
then , as i am sure lincoln did as he moved among his friends in the light of the bonfires , we could pause and talk a while about the questions that are uppermost in your mind .
i am sure that one topic would dominate all the rest .
that topic is : the future .
this is a good time to think about the future , for this convention is celebrating its one hundredth anniversary .
and a centennial is an occasion , not just for recalling the inspiring past , but even more for looking ahead to the demanding future .
just as on new year 's day we instinctively think , " i wonder where i will be a year from now , " so it is quite natural for the republican party to ask today , " what will happen , not just in the coming election , but even one hundred years from now ? "
my answer is this : if we and our successors are as courageous and forward - looking and as militantly determined , here under the klieg - lights of the twentieth century , as abraham lincoln and his associates were in the bonfire - light of the nineteenth , the republican party will continue to grow in the confidence and affection of the american people , not only to november next , but indeed to , and beyond , its second centennial .
now , of course , in this convention setting , you and i are momentarily more interested in november 1956 than in 2056 .
but the point is this : our policies are right today only as they are designed to stand the test of tomorrow .
the great norwegian , henrik ibsen once wrote : " i hold that man is in the right who is most clearly in league with the future . "
today i want to demonstrate the truth of a single proposition : the republican party is the party of the future .
i hold that the republican party and platform are right in 1956 , because they are " most closely in league with the future . "
and for this reason the republican party and program are and will be decisively approved by the american people in 1956 !
my friends , i have just made a very fiat statement for victory for the republican party in november , and i believe it from the bottom of my heart .
but what i say is based upon certain assumptions , and those assumptions must become true if the prediction i make is to be valid .
and that is this : that every american who believes as we do -- the republicans , the independents , the straight - thinking democrats -- must carry the message of the record and the pledges that we here make -- that we have made and here make , to all the people of the land .
we must see , as we do our civic duty , that not only do we vote but that everybody is qualified to vote , that everybody registers and everybody goes to the polls in november .
here is a task not only for the republican national committee , for the women 's organizations , for the citizens ' organizations , for the so - called youth for eisenhower -- everybody that bears this message in his heart must carry it to the country .
in that way we will win .
and which reminds me , my friends , there are only a few days left for registering in a number of our states .
that is one thing you can not defer .
the records show that our registration as compared to former years at this time is way down across the land -- registration across the board .
let 's help the american heritage , let 's help the boy scouts , let 's help everybody to get people out to register to vote .
now , of special relevance , and to me particularly gratifying , is the fact that the country 's young people show a consistent preference for this administration .
after all , let us not forget , these young people are america 's future .
parenthetically , may i say i shall never cease to hope that the several states will give them the voting privilege at a somewhat earlier age than is now generally the case .
now , the first reason of the five i shall give you why the republican party is the party of the future is this : 
 first : because it is the party of long - range principle , not short - term expediency .
one of my predecessors is said to have observed that in making his decisions he had to operate like a football quarterback -- he could not very well call the next play until he saw how the last play turned out .
well , that may be a good way to run a football team , but in these days it is no way to run a government .
now , why is it so important that great governmental programs be based upon principle rather than upon shifting political opportunism ?
it is because what government does affects profoundly the daily lives and plans of every person in the country .
if governmental action is without the solid guidelines of enduring principle , national policies flounder in confusion .
and more than this , the millions of individuals , families and enterprises , whose risk - taking and planning for the future are our country 's very life force , are paralyzed by uncertainty , diffidence and indecision .
change based on principle is progress .
constant change without principle becomes chaos .
i shall give you several examples of rejecting expediency in favor of principle .
first , the farm issue .
expediency said : " let 's do something in a hurry -- anything -- even multiply our price - depressing surpluses at the risk of making the 
 problem twice as bad next year -- just so we get through this year . "
people who talk like that do not care about principle , and do not know farmers .
the farmer deals every day in basic principles of growth and life .
his product must be planned , and cultivated , and harvested over a long period .
he has to figure not just a year at a time but over cycles and spans of years , as to his soil , his water , his equipment , the strains of his stock -- and the strains on his income .
and so , for this man of principle , we have designed our program of principle .
in it , we recognize that we have received from our forebears a rich legacy : our continent 's basic resource of soil .
we are determined that , through such measures as the soil bank and the great plains program , this legacy shall be handed on to our children even richer than we received it .
we are equally determined that farm prices and income , which were needlessly pushed down under surpluses -- surpluses induced first by war and then by unwise political action that was stubbornly and recklessly prolonged , shall in the coming months and years get back on a genuinely healthy basis .
this improvement must continue until a rightful share of our prosperity is permanently enjoyed by agriculture on which our very life depends .
a second example : labor relations .
expediency said : " when a major labor dispute looms , the government must do something -- anything -- to settle the dispute even before the parties have finished negotiating .
get an injunction .
seize the steel mills .
appoint a board .
knock their heads together . "
principle says : " free collective bargaining without government interference is the cornerstone of the american philosophy of labor - management relations . "
if the government charges impatiently into every major dispute , the negotiations between parties will become a pointless preliminary farce , while everyone waits around to see what the government will do .
this administration has faith in the rightness of the collective bargaining principle .
it believes in the maturity of both labor and business leaders , and in their determination to do what is best not only for their own side but for the country as a whole .
the results : for the first time in our history a complete steel contract was negotiated and signed without direct government intervention , and the last three and a half years have witnessed one of the most remarkable periods of labor peace on record .
another example : concentration of power in washington .
expediency said : 
 " we can not allow our fine new ideas to be at the mercy of 51 separate state and territorial legislatures .
it is so much quicker and easier to plan , finance and direct all major projects from washington . "
principle says : " geographical balance of power is essential to our form of free society .
if you take the centralization shortcut every time something is to be done , you will perhaps sometimes get quick action .
but there is no perhaps about the price you will pay for your impatience : the growth of a swollen , bureaucratic , monster government in washington , in whose shadow our state and local governments will ultimately wither and die . "
and so we stemmed the heedless stampede to washington .
we made a special point of building up state activities , state finances , and state prestige .
our founding fathers showed us how the federal government could exercise its undoubted responsibility for leadership , while still stopping short of the kind of interference that deadens local vigor , variety , initiative and imagination .
so today we say to our young people : the party of the future will pass along to you undamaged the unique system of division of authority which has proved so successful in reconciling our oldest ideals of personal freedom with the twentieth - century need for decisiveness in action .
my second reason for saying that the republican party is the party of the future is this : it is the party which concentrates on the facts and issues of today and tomorrow , not the facts and issues of yesterday .
more than twenty years ago , our opponents found in the problems of the depression a battleground on which they scored many political victories .
now , economic cycles have not been eliminated .
still , the world has moved on from the 1930 's : good times have supplanted depression ; new techniques for checking serious recession have been learned and tested and a whole new array of problems has sprung up .
but their obsession with a depression still blinds many of our opponents to the insistent demands of today .
the present and the future are bringing new kinds of challenge to federal and local governments : water supply , highways , health , housing , power development , and peaceful uses of atomic energy .
with two - thirds of us living in big cities , questions of urban organization and redevelopment must be given high priority .
highest of all , perhaps , will be the priority of first - class education to meet the demands of our swiftly growing school - age population .
the party of the young and of all ages says : let us quit fighting the battles of the past , and let us all turn our attention to these problems of the present and future , on which the longterm well - being of our people so urgently depends .
third : the republican party is the party of the future because it is the party that draws people together , not drives them apart .
our party detests the technique of pitting group against group for cheap political advantage .
republicans view as a central principle of conduct -- not just as a phrase on nickels and dimes -- that old motto of ours : " e pluribus unum " -- " out of many -- one . "
our party as far back as 1856 began establishing a record of bringing together , .
as its largest element , the working people and small farmers , as well as the small businessmen .
it attracted minority groups , scholars and writers , not to mention reformers of all kinds , free - soilers , independent democrats , conscience whigs , barnburners , " soft hunkers , " teetotallers , vegetarians , and transcendentalists !
now , a hundred years later , the republican party is again the rallying point for americans of all callings , ages , races and incomes .
they see in its broad , forward - moving , straight - down - the road , fighting program the best promise for their own steady progress toward a bright future .
some opponents have tried to call this a " one - interest party . "
indeed it is a one - interest party ; and that one interest is the interest of every man , woman and child in america !
and most surely , as long as the republican party continues to be this kind of one - interest party -- a one - universal - interest party -- it will continue to be the party of the future .
and now the fourth reason : the republican party is the party of the future because it is the party through which the many things that still need doing will soonest be done -- and will be done by enlisting the fullest energies of free , creative , individual people .
republicans have proved that it is possible for a government to have a warm , sensitive concern for the everyday needs of people , while steering clear of the paternalistic " big - brother - is - watching - you " kind of interference .
the individual -- and especially the idealistic young person -- has no faith in a tight federal monopoly on problem - solving .
he seeks and deserves opportunity for himself and every other person who is burning to participate in putting right the wrongs of the world .
in our time of prosperity and progress , one thing we must always be on guard against is smugness .
true , things are going well ; but there are thousands of things still to be done .
there are still enough needless sufferings to be cured , enough injustices to be erased , to provide careers for all the crusaders we can produce or find .
we want them all !
republicans , independents , discerning democrats -- come on in and help !
one hundred years ago the republican party was created in a devout belief in equal justice and equal opportunity for all in a nation of free men and women .
what is more , the republican party 's record on social justice rests , not on words and promises , but on accomplishment .
the record shows that a wide range of quietly effective actions , conceived in understanding and good will for all , has brought about more genuine -- and often voluntary -- progress toward equal justice and opportunity in the last three years than was accomplished in all the previous twenty put together .
elimination of various kinds of discrimination in the armed services , the district of columbia , and among the employees of government contractors provides specific examples of this progress .
in this work , incidentally , no one has been more effective and more energetic than our vice president who has headed one of the great committees in this direction .
now , in all existing kinds of discrimination there is much to do .
we must insure a fair chance to such people as mature workers who have trouble getting jobs , older citizens with problems of health , housing , security and recreation , migratory farm laborers and physically - handicapped workers .
we have with us , also , problems involving american indians , low - income farmers and laborers , women who sometimes do not get equal pay for equal work , small businessmen , and employers and workers in areas which need special assistance for redevelopment .
specific new programs of action are being pushed for all of these , the most recent being a new 14-point program for small businessmen which was announced early in august .
and the everyday well - being of people is being advanced on many other fronts .
this is being done , not by paternalistic regimentation .
it is done by clear cut , aggressive federal leadership and by releasing the illimitable resources and drives of our millions of self - reliant individuals and our thousands of private organizations of every conceivable kind and size -- each of these is consecrated to the task of meeting some human need , curing some human evil , or enriching some human experience .
finally , a party of the future must be completely dedicated to peace , as indeed must all americans .
for without peace there is no future .
it was in the light of this truth that the united states proposed its atoms for peace plan in 1953 , and since then has done so much to make this new science universally available to friendly nations in order to promote human welfare .
we have agreements with more than thirty nations for research reactors , and with seven for power reactors , while many others are under consideration .
twenty thousand kilograms of nuclear fuel have been set aside for the foreign programs .
in the same way , we have worked unceasingly for the promotion of effective steps in disarmament so that the labor of men could with confidence be devoted to their own improvement rather than wasted in the building of engines of destruction .
no one is more aware than i that it is the young who fight the wars , and it is the young who give up years of their lives to military training and service .
it is not enough that their elders promise " peace in our time " ; it must be peace in their time too , and in their children 's time ; indeed , my friends , there is only one real peace now , and that is peace for all time .
now there are three imperatives of peace -- three requirements that the prudent man must face with unblinking realism .
the first imperative is the elementary necessity of maintaining our own national strength -- moral , economic and military .
it is still my conviction , as i wrote in 1947 : " the compelling necessities of the moment leave us no alternative to the maintenance of real and respectable strength -- not only in our moral rectitude and our economic power , but in terms of adequate military preparedness . "
during the past three and one - half years , our military strength has been constantly augmented , soberly and intelligently .
our country has never before in peacetime been so well prepared militarily .
so long as the world situation requires , our security must be vigorously sustained .
our economic power , as everyone knows , is displaying a capacity for growth which is both rapid and sound , even while supporting record military budgets .
we must keep it growing .
but moral strength is also essential .
today we are competing for men 's hearts , and minds , and trust all over the world .
in such a competition , what we are at home and what we do at home is even more important than what we say abroad .
here again , my friends , we find constructive work for each of us .
what each of us does , how each of us acts , has an influence on this question .
now , the second imperative of peace is collective security .
we live in a shrunken world , a world in which oceans are crossed in hours , a world in which a single - minded despotism menaces the scattered freedoms of scores of struggling independent nations .
to ensure the combined strength of friendly nations is for all of us an elementary matter of self - preservation -- as elementary as having a stout militia in the days of the 
 flint - lock .
again , the strength i speak of is not military strength alone .
the heart of the collective security principle is the idea of helping other nations to realize their own potentialities -- political , economic and military .
the strength of the free world lies not in cementing the free world into a second monolithic mass to compete with that of the communists .
it lies rather in the unity that comes of the voluntary association of nations which , however diverse , are developing their own capacities and asserting their own national destinies in a world of freedom and of mutual respect .
there can be no enduring peace for any nation while other nations suffer privation , oppression , and a sense of injustice and despair .
in our modern world , it is madness to suppose that there could be an island of tranquillity and prosperity in a sea of wretchedness and frustration .
for america 's sake , as well as the world 's , we must measure up to the challenge of the second imperative ; the urgent need for mutual economic and military cooperation among the free nations , sufficient to deter or repel aggression wherever it may threaten .
but even this is no longer enough .
we are in the era of the thermo - nuclear bomb that can obliterate cities and can be delivered across continents .
with such weapons , war has become , not just tragic , but preposterous .
with such weapons , there can be no victory for anyone .
plainly , the objective now must be to see that such a war does not occur at all .
and so the third imperative of peace is this : without for a moment relaxing our internal and collective defenses , we must actively try to bridge the great chasm that separates us from the peoples under communist rule .
in those regions are millions of individual human beings who have been our friends , and who themselves have sincerely wanted peace and freedom , throughout so much of our mutual history .
now for years the iron curtain was impenetrable .
our people were unable to talk to these individuals behind the curtain , or travel among them , or share their arts or sports , or invite them to see what life is like in a free democracy , or even get acquainted in any way .
what future was there in such a course , except greater misunderstanding and an ever deepening division in the world ?
of course , good will from our side can do little to reach these peoples unless there is some new spirit of conciliation on the part of the governments controlling them .
now , at last , there appear to be signs that some small degree of friendly intercourse among peoples may be permitted .
we are beginning to be able -- cautiously and with our eyes open -- to encourage some interchange of ideas , of books , magazines , students , tourists , artists , radio programs , technical experts , religious leaders and governmental officials .
the hope is that , little by little , mistrust based on falsehoods will give way to international understanding based on truth .
now , as this development gradually comes about , it will not seem futile for young people to dream of a brave and new and shining world , or for older people to feel that they can in fact bequeath to their children a better inheritance than that which was their own .
science and technology , labor - saving methods , management , labor organization , education , medicine -- and not least , politics and government .
all these have brought within our grasp a world in which backbreaking toil and longer hours will not be necessary .
travel all over the world , to learn to know our brothers abroad , will be fast and cheap .
the fear and pain of crippling disease will be greatly reduced .
the material things that make life interesting and pleasant will be available to everyone .
leisure , together with educational and recreational facilities , will be abundant , so that all can develop the life of the spirit , of reflection , of religion , of the arts , of the full realization of the good things of the world .
and political wisdom will ensure justice and harmony .
this picture of the future brings to mind a little story .
a government worker , when he first arrived in washington in 1953 , was passing the national archives building in a taxi , where he saw this motto carved on one of its pedestals : " what is past is prologue . "
he had heard that washington cab drivers were noted for knowing all the washington answers , so he asked the driver about the motto . "
oh that , " said the driver , " that 's just bureaucrat talk .
what it really means is -- ' you ai n't seen nothing yet . ' "
my friends , the kind of era i have described is possible .
but it will not be attained by revolution .
it will not be attained by the sordid politics of pitting group against group .
it will be brought about by the ambitions and judgments and inspirations and darings of 168 million free americans working together and with friends abroad toward a common ideal in a peaceful world .
lincoln , speaking to the republican state convention in 1858 , began with the biblical quotation , " a house divided against itself can not stand . "
today the world is a house divided .
but -- as is sometimes forgotten -- lincoln followed this quotation with a note of hope for his troubled country : " i do not expect the house to fall , " he said , " but i do expect it will cease to be divided . "
a century later , we too must have the vision , the fighting spirit , and the deep religious faith in our creator 's destiny for us , to sound a similar note of promise for our divided world ; that out of our time there can , with incessant work and with god 's help , emerge a new era of good life , good will and good hope for all men .
one american put it this way : " every tomorrow has two handles .
we can take hold of it with the handle of anxiety or the handle of faith . "
my friends , in firm faith , and in the conviction that the republican purposes and principles are " in league " with this kind of future , the nomination that you have tendered me for the presidency of the united states i now -- humbly but confidently -- accept .

my fellow americans : three days from now , after half a century in the service of our country , i shall lay down the responsibilities of office as , in traditional and solemn ceremony , the authority of the presidency is vested in my successor .
this evening i come to you with a message of leave - taking and farewell , and to share a few final thoughts with you , my countrymen .
like every other citizen , i wish the new president , and all who will labor with him , godspeed .
i pray that the coming years will be blessed with peace and prosperity for all .
our people expect their president and the congress to find essential agreement on issues of great moment , the wise resolution of which will better shape the future of the nation .
my own relations with the congress , which began on a remote and tenuous basis when , long ago , a member of the senate appointed me to west point , have since ranged to the intimate during the war and immediate post - war period , and , finally , to the mutually interdependent during these past eight years .
in this final relationship , the congress and the administration have , on most vital issues , cooperated well , to serve the national good rather than mere partisanship , and so have assured that the business of the nation should go forward .
so , my official relationship with the congress ends in a feeling , on my part , of gratitude that we have been able to do so much together .
ii .
we now stand ten years past the midpoint of a century that has witnessed four major wars among great nations .
three of these involved our own country .
despite these holocausts america is today the strongest , the most influential and most productive nation in the world .
understandably proud of this pre - eminence , we yet realize that america 's leadership and prestige depend , not merely upon our unmatched material progress , riches and military strength , but on how we use our power in the interests of world peace and human betterment .
iii .
throughout america 's adventure in free government , our basic purposes have been to keep the peace ; to foster progress in human achievement , and to enhance liberty , dignity and integrity among people and among nations .
to strive for less would be unworthy of a free and religious people .
any failure traceable to arrogance , or our lack of comprehension or readiness to sacrifice would inflict upon us grievous hurt both at home and abroad .
progress toward these noble goals is persistently threatened by the conflict now engulfing the world .
it commands our whole attention , absorbs our very beings .
we face a hostile ideology -- global in scope , atheistic in character , ruthless in purpose , and insidious in method .
unhappily the danger it poses promises to be of indefinite duration .
to meet it successfully , there is called for , not so much the emotional and transitory sacrifices of crisis , but rather those which enable us to carry forward steadily , surely , and without complaint the burdens of a prolonged and complex struggle -- with liberty the stake .
only thus shall we remain , despite every provocation , on our charted course toward permanent peace and human betterment .
crises there will continue to be .
in meeting them , whether foreign or domestic , great or small , there is a recurring temptation to feel that some spectacular and costly action could become the miraculous solution to all current difficulties .
a huge increase in newer elements of our defense ; development of unrealistic programs to cure every ill in agriculture ; a dramatic expansion in basic and applied research -- these and many other possibilities , each possibly promising in itself , may be suggested as the only way to the road we wish to travel .
but each proposal must be weighed in the light of a broader consideration : the need to maintain balance in and among national programs - balance between the private and the public economy , balance between cost and hoped for advantage -- balance between the clearly necessary and the comfortably desirable ; balance between our essential requirements as a nation and the duties imposed by the nation upon the individual ; balance between actions of the moment and the national welfare of the future .
good judgment seeks balance and progress ; lack of it eventually finds imbalance and frustration .
the record of many decades stands as proof that our people and their government have , in the main , understood these truths and have responded to them well , in the face of stress and threat .
but threats , new in kind or degree , constantly arise .
i mention two only .
iv .
a vital element in keeping the peace is our military establishment .
our arms must be mighty , ready for instant action , so that no potential aggressor may be tempted to risk his own destruction .
our military organization today bears little relation to that known by any of my predecessors in peacetime , or indeed by the fighting men of world war ii or korea .
until the latest of our world conflicts , the united states had no armaments industry .
american makers of plowshares could , with time and as required , make swords as well .
but now we can no longer risk emergency improvisation of national defense ; we have been compelled to create a permanent armaments industry of vast proportions .
added to this , three and a half million men and women are directly engaged in the defense establishment .
we annually spend on military security more than the net income of all united states corporations .
this conjunction of an immense military establishment and a large arms industry is new in the american experience .
the total influence - economic , political , even spiritual -- is felt in every city , every state house , every office of the federal government .
we recognize the imperative need for this development .
yet we must not fail to comprehend its grave implications .
our toil , resources and livelihood are all involved ; so is the very structure of our society .
in the councils of government , we must guard against the acquisition of unwarranted influence , whether sought or unsought , by the military - industrial complex .
the potential for the disastrous rise of misplaced power exists and will persist .
we must never let the weight of this combination endanger our liberties or democratic processes .
we should take nothing for granted .
only an alert and knowledgeable citizenry can compel the proper meshing of the huge industrial and military machinery of defense with our peaceful methods and goals , so that security and liberty may prosper together .
akin to , and largely responsible for the sweeping changes in our industrial - military posture , has been the technological revolution during recent decades .
in this revolution , research has become central ; it also becomes more formalized , complex , and costly .
a steadily increasing share is conducted for , by , or at the direction of , the federal government .
today , the solitary inventor , tinkering in his shop , has been overshadowed by task forces of scientists in laboratories and testing fields .
in the same fashion , the free university , historically the fountainhead of free ideas and scientific discovery , has experienced a revolution in the conduct of research .
partly because of the huge costs involved , a government contract becomes virtually a substitute for intellectual curiosity .
for every old blackboard there are now hundreds of new electronic computers .
the prospect of domination of the nation 's scholars by federal employment , project allocations , and the power of money is ever present -- and is gravely to be regarded .
yet , in holding scientific research and discovery in respect , as we should , we must also be alert to the equal and opposite danger that public policy could itself become the captive of a scientific - technological elite .
it is the task of statesmanship to mold , to balance , and to integrate these and other forces , new and old , within the principles of our democratic system -- ever aiming toward the supreme goals of our free society .
v. another factor in maintaining balance involves the element of time .
as we peer into society 's future , we -- you and i , and our government - must avoid the impulse to live only for today , plundering , for our own ease and convenience , the precious resources of tomorrow .
we can not mortgage the material assets of our grandchildren without risking the loss also of their political and spiritual heritage .
we want democracy to survive for all generations to come , not to become the insolvent phantom of tomorrow .
vi .
down the long lane of the history yet to be written america knows that this world of ours , ever growing smaller , must avoid becoming a community of dreadful fear and hate , and be , instead , a proud confederation of mutual trust and respect .
such a confederation must be one of equals .
the weakest must come to the conference table with the same confidence as do we , protected as we are by our moral , economic , and military strength .
that table , though scarred by many past frustrations , can not be abandoned for the certain agony of the battlefield .
disarmament , with mutual honor and confidence , is a continuing imperative .
together we must learn how to compose differences , not with arms , but with intellect and decent purpose .
because this need is so sharp and apparent i confess that i lay down my official responsibilities in this field with a definite sense of disappointment .
as one who has witnessed the horror and the lingering sadness of war -- as one who knows that another war could utterly destroy this civilization which has been so slowly and painfully built over thousands of years -- i wish i could say tonight that a lasting peace is in sight .
happily , i can say that war has been avoided .
steady progress toward our ultimate goal has been made .
but , so much remains to be done .
as a private citizen , i shall never cease to do what little i can to help the world advance along that road .
vii .
so -- in this my last good night to you as your president -- i thank you for the many opportunities you have given me for public service in war and peace .
i trust that in that service you find some things worthy ; as for the rest of it , i know you will find ways to improve performance in the future .
you and i -- my fellow citizens -- need to be strong in our faith that all nations , under god , will reach the goal of peace with justice .
may we be ever unswerving in devotion to principle , confident but humble with power , diligent in pursuit of the nation 's great goals .
to all the peoples of the world , i once more give expression to america 's prayerful and continuing aspiration : we pray that peoples of all faiths , all races , all nations , may have their great human needs satisfied ; that those now denied opportunity shall come to enjoy it to the full ; that all who yearn for freedom may experience its spiritual blessings ; that those who have freedom will understand , also , its heavy responsibilities ; that all who are insensitive to the needs of others will learn charity ; that the scourges of poverty , disease and ignorance will be made to disappear from the earth , and that , in the goodness of time , all peoples will come to live together in a peace guaranteed by the binding force of mutual respect and love .

my friends , before i begin the expression of those thoughts that i deem appropriate to this moment , would you permit me the privilege of uttering a little private prayer of my own .
and i ask that you bow your heads : 
 almighty god , as we stand here at this moment my future associates in the executive branch of government join me in beseeching that thou will make full and complete our dedication to the service of the people in this throng , and their fellow citizens everywhere .
give us , we pray , the power to discern clearly right from wrong , and allow all our words and actions to be governed thereby , and by the laws of this land .
especially we pray that our concern shall be for all the people regardless of station , race or calling .
may cooperation be permitted and be the mutual aim of those who , under the concepts of our constitution , hold to differing political faiths ; so that all may work for the good of our beloved country and thy glory .
amen .
my fellow citizens , the world and we have passed the midway point of a century of continuing challenge .
we sense with all our faculties that forces of good and evil are massed and armed and opposed as rarely before in history .
this fact defines the meaning of this day .
we are summoned by this honored and historic ceremony to witness more than the act of one citizen swearing his oath of service , in the presence of god .
we are called as a people to give testimony in the sight of the world to our faith that the future shall belong to the free .
since this century 's beginning , a time of tempest has seemed to come upon the continents of the earth .
masses of asia have awakened to strike off shackles of the past .
great nations of europe have fought their bloodiest wars .
thrones have toppled and their vast empires have disappeared .
new nations have been born .
for our own country , it has been a time of recurring trial .
we have grown in power and in responsibility .
we have passed through the anxieties of depression and of war to a summit unmatched in man 's history .
seeking to secure peace in the world , we have had to fight through the forests of the argonne to the shores of iwo jima , and to the cold mountains of korea .
in the swift rush of great events , we find ourselves groping to know the full sense and meaning of these times in which we live .
in our quest of understanding , we beseech god 's guidance .
we summon all our knowledge of the past and we scan all signs of the future .
we bring all our wit and all our will to meet the question : 
 how far have we come in man 's long pilgrimage from darkness toward the light ?
are we nearing the light -- a day of freedom and of peace for all mankind ?
or are the shadows of another night closing in upon us ?
great as are the preoccupations absorbing us at home , concerned as we are with matters that deeply affect our livelihood today and our vision of the future , each of these domestic problems is dwarfed by , and often even created by , this question that involves all humankind .
this trial comes at a moment when man 's power to achieve good or to inflict evil surpasses the brightest hopes and the sharpest fears of all ages .
we can turn rivers in their courses , level mountains to the plains .
oceans and land and sky are avenues for our colossal commerce .
disease diminishes and life lengthens .
yet the promise of this life is imperiled by the very genius that has made it possible .
nations amass wealth .
labor sweats to create -- and turns out devices to level not only mountains but also cities .
science seems ready to confer upon us , as its final gift , the power to erase human life from this planet .
at such a time in history , we who are free must proclaim anew our faith .
this faith is the abiding creed of our fathers .
it is our faith in the deathless dignity of man , governed by eternal moral and natural laws .
this faith defines our full view of life .
it establishes , beyond debate , those gifts of the creator that are man 's inalienable rights , and that make all men equal in his sight .
in the light of this equality , we know that the virtues most cherished by free people -- love of truth , pride of work , devotion to country -- all are treasures equally precious in the lives of the most humble and of the most exalted .
the men who mine coal and fire furnaces , and balance ledgers , and turn lathes , and pick cotton , and heal the sick and plant corn -- all serve as proudly and as profitably for america as the statesmen who draft treaties and the legislators who enact laws .
this faith rules our whole way of life .
it decrees that we , the people , elect leaders not to rule but to serve .
it asserts that we have the right to choice of our own work and to the reward of our own toil .
it inspires the initiative that makes our productivity the wonder of the world .
and it warns that any man who seeks to deny equality among all his brothers betrays the spirit of the free and invites the mockery of the tyrant .
it is because we , all of us , hold to these principles that the political changes accomplished this day do not imply turbulence , upheaval or disorder .
rather this change expresses a purpose of strengthening our dedication and devotion to the precepts of our founding documents , a conscious renewal of faith in our country and in the watchfulness of a divine providence .
the enemies of this faith know no god but force , no devotion but its use .
they tutor men in treason .
they feed upon the hunger of others .
whatever defies them , they torture , especially the truth .
here , then , is joined no argument between slightly differing philosophies .
this conflict strikes directly at the faith of our fathers and the lives of our sons .
no principle or treasure that we hold , from the spiritual knowledge of our free schools and churches to the creative magic of free labor and capital , nothing lies safely beyond the reach of this struggle .
freedom is pitted against slavery ; lightness against the dark .
the faith we hold belongs not to us alone but to the free of all the world .
this common bond binds the grower of rice in burma and the planter of wheat in iowa , the shepherd in southern italy and the mountaineer in the andes .
it confers a common dignity upon the french soldier who dies in indo - china , the british soldier killed in malaya , the american life given in korea .
we know , beyond this , that we are linked to all free peoples not merely by a noble idea but by a simple need .
no free people can for long cling to any privilege or enjoy any safety in economic solitude .
for all our own material might , even we need markets in the world for the surpluses of our farms and our factories .
equally , we need for these same farms and factories vital materials and products of distant lands .
this basic law of interdependence , so manifest in the commerce of peace , applies with thousand - fold intensity in the event of war .
so we are persuaded by necessity and by belief that the strength of all free peoples lies in unity ; their danger , in discord .
to produce this unity , to meet the challenge of our time , destiny has laid upon our country the responsibility of the free world 's leadership .
so it is proper that we assure our friends once again that , in the discharge of this responsibility , we americans know and we observe the difference between world leadership and imperialism ; between firmness and truculence ; between a thoughtfully calculated goal and spasmodic reaction to the stimulus of emergencies .
we wish our friends the world over to know this above all : we face the threat -- not with dread and confusion -- but with confidence and conviction .
we feel this moral strength because we know that we are not helpless prisoners of history .
we are free men .
we shall remain free , never to be proven guilty of the one capital offense against freedom , a lack of stanch faith .
in pleading our just cause before the bar of history and in pressing our labor for world peace , we shall be guided by certain fixed principles .
these principles are : 
 1 .
abhorring war as a chosen way to balk the purposes of those who threaten us , we hold it to be the first task of statesmanship to develop the strength that will deter the forces of aggression and promote the conditions of peace .
for , as it must be the supreme purpose of all free men , so it must be the dedication of their leaders , to save humanity from preying upon itself .
in the light of this principle , we stand ready to engage with any and all others in joint effort to remove the causes of mutual fear and distrust among nations , so as to make possible drastic reduction of armaments .
the sole requisites for undertaking such effort are that -- in their purpose -- they be aimed logically and honestly toward secure peace for all ; and that -- in their result -- they provide methods by which every participating nation will prove good faith in carrying out its pledge .
2 .
realizing that common sense and common decency alike dictate the futility of appeasement , we shall never try to placate an aggressor by the false and wicked bargain of trading honor for security .
americans , indeed , all free men , remember that in the final choice a soldier 's pack is not so heavy a burden as a prisoner 's chains .
3 .
knowing that only a united states that is strong and immensely productive can help defend freedom in our world , we view our nation 's strength and security as a trust upon which rests the hope of free men everywhere .
it is the firm duty of each of our free citizens and of every free citizen everywhere to place the cause of his country before the comfort , the convenience of himself .
4 .
honoring the identity and the special heritage of each nation in the world , we shall never use our strength to try to impress upon another people our own cherished political and economic institutions .
5 .
assessing realistically the needs and capacities of proven friends of freedom , we shall strive to help them to achieve their own security and well - being .
likewise , we shall count upon them to assume , within the limits of their resources , their full and just burdens in the common defense of freedom .
6 .
recognizing economic health as an indispensable basis of military strength and the free world 's peace , we shall strive to foster everywhere , and to practice ourselves , policies that encourage productivity and profitable trade .
for the impoverishment of any single people in the world means danger to the well - being of all other peoples .
7 .
appreciating that economic need , military security and political wisdom combine to suggest regional groupings of free peoples , we hope , within the framework of the united nations , to help strengthen such special bonds the world over .
the nature of these ties must vary with the different problems of different areas .
in the western hemisphere , we enthusiastically join with all our neighbors in the work of perfecting a community of fraternal trust and common purpose .
in europe , we ask that enlightened and inspired leaders of the western nations strive with renewed vigor to make the unity of their peoples a reality .
only as free europe unitedly marshals its strength can it effectively safeguard , even with our help , its spiritual and cultural heritage .
8 .
conceiving the defense of freedom , like freedom itself , to be one and indivisible , we hold all continents and peoples in equal regard and honor .
we reject any insinuation that one race or another , one people or another , is in any sense inferior or expendable .
9 .
respecting the united nations as the living sign of all people 's hope for peace , we shall strive to make it not merely an eloquent symbol but an effective force .
and in our quest for an honorable peace , we shall neither compromise , nor tire , nor ever cease .
by these rules of conduct , we hope to be known to all peoples .
by their observance , an earth of peace may become not a vision but a fact .
this hope -- this supreme aspiration -- must rule the way we live .
we must be ready to dare all for our country .
for history does not long entrust the care of freedom to the weak or the timid .
we must acquire proficiency in defense and display stamina in purpose .
we must be willing , individually and as a nation , to accept whatever sacrifices may be required of us .
a people that values its privileges above its principles soon loses both .
these basic precepts are not lofty abstractions , far removed from matters of daily living .
they are laws of spiritual strength that generate and define our material strength .
patriotism means equipped forces and a prepared citizenry .
moral stamina means more energy and more productivity , on the farm and in the factory .
love of liberty means the guarding of every resource that makes freedom possible -- from the sanctity of our families and the wealth of our soil to the genius of our scientists .
and so each citizen plays an indispensable role .
the productivity of our heads , our hands and our hearts is the source of all the strength we can command , for both the enrichment of our lives and the winning of the peace .
no person , no home , no community can be beyond the reach of this call .
we are summoned to act in wisdom and in conscience , to work with industry , to teach with persuasion , to preach with conviction , to weigh our every deed with care and with compassion .
for this truth must be clear before us : whatever america hopes to bring to pass in the world must first come to pass in the heart of america .
the peace we seek , then , is nothing less than the practice and fulfillment of our whole faith among ourselves and in our dealings with others .
this signifies more than the stilling of guns , casing the sorrow of war .
more than escape from death , it is a way of life .
more than a haven for the weary , it is a hope for the brave .
this is the hope that beckons us onward in this century of trial .
this is the work that awaits us all , to be done with bravery , with charity , and with prayer to almighty god .
my citizens -- i thank you .

madame president , members of the general assembly : 
 when secretary general hammarskjold 's invitation to address this general assembly reached me in bermuda , i was just beginning a series of conferences with the prime ministers and foreign ministers of great britain and of france .
our subject was some of the problems that beset our world .
during the remainder of the bermuda conference , i had constantly in mind that ahead of me lay a great honor .
that honor is mine today as i stand here , privileged to address the general assembly of the united nations .
at the same time that i appreciate the distinction of addressing you , i have a sense of exhilaration as i look upon this assembly .
never before in history has so much hope for so many people been gathered together in a single organization .
your deliberations and decisions during these somber years have already realized part of those hopes .
but the great tests and the great accomplishments still lie ahead .
and in the confident expectation of those accomplishments , i would use the office which , for the time being , i hold , to assure you that the government of the united states will remain steadfast in its support of this body .
this we shall do in the conviction that you will provide a great share of the wisdom , the courage , and the faith which can bring to this world lasting peace for all nations , and happiness and well - being for all men .
clearly , it would not be fitting for me to take this occasion to present to you a unilateral american report on bermuda .
nevertheless , i assure you that in our deliberations on that lovely island we sought to invoke those same great concepts of universal peace and human dignity which are so clearly etched in your charter .
neither would it be a measure of this great opportunity merely to recite , however hopefully , pious platitudes .
i therefore decided that this occasion warranted my saying to you some of the things that have been on the minds and hearts of my legislative and executive associates and on mine for a great many months -- thoughts i had originally planned to say primarily to the american people .
i know that the american people share my deep belief that if a danger exists in the world , it is a danger shared by all -- and equally , that if hope exists in the mind of one nation , that hope should be shared by all .
finally , if there is to be advanced any proposal designed to ease even by the smallest measure the tensions of today 's world , what more appropriate audience could there be than the members of the general assembly of the united nations ?
i feel impelled to speak today in a language that in a sense is new -- one which i , who have spent so much of my life in the military profession , would have preferred never to use .
that new language is the language of atomic warfare .
the atomic age has moved forward at such a pace that every citizen of the world should have some comprehension , at least in comparative terms , of the extent of this development of the utmost significance to every one of us .
clearly , if the peoples of the world are to conduct an intelligent search for peace , they must be armed with the significant facts of today 's existence .
my recital of atomic danger and power is necessarily stated in united states terms , for these are the only incontrovertible facts that i know .
i need hardly point out to this assembly , however , that this subject is global , not merely national in character .
on july 16 , 1945 , the united states set off the world 's first atomic explosion .
since that date in 1945 , the united states of america has conducted 42 test explosions .
atomic bombs today are more than 25 times as powerful as the weapons with which the atomic age dawned , while hydrogen weapons are in the ranges of millions of tons of tnt equivalent .
today , the united states ' stockpile of atomic weapons , which , of course , increases daily , exceeds by many times the explosive equivalent of the total of all bombs and all shells that came from every plane and every gun in every theatre of war in all of the years of world war ii .
a single air group , whether afloat or land - based , can now deliver to any reachable target a destructive cargo exceeding in power all the bombs that fell on britain in all of world war ii .
in size and variety , the development of atomic weapons has been no less remarkable .
the development has been such that atomic weapons have virtually achieved conventional status within our armed services .
in the united states , the army , the navy , the air force , and the marine corps are all capable of putting this weapon to military use .
but the dread secret , and the fearful engines of atomic might , are not ours alone .
in the first place , the secret is possessed by our friends and allies , great britain and canada , whose scientific genius made a tremendous contribution to our original discoveries , and the designs of atomic bombs .
the secret is also known by the soviet union .
the soviet union has informed us that , over recent years , it has devoted extensive resources to atomic weapons .
during this period , the soviet union has exploded a series of atomic devices , including at least one involving thermo - nuclear reactions .
if at one time the united states possessed what might have been called a monopoly of atomic power , that monopoly ceased to exist several years ago .
therefore , although our earlier start has permitted us to accumulate what is today a great quantitative advantage , the atomic realities of today comprehend two facts of even greater significance .
first , the knowledge now possessed by several nations will eventually be shared by others -- possibly all others .
second , even a vast superiority in numbers of weapons , and a consequent capability of devastating retaliation , is no preventive , of itself , against the fearful material damage and toll of human lives that would be inflicted by surprise aggression .
the free world , at least dimly aware of these facts , has naturally embarked on a large program of warning and defense systems .
that program will be accelerated and expanded .
but let no one think that the expenditure of vast sums for weapons and systems of defense can guarantee absolute safety for the cities and citizens of any nation .
the awful arithmetic of the atomic bomb does not permit of any such easy solution .
even against the most powerful defense , an aggressor in possession of the effective minimum number of atomic bombs for a surprise attack could probably place a sufficient number of his bombs on the chosen targets to cause hideous damage .
should such an atomic attack be launched against the united states , our reactions would be swift and resolute .
but for me to say that the defense capabilities of the united states are such that they could inflict terrible losses upon an aggressor -- for me to say that the retaliation capabilities of the united states are so great that such an aggressor 's land would be laid waste -- all this , while fact , is not the true expression of the purpose and the hope of the united states .
to pause there would be to confirm the hopeless finality of a belief that two atomic colossi are doomed malevolently to eye each other indefinitely across a trembling world .
to stop there would be to accept helplessly the probability of civilization destroyed - the annihilation of the irreplaceable heritage of mankind handed down to us generation from generation -- and the condemnation of mankind to begin all over again the age - old struggle upward from savagery toward decency , and right , and justice .
surely no sane member of the human race could discover victory in such desolation .
could anyone wish his name to be coupled by history with such human degradation and destruction .
occasional pages of history do record the faces of the " great destroyers " but the whole book of history reveals mankind 's never - ending quest for peace , and mankind 's god - given capacity to build .
it is with the book of history , and not with isolated pages , that the united states will ever wish to be identified .
my country wants to be constructive , not destructive .
it wants agreements , not wars , among nations .
it wants itself to live in freedom , and in the confidence that the people of every other nation enjoy equally the right of choosing their own way of life .
so my country 's purpose is to help us move out of the dark chamber of horrors into the light , to find a way by which the minds of men , the hopes of men , the souls of men everywhere , can move forward toward peace and happiness and well being .
in this quest , i know that we must not lack patience .
i know that in a world divided , such as ours today , salvation can not be attained by one dramatic act .
i know that many steps will have to be taken over many months before the world can look at itself one day and truly realize that a new climate of mutually peaceful confidence is abroad in the world .
but i know , above all else , that we must start to take these steps -- now .
the united states and its allies , great britain and france , have over the past months tried to take some of these steps .
let no one say that we shun the conference table .
on the record has long stood the request of the united states , great britain , and france to negotiate with the soviet union the problems of a divided germany .
on that record has long stood the request of the same three nations to negotiate an austrian peace treaty .
on the same record still stands the request of the united nations to negotiate the problems of korea .
most recently , we have received from the soviet union what is in effect an expression of willingness to hold a four power meeting .
along with our allies , great britain and france , we were pleased to see that this note did not contain the unacceptable preconditions previously put forward .
as you already know from our joint bermuda communique , the united states , great britain , and france have agreed promptly to meet with the soviet union .
the government of the united states approaches this conference with hopeful sincerity .
we will bend every effort of our minds to the single purpose of emerging from that conference with tangible results toward peace -- the only true way of lessening international tension .
we never have , we never will , propose or suggest that the soviet union surrender what is rightfully theirs .
we will never say that the peoples of russia are an enemy with whom we have no desire ever to deal or mingle in friendly and fruitful relationship .
on the contrary , we hope that this coming conference may initiate a relationship with the soviet union which will eventually bring about a free intermingling of the peoples of the east and of the west -- the one sure , human way of developing the understanding required for confident and peaceful 
 relations .
instead of the discontent which is now settling upon eastern germany , occupied austria , and the countries of eastern europe , we seek a harmonious family of free european nations , with none a threat to the other , and least of all a threat to the peoples of russia .
beyond the turmoil and strife and misery of asia , we seek peaceful opportunity for these peoples to develop their natural resources and to elevate their lives .
these are not idle words or shallow visions .
behind them lies a story of nations lately come to independence , not as a result of war , but through free grant or peaceful negotiation .
there is a record , already written , of assistance gladly given by nations of the west to needy peoples , and to those suffering the temporary effects of famine , drought , and natural disaster .
these are deeds of peace .
they speak more loudly than promises or protestations of peaceful intent .
but i do not wish to rest either upon the reiteration of past proposals or the restatement of past deeds .
the gravity of the time is such that every new avenue of peace , no matter how dimly discernible , should be explored .
there is at least one new avenue of peace which has not yet been well explored -- an avenue now laid out by the general assembly of the united nations .
in its resolution of november 18th , 1953 , this general assembly suggested -- and i quote -- " that the disarmament commission study the desirability of establishing a sub - committee consisting of representatives of the powers principally involved , which should seek in private an acceptable solution . . .
and report on such a solution to the general assembly and to the security council not later than 1 september 1954 . "
the united states , heeding the suggestion of the general assembly of the united nations , is instantly prepared to meet privately with such other countries as may be " principally involved , " to seek " an acceptable solution " to the atomic armaments race which overshadows not only the peace , but the very life , of the world .
we shall carry into these private or diplomatic talks a new conception .
the united states would seek more than the mere reduction or elimination of atomic materials for military purposes .
it is not enough to take this weapon out of the hands of the soldiers .
it must be put into the hands of those who will know how to strip its military casing and adapt it to the arts of peace .
the united states knows that if the fearful trend of atomic military buildup can be reversed , this greatest of destructive forces can be developed into a great boon , for the benefit of all mankind .
the united states knows that peaceful power from atomic energy is no dream of the future .
that capability , already proved , is here -- now -- today .
who can doubt , if the entire body of the world 's scientists and engineers had adequate amounts of fissionable material with which to test and develop their ideas , that this capability would rapidly be transformed into universal , efficient , and economic usage .
to hasten the day when fear of the atom will begin to disappear from the minds of people , and the governments of the east and west , there are certain steps that can be taken now .
i therefore make the following proposals : 
 the governments principally involved , to the extent permitted by elementary prudence , to begin now and continue to make joint contributions from their stockpiles of normal uranium and fissionable materials to an international atomic energy agency .
we would expect that such an agency would be set up under the aegis of the united nations .
the ratios of contributions , the procedures and other details would properly be within the scope of the " private conversations " i have referred to earlier .
the united states is prepared to undertake these explorations in good faith .
any partner of the united states acting in the same good faith will find the united states a not unreasonable or ungenerous associate .
undoubtedly initial and early contributions to this plan would be small in quantity .
however , the proposal has the great virtue that it can be undertaken without the irritations and mutual suspicions incident to any attempt to set up a completely acceptable system of world - wide inspection and control .
the atomic energy agency could be made responsible for the impounding , storage , and protection of the contributed fissionable and other materials .
the ingenuity of our scientists will provide special safe conditions under which such a bank of fissionable material can be made essentially immune to surprise seizure .
the more important responsibility of this atomic energy agency would be to devise methods whereby this fissionable material would be allocated to serve the peaceful pursuits of mankind .
experts would be mobilized to apply atomic energy to the needs of agriculture , medicine , and other peaceful activities .
a special purpose would be to provide abundant electrical energy in the power - starved areas of the world .
thus the contributing powers would be dedicating some of their strength to serve the needs rather than the fears of mankind .
the united states would be more than willing -- it would be proud to take up with others " principally involved " the development of plans whereby such peaceful use of atomic energy would be expedited .
of those " principally involved " the soviet union must , of course , be one .
i would be prepared to submit to the congress of the united states , and with every expectation of approval , any such plan that would : 
 first -- encourage world - wide investigation into the most effective peacetime uses of fissionable material , and with the certainty that they had all the material needed for the conduct of all experiments that were appropriate ; 
 second -- begin to diminish the potential destructive power of the 
 world 's atomic stockpiles ; 
 third -- allow all peoples of all nations to see that , in this enlightened age , the great powers of the earth , both of the east and of the west , are interested in human aspirations first , rather than in building up the armaments of war ; 
 fourth -- open up a new channel for peaceful discussion , and initiate at least a new approach to the many difficult problems that must be solved in both private and public conversations , if the world is to shake off the inertia imposed by fear , and is to make positive progress toward peace .
against the dark background of the atomic bomb , the united states does not wish merely to present strength , but also the desire and the hope for peace .
the coming months will be fraught with fateful decisions .
in this assembly ; in the capitals and military headquarters of the world ; in the hearts of men everywhere , be they governors or governed , may they be the decisions which will lead this world out of fear and into peace .
to the making of these fateful decisions , the united states pledges before you -- and therefore before the world -- its determination to help solve the fearful atomic dilemma -- to devote its entire heart and mind to find the way by which the miraculous inventiveness of man shall not be dedicated to his death , but consecrated to his life .
i again thank the delegates for the great honor they have done me , in inviting me to appear before them , and in listening to me so courteously .
thank you .

first may i express to you my deep appreciation of your courtesy in giving me , at some inconvenience to yourselves , this early opportunity of addressing you on a matter i deem to be of grave importance to our country .
in my forthcoming state of the union message , i shall review the international situation generally .
there are worldwide hopes which we can reasonably entertain , and there are worldwide responsibilities which we must carry to make certain that freedom -- including our own -- may be secure .
there is , however , a special situation in the middle east which i feel i should , even now , lay before you .
before doing so it is well to remind ourselves that our basic national objective in international affairs remains peace -- a world peace based on justice .
such a peace must include all areas , all peoples of the world if it is to be enduring .
there is no nation , great or small , with which we would refuse to negotiate , in mutual good faith , with patience and in the determination to secure a better understanding between us .
out of such understandings must , and eventually will , grow confidence and trust , indispensable ingredients to a program of peace and to plans for lifting from us all the burdens of expensive armaments .
to promote these objectives , our government works tirelessly , day by day , month by month , year by year .
but until a degree of success crowns our efforts that will assure to all nations peaceful existence , we must , in the interests of peace itself , remain vigilant , alert and strong .
i. 
 the middle east has abruptly reached a new and critical stage in its long and important history .
in past decades many of the countries in that area were not fully self - governing .
other nations exercised considerable authority in the area and the security of the region was largely built around their power .
but since the first world war there has been a steady evolution toward self - government and independence .
this development the united states has welcomed and has encouraged .
our country supports without reservation the full sovereignty and independence of each and every nation of the middle east .
the evolution to independence has in the main been a peaceful process .
but the area has been often troubled .
persistent crosscurrents of distrust and fear with raids back and forth across national boundaries have brought about a high degree of instability in much of the mid east .
just recently there have been hostilities involving western european nations that once exercised much influence in the area .
also the relatively large attack by israel in october has intensified the basic differences between that nation and its arab neighbors .
all this instability has been heightened and , at times , manipulated by international communism .
ii .
russia 's rulers have long sought to dominate the middle east .
that was true of the czars and it is true of the bolsheviks .
the reasons are not hard to find .
they do not affect russia 's security , for no one plans to use the middle east as a base for aggression against russia .
never for a moment has the united states entertained such a thought .
the soviet union has nothing whatsoever to fear from the united states in the middle east , or anywhere else in the world , so long as its rulers do not themselves first resort to aggression .
that statement i make solemnly and emphatically .
neither does russia 's desire to dominate the middle east spring from its own economic interest in the area .
russia does not appreciably use or depend upon the suez canal .
in 1955 soviet traffic through the canal represented only about three fourths of 1 percent of the total .
the soviets have no need for , and could provide no market for , the petroleum resources which constitute the principal natural wealth of the area .
indeed , the soviet union is a substantial exporter of petroleum products .
the reason for russia 's interest in the middle east is solely that of power politics .
considering her announced purpose of communizing the world , it is easy to understand her hope of dominating the middle east .
this region has always been the crossroads of the continents of the eastern hemisphere .
the suez canal enables the nations of asia and europe to carry on the commerce that is essential if these countries are to maintain well - rounded and prosperous economies .
the middle east provides a gateway between eurasia and africa .
it contains about two thirds of the presently known oil deposits of the world and it normally supplies the petroleum needs of many nations of europe , asia and africa .
the nations of europe are peculiarly dependent upon this supply , and this dependency relates to transportation as well as to production !
this has been vividly demonstrated since the closing of the suez canal and some of the pipelines .
alternate ways of transportation and , indeed , alternate sources of power can , if necessary , be developed .
but these can not be considered as early prospects .
these things stress the immense importance of the middle east .
if the nations of that area should lose their independence , if they were dominated by alien forces hostile to freedom , that would be both a tragedy for the area and for many other free nations whose economic life would be subject to near strangulation .
western europe would be endangered just as though there had been no marshall plan , no north atlantic treaty organization .
the free nations of asia and africa , too , would be placed in serious jeopardy .
and the countries of the middle east would lose the markets upon which their economies depend .
all this would have the most adverse , if not disastrous , effect upon our own nation 's economic life and political prospects .
then there are other factors which transcend the material .
the middle east is the birthplace of three great religions - moslem , christian and hebrew .
mecca and jerusalem are more than places on the map .
they symbolize religions which teach that the spirit has supremacy over matter and that the individual has a dignity and rights of which no despotic government can rightfully deprive him .
it would be intolerable if the holy places of the middle east should be subjected to a rule that glorifies atheistic materialism .
international communism , of course , seeks to mask its purposes of domination by expressions of good will and by superficially attractive offers of political , economic and military aid .
but any free nation , which is the subject of soviet enticement , ought , in elementary wisdom , to look behind the 
 mask .
remember estonia , latvia and lithuania !
in 1939 the soviet union entered into mutual assistance pacts with these then dependent countries ; and the soviet foreign minister , addressing the extraordinary fifth session of the supreme soviet in october 1939 , solemnly and publicly declared that " we stand for the scrupulous and punctilious observance of the pacts on the basis of complete reciprocity , and we declare that all the nonsensical talk about the sovietization of the baltic countries is only to the interest of our common enemies and of all anti - soviet provocateurs . "
yet in 1940 , estonia , latvia and lithuania were forcibly incorporated into the soviet union .
soviet control of the satellite nations of eastern europe has been forcibly maintained in spite of solemn promises of a contrary intent , made during world war ii .
stalin 's death brought hope that this pattern would change .
and we read the pledge of the warsaw treaty of 1955 that the soviet union would follow in satellite countries " the principles of mutual respect for their independence and sovereignty and noninterference in domestic affairs . "
but we have just seen the subjugation of hungary by naked armed force .
in the aftermath of this hungarian tragedy , world respect for and belief in soviet promises have sunk to a new low .
international communism needs and seeks a recognizable success .
thus , we have these simple and indisputable facts : 
 1 .
the middle east , which has always been coveted by russia , would today be prized more than ever by international communism .
2 .
the soviet rulers continue to show that they do not scruple to use any means to gain their ends .
3 .
the free nations of the mid east need , and for the most part want , added strength to assure their continued independence .
iii .
our thoughts naturally turn to the united nations as a protector of small nations .
its charter gives it primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security .
our country has given the united nations its full support in relation to the hostilities in hungary and in egypt .
the united nations was able to bring about a cease - fire and withdrawal of hostile forces from egypt because it was dealing with governments and peoples who had a decent respect for the opinions of mankind as reflected in the united nations general assembly .
but in the case of hungary , the situation was different .
the soviet union vetoed action by the security council to require the withdrawal of soviet armed forces from hungary .
and it has shown callous indifference to the recommendations , even the censure , of the general assembly .
the united nations can always be helpful , but it can not be a wholly dependable protector of freedom when the ambitions of the soviet union are involved .
iv .
under all the circumstances i have laid before you , a greater responsibility now devolves upon the united states .
we have shown , so that none can doubt , our dedication to the principle that force shall not be used internationally for any aggressive purpose and that the integrity and independence of the nations of the middle east should be inviolate .
seldom in history has a nation 's dedication to principle been tested as severely as ours during recent weeks .
there is general recognition in the middle east , as elsewhere , that the united states does not seek either political or economic domination over any other people .
our desire is a world environment of freedom , not servitude .
on the other hand many , if not all , of the nations of the middle east are aware of the danger that stems from international communism and welcome closer cooperation with the united states to realize for themselves the united nations goals of independence , economic well - being and spiritual growth .
if the middle east is to continue its geographic role of uniting rather than separating east and west ; if its vast economic resources are to serve the well - being of the peoples there , as well as that of others ; and if its cultures and religions and their shrines are to be preserved for the uplifting of the spirits of the peoples , then the united states must make more evident its willingness to support the independence of the freedom - loving nations of the area .
v. 
 under these circumstances i deem it necessary to seek the cooperation of the congress .
only with that cooperation can we give the reassurance needed to deter aggression , to give courage and confidence to those who are dedicated to freedom and thus prevent a chain of events which would gravely endanger all of the free world .
there have been several executive declarations made by the united states in relation to the middle east .
there is the tripartite declaration of may 25 , 1950 , followed by the presidential assurance of october 31 , 1950 , to the king of saudi arabia .
there is the presidential declaration of april 9 , 1956 , that 
 the united states will within constitutional means oppose any aggression in the area .
there is our declaration of november 29 , 1956 , that a threat to the territorial integrity or political independence of iran , iraq , pakistan , or turkey would be viewed by the united states with the utmost gravity .
nevertheless , weaknesses in the present situation and the increased danger from international communism , convince me that basic united states policy should now find expression in joint action by the congress and the executive .
furthermore , our joint resolve should be so couched as to make it apparent that if need be our words will be backed by action .
vi .
it is nothing new for the president and the congress to join to recognize that the national integrity of other free nations is directly related to our own security .
we have joined to create and support the security system of the united nations .
we have reinforced the collective security system of the united nations by a series of collective defense arrangements .
today we have security treaties with 42 other nations which recognize that our peace and security are intertwined .
we have joined to take decisive action in relation to greece and turkey and in relation to taiwan .
thus , the united states through the joint action of the president and the congress , or , in the case of treaties , the senate , has manifested in many endangered areas its purpose to support free and independent governments -- and peace -- against external menace , notably the menace of international communism .
thereby we have helped to maintain peace and security during a period of great danger .
it is now essential that the united states should manifest through joint action of the president and the congress our determination to assist those nations of the mid east area , which desire that assistance .
the action which i propose would have the following features .
it would , first of all , authorize the united states to cooperate with and assist any nation or group of nations in the general area of the middle east in the development of economic strength dedicated to the maintenance of national independence .
it would , in the second place , authorize the executive to undertake in the same region programs of military assistance and cooperation with any nation or group of nations which desires such aid .
it would , in the third place , authorize such assistance and cooperation to include the employment of the armed forces of the united states to secure and protect the territorial integrity and political independence of such nations , requesting such aid , against overt armed aggression from any nation controlled by international communism .
these measures would have to be consonant with the treaty obligations of the united states , including the charter of the united nations and with any action or recommendations of the united nations .
they would also , if armed attack occurs , be subject to the overriding authority of the united nations security council in accordance with the charter .
the present proposal would , in the fourth place , authorize the president to employ , for economic and defensive military purposes , sums available under the mutual security act of 1954 , as amended , without regard to existing limitations .
the legislation now requested should not include the authorization or appropriation of funds because i believe that , under the conditions i suggest , presently appropriated funds will be adequate for the balance of the present fiscal year ending june 30 .
i shall , however , seek in subsequent legislation the authorization of $ 200,000,000 to be available during each of the fiscal years 1958 and 1959 for discretionary use in the area , in addition to the other mutual security programs for the area hereafter provided for by the congress .
vii .
this program will not solve all the problems of the middle east .
neither does it represent the totality of our policies for the area .
there are the problems of palestine and relations between israel and the arab states , and the future of the arab refugees .
there is the problem of the future status of the suez canal .
these difficulties are aggravated by international communism , but they would exist quite apart from that threat .
it is not the purpose of the legislation i propose to deal directly with these problems .
the united nations is actively concerning itself with all these matters , and we are supporting the united nations .
the united states has made clear , notably by secretary dulles ' address of august 26 , 1955 , that we are willing to do much to assist the united nations in solving the basic problems of palestine .
the proposed legislation is primarily designed to deal with the possibility of communist aggression , direct and indirect .
there is imperative need that any lack of power in the area should be made good , not by external or alien force , but by the increased vigor and security of the independent nations of the area .
experience shows that indirect aggression rarely if ever succeeds where there is reasonable security against direct aggression ; where the government disposes of loyal security forces , and where economic conditions are such as not to make communism seem an attractive alternative .
the program i suggest deals with all three aspects of this matter and thus with the problem of indirect aggression .
it is my hope and belief that if our purpose be proclaimed , as proposed by the requested legislation , that very fact will serve to halt any contemplated aggression .
we shall have heartened the patriots who are dedicated to the independence of their nations .
they will not feel that they stand alone , under the menace of great power .
and i should add that patriotism is , throughout this area , a powerful sentiment .
it is true that fear sometimes perverts true patriotism into fanaticism and to the acceptance of dangerous enticements from without .
but if that fear can be allayed , then the climate will be more favorable to the attainment of worthy national ambitions .
and as i have indicated , it will also be necessary for us to contribute economically to strengthen those countries , or groups of countries , which have governments manifestly dedicated to the preservation of independence and resistance to subversion .
such measures will provide the greatest insurance against communist inroads .
words alone are not enough .
viii .
let me refer again to the requested authority to employ the armed forces of the united states to assist to defend the territorial integrity and the political independence of any nation in the area against communist armed aggression .
such authority would not be exercised except at the desire of the nation attacked .
beyond this it is my profound hope that this authority would never have to be exercised at all .
nothing is more necessary to assure this than that our policy with respect to the defense of the area be promptly and clearly determined and declared .
thus the united nations and all friendly governments , and indeed governments which are not friendly , will know where we stand .
if , contrary to my hope and expectation , a situation arose which called for the military application of the policy which i ask the congress to join me in proclaiming , i would of course maintain hour - by - hour contact with the congress if it were in session .
and if the congress were not in session , and if the situation had grave implications , i would , of course , at once call the congress into special session .
in the situation now existing , the greatest risk , as is often the case , is that ambitious despots may miscalculate .
if power - hungry communists should either falsely or correctly estimate that the middle east is inadequately defended , they might be tempted to use open measures of armed attack .
if so , that would start a chain of circumstances which would almost surely involve the united states in military action .
i am convinced that the best insurance against this dangerous contingency is to make clear now our readiness to cooperate fully and freely with our friends of the middle east in ways consonant with the purposes and principles of the united nations .
i intend promptly to send a special mission to the middle east to explain the cooperation we are prepared to give .
ix .
the policy which i outline involves certain burdens and indeed risks for the united states .
those who covet the area will not like what is proposed .
already , they are grossly distorting our purpose .
however , before this americans have seen our nation 's vital interests and human freedom in jeopardy , and their fortitude and resolution have been equal to the crisis , regardless of hostile distortion of our words , motives and actions .
indeed , the sacrifices of the american people in the cause of freedom have , even since the close of world war ii , been measured in many billions of dollars and in thousands of the precious lives of our youth .
these sacrifices , by which great areas of the world have been preserved to freedom , must not be thrown away .
in those momentous periods of the past , the president and the congress have united , without partisanship , to serve the vital interests of the united states and of the free world .
the occasion has come for us to manifest again our national unity in support of freedom and to show our deep respect for the rights and independence of every nation -- however great , however small .
we seek not violence , but peace .
to this purpose we must now devote our energies , our determination , ourselves .

