members of the convention - my friends : 
 it is very late ; but i have felt that you would rather that i speak to you now than wait until tomorrow .
it is with a very full heart that i speak tonight .
i must confess that i do so with mixed feelings -- because i find myself , as almost everyone does sooner or later in his lifetime , in a conflict between deep personal desire for retirement on the one hand , and that quiet , invisible thing called " conscience " on the other .
because there are self - appointed commentators and interpreters who will seek to misinterpret or question motives , i speak in a somewhat personal vein ; and i must trust to the good faith and common sense of the american people to accept my own good faith and to do their own interpreting .
when , in 1936 , i was chosen by the voters for a second time as president , it was my firm intention to turn over the responsibilities of government to other hands at the end of my term .
that conviction remained with me .
eight years in the presidency , following a period of bleak depression , and covering one world crisis after another , would normally entitle any man to the relaxation that comes from honorable retirement .
during the spring of 1939 , world events made it clear to all but the blind or the partisan that a great war in europe had become not merely a possibility but a probability , and that such a war would of necessity deeply affect the future of this nation .
when the conflict first broke out last september , it was still my intention to announce clearly and simply , at an early date , that under no conditions would i accept reelection .
this fact was well known to my friends , and i think was understood by many citizens .
it soon became evident , however , that such a public statement on my part would be unwise from the point of view of sheer public duty .
as president of the united states , it was my clear duty , with the aid of the congress , to preserve our neutrality , to shape our program of defense , to meet rapid changes , to keep our domestic affairs adjusted to shifting world conditions , and to sustain the policy of the good neighbor .
it was also my obvious duty to maintain to the utmost the influence of this mighty nation in our effort to prevent the spread of war , and to sustain by all legal means those governments threatened by other governments which had rejected the principles of democracy .
swiftly moving foreign events made necessary swift action at home and beyond the seas .
plans for national defense had to be expanded and adjusted to meet new forms of warfare .
american citizens and their welfare had to be safeguarded in many foreign zones of danger .
national unity in the united states became a crying essential in the face of the development of unbelievable types of espionage and international treachery .
every day that passed called for the postponement of personal plans and partisan debate until the latest possible moment .
the normal conditions under which i would have made public declaration of my personal desires were wholly gone .
and so , thinking solely of the national good and of the international scene , i came to the reluctant conclusion that such declaration should not be made before the national convention .
it was accordingly made to you within an hour after the permanent organization of this convention .
like any other man , i am complimented by the honor you have done me .
but i know you will understand the spirit in which i say that no call of party alone would prevail upon me to accept reelection to the presidency .
the real decision to be made in these circumstances is not the acceptance of a nomination , but rather an ultimate willingness to serve if chosen by the electorate of the united states .
many considerations enter into this decision .
during the past few months , with due congressional approval , we in the united states have been taking steps to implement the total defense of america .
i can not forget that in carrying out this program i have drafted into the service of the nation many men and women , taking them away from important 
 private affairs , calling them suddenly from their homes and their businesses .
i have asked them to leave their own work , and to contribute their skill and 
 experience to the cause of their nation .
i , as the head of their government , have asked them to do this .
regardless of party , regardless of personal convenience , they came -- they answered the call .
every single one of them , with one exception , has come to the nation 's capital to serve the nation .
these people , who have placed patriotism above all else , represent those who have made their way to what might be called the top of their professions or industries through their proven skill and experience .
but they alone could not be enough to meet the needs of the times .
just as a system of national defense based on man power alone , without the mechanized equipment of modern warfare , is totally insufficient for adequate national defense , so also planes and guns and tanks are wholly insufficient unless they are implemented by the power of men trained to use them .
such man power consists not only of pilots and gunners and infantry and those who operate tanks .
for every individual in actual combat service , it is necessary for adequate defense that we have ready at hand at least four or five other trained individuals organized for non - combat services .
because of the millions of citizens involved in the conduct of defense , most right thinking persons are agreed that some form of selection by draft is as necessary and fair today as it was in 1917 and 1918 .
nearly every american is willing to do his share or her share to defend the united states .
it is neither just nor efficient to permit that task to fall upon any one section or any one group .
for every section and every group depend for their existence upon the survival of the nation as a whole .
lying awake , as i have , on many nights , i have asked myself whether i have the right , as commander - in - chief of the army and navy , to call on men and women to serve their country or to train themselves to serve and , at the same time , decline to serve my country in my own personal capacity , if i am called upon to do so by the people of my country .
in times like these -- in times of great tension , of great crisis -- the compass of the world narrows to a single fact .
the fact which dominates our world is the fact of armed aggression , the fact of successful armed aggression , aimed at the form of government , the kind of society that we in the united states have chosen and established for ourselves .
it is a fact which no one longer doubts , which no one is longer able to ignore .
it is not an ordinary war .
it is a revolution imposed by force of arms , which threatens all men everywhere .
it is a revolution which proposes not to set men free but to reduce them to slavery -- to reduce them to slavery in the interest of a dictatorship which has already shown the nature and the extent of the advantage which it hopes to obtain .
that is the fact which dominates our world and which dominates the lives of all of us , each and every one of us .
in the face of the danger which confronts our time , no individual retains or can hope to retain , the right of personal choice which free men enjoy in times of peace .
he has a first obligation to serve in the defense of our institutions of freedom -- a first obligation to serve his country in whatever capacity his country finds him useful .
like most men of my age , i had made plans for myself , plans for a private life of my own choice and for my own satisfaction , a life of that kind to begin in january , 1941 .
these plans , like so many other plans , had been made in a world which now seems as distant as another planet .
today all private plans , all private lives , have been in a sense repealed by an overriding public danger .
in the face of that public danger all those who can be of service to the republic have no choice but to offer themselves for service in those capacities for which they may be fitted .
those , my friends , are the reasons why i have had to admit to myself , and now to state to you , that my conscience will not let me turn my back upon a call to service .
the right to make that call rests with the people through the american method of a free election .
only the people themselves can draft a president .
if such a draft should be made upon me , i say to you , in the utmost simplicity , i will , with god 's help , continue to serve with the best of my ability and with the fullness of my strength .
to you , the delegates of this convention , i express my gratitude for the selection of henry wallace for the high office of vice president of the united states .
his first - hand knowledge of the problems of government in every sphere of life and in every single part of the nation -- and indeed of the whole world -- qualifies him without reservation .
his practical idealism will be of great service to me individually and to the nation as a whole .
and to the chairman of the national committee , the postmaster general of the united states -- my old friend jim farley -- i send , as i have often before and shall many times again , my most affectionate greetings .
all of us are sure that he will continue to give all the leadership and support that he possibly can to the cause of american democracy .
in some respects , as i think my good wife suggested an hour or so ago -- the next few months will be different from the usual national campaigns of recent years .
most of you know how important it is that the president of the united states in these days remain close to the seat of government .
since last summer i have been compelled to abandon proposed journeys to inspect many of our great national projects from the alleghenies to the pacific coast .
events move so fast in other parts of the world that it has be come my duty to remain either in the white house itself or at some near - by point where i can reach washington and even europe and asia by direct telephone -- where , if need be , i can be back at my desk in the space of a very few hours .
and in addition , the splendid work of the new defense machinery will require me to spend vastly more time in conference with the responsible administration heads under me .
finally , the added task which the present crisis has imposed also upon the congress , compelling them to forego their usual adjournment , calls for constant cooperation between the executive and legislative branches , to the efficiency of which i am glad indeed now to pay tribute .
i do expect , of course , during the coming months to make my usual periodic reports to the country through the medium of press conferences and radio talks .
i shall not have the time or the inclination to engage in purely political debate .
but i shall never be loath to call the attention of the nation to deliberate or unwitting falsifications of fact , which are sometimes made by political candidates .
i have spoken to you in a very informal and personal way .
the exigencies of the day require , however , that i also talk with you about things which transcend any personality and go very deeply to the roots of american civilization .
our lives have been based on those fundamental freedoms and liberties which we americans have cherished for a century and a half .
the establishment of them and the preservation of them in each succeeding generation have been accomplished through the processes of free elective government -- the democratic - republican form , based on the representative system and the coordination of the executive , the legislative and the judicial branches .
the task of safeguarding our institutions seems to me to be twofold .
one must be accomplished , if it becomes necessary , by the armed defense forces of the nation .
the other , by the united effort of the men and women of the country to make our federal and state and local governments responsive to the growing requirements of modern democracy .
there have been occasions , as we remember , when reactions in the march of democracy have set in , and forward - looking progress has seemed to stop .
but such periods have been followed by liberal and progressive times which have enabled the nation to catch up with new developments in fulfilling new human needs .
such a time has been the past seven years .
because we had seemed to lag in previous years , we have had to develop , speedily and efficiently , the answers to aspirations which had come from every state and every family in the land .
we have sometimes called it social legislation ; we have sometimes called it legislation to end the abuses of the past ; we have sometimes called it legislation for human security ; and we have sometimes called it legislation to better the condition of life of the many millions of our fellow citizens , who could not have the essentials of life or hope for an american standard of living .
some of us have labeled it a wider and more equitable distribution of wealth in our land .
it has included among its aims , to liberalize and broaden the control of vast industries -- lodged today in the hands of a relatively small group of individuals of very great financial power .
but all of these definitions and labels are essentially the expression of one consistent thought .
they represent a constantly growing sense of human decency , human decency throughout our nation .
this sense of human decency is happily confined to no group or class .
you find it in the humblest home .
you find it among those who toil , and among the shopkeepers and the farmers of the nation .
you find it , to a growing degree , even among those who are listed in that top group which has so much control over the industrial and financial structure of the nation .
therefore , this urge of humanity can by no means be labeled a war of class against class .
it is rather a war against poverty and suffering and ill - health and insecurity , a war in which all classes are joining in the interest of a sound and enduring democracy .
i do not believe for a moment , and i know that you do not believe either , that we have fully answered all the needs of human security .
but we have covered much of the road .
i need not catalogue the milestones of seven years .
for every individual and every family in the whole land know that the average of their personal lives has been made safer and sounder and happier than it has ever been before .
i do not think they want the gains in these directions to be repealed or even to be placed in the charge of those who would give them mere lip - service with no heart service .
yes , very much more remains to be done , and i think the voters want the task entrusted to those who believe that the words " human betterment " apply to poor and rich alike .
and i have a sneaking suspicion too , that voters will smile at charges of inefficiency against a government which has boldly met the enormous problems of banking , and finance and industry which the great efficient bankers and industrialists of the republican party left in such hopeless chaos in the famous year 1933 .
but we all know that our progress at home and in the other american nations toward this realization of a better human decency -- progress along free lines -- is gravely endangered by what is happening on other continents .
in europe , many nations , through dictatorships or invasions , have been compelled to abandon normal democratic processes .
they have been compelled to adopt forms of government which some call " new and efficient . "
they are not new , my friends , they are only a relapse -- a relapse into ancient history .
the omnipotent rulers of the greater part of modern europe have guaranteed efficiency , and work , and a type of security .
but the slaves who built the pyramids for the glory of the dictator pharaohs of egypt had that kind of security , that kind of efficiency , that kind of corporative state .
so did the inhabitants of that world which extended from britain to persia under the undisputed rule of the proconsuls sent out from rome .
so did the henchmen , the tradesmen , the mercenaries and the slaves of the feudal system which dominated europe a thousand years ago .
so did the people of those nations of europe who received their kings and their government at the whim of the conquering napoleon .
whatever its new trappings and new slogans , tyranny is the oldest and most discredited rule known to history .
and whenever tyranny has replaced a more human form of government it has been due more to internal causes than external .
democracy can thrive only when it enlists the devotion of those whom lincoln called the common people .
democracy can hold that devotion only when it adequately respects their dignity by so ordering society as to assure to the masses of men and women reasonable security and hope for themselves and for their children .
we in our democracy , and those who live in still unconquered democracies , will never willingly descend to any form of this so - called security of efficiency which calls for the abandonment of other securities more vital to the dignity of man .
it is our credo -- unshakable to the end -- that we must live under the liberties that were first heralded by magna carta and placed into glorious operation through the declaration of independence , the constitution of the united states and the bill of rights .
the government of the united states for the past seven years has had the courage openly to oppose by every peaceful means the spread of the dictator form of government .
if our government should pass to other hands next january -- untried hands , inexperienced hands -- we can merely hope and pray that they will not substitute appeasement and compromise with those who seek to destroy all democracies everywhere , including here .
i would not undo , if i could , the efforts i made to prevent war from the moment it was threatened and to restrict the area of carnage , down to the last minute .
i do not now soften the condemnation expressed by secretary hull and myself from time to time for the acts of aggression that have wiped out ancient liberty - loving , peace - pursuing countries which had scrupulously maintained neutrality .
i do not recant the sentiments of sympathy with all free peoples resisting such aggression , or begrudge the material aid that we have given to them .
i do not regret my consistent endeavor to awaken this country to the menace for us and for all we hold dear .
i have pursued these efforts in the face of appeaser fifth columnists who charged me with hysteria and war - mongering .
but i felt it my duty , my simple , plain , inescapable duty , to arouse my countrymen to the danger of the new forces let loose in the world .
so long as i am president , i will do all i can to insure that that foreign policy remain our foreign policy .
all that i have done to maintain the peace of this country and to prepare it morally , as well as physically , for whatever contingencies may be in store , i submit to the judgment of my countrymen .
we face one of the great choices of history .
it is not alone a choice of government by the people versus dictatorship .
it is not alone a choice of freedom versus slavery .
it is not alone a choice between moving forward or falling back .
it is all of these rolled into one .
it is the continuance of civilization as we know it versus the ultimate destruction of all that we have held dear -- religion against godlessness ; the ideal of justice against the practice of force ; moral decency versus the firing squad ; courage to speak out , and to act , versus the false lullaby of appeasement .
but it has been well said that a selfish and greedy people can not be free .
the american people must decide whether these things are worth making sacrifices of money , of energy , and of self .
they will not decide by listening to mere words or by reading mere pledges , interpretations and claims .
they will decide on the record -- the record as it has been made -- the record of things as they are .
the american people will sustain the progress of a representative democracy , asking the divine blessing as they face the future with courage and with faith .

i am speaking tonight from the white house in the presence of the governing board of the pan american union , the canadian minister , and their families .
the members of this board are the ambassadors and ministers of the american republics in washington .
it is appropriate that i do this for now , as never before , the unity of the american republics is of supreme importance to each and every one of us and to the cause of freedom throughout the world .
our future independence is bound up with the future independence of all of our sister republics .
the pressing problems that confront us are military and naval problems .
we can not afford to approach them from the point of view of wishful thinkers or sentimentalists .
what we face is cold , hard fact .
the first and fundamental fact is that what started as a european war has developed , as the nazis always intended it should develop , into a world war for world domination .
adolf hitler never considered the domination of europe as an end in itself .
european conquest was but a step toward ultimate goals in all the other continents .
it is unmistakably apparent to all of us that , unless the advance of hitlerism is forcibly checked now , the western hemisphere will be within range of the nazi weapons of destruction .
for our own defense we have accordingly undertaken certain obviously necessary measures : 
 first , we have joined in concluding a series of agreements with all the other american republics .
this further solidified our hemisphere against the common danger .
and then , a year ago , we launched , and are successfully carrying out , the largest armament production program we have ever undertaken .
we have added substantially to our splendid navy , and we have mustered our manpower to build up a new army which is already worthy of the highest traditions of our military service .
we instituted a policy of aid for the democracies -- the nations which have fought for the continuation of human liberties .
this policy had its origin in the first month of the war , when i urged upon the congress repeal of the arms embargo provisions in the old neutrality law , and in that message of september 3 , 1939 , i said , " i should like to be able to offer the hope that the shadow over the world might swiftly pass .
i can not .
the facts compel my stating , with candor , that darker periods may lie ahead . "
in the subsequent months , the shadows deepened and lengthened .
and the night spread over poland , denmark , norway , holland , belgium , luxembourg , and france .
in june , 1940 , britain stood alone , faced by the same machine of terror which had overwhelmed her allies .
our government rushed arms to meet her desperate needs .
in september , 1940 , an agreement was completed with great britain for the trade of fifty destroyers for eight important offshore bases .
and in march , 1941 , the congress passed the lend - lease bill and an appropriation of seven billion dollars to implement it .
this law realistically provided for material aid " for the government of any country whose defense the president deems vital to the defense of the united states . "
our whole program of aid for the democracies has been based on hard - headed concern for our own security and for the kind of safe and civilized world in which we wish to live .
every dollar of material that we send helps to keep the dictators away from our own hemisphere , and every day that they are held off gives us time to build more guns and tanks and planes and ships .
we have made no pretense about our own self - interest in this aid .
great britain understands it -- and so does nazi germany .
and now -- after a year -- britain still fights gallantly , on a " far - flung battle line . "
we have doubled and redoubled our vast production , increasing , month by month , our material supply of the tools of war for ourselves and for britain and for china- and eventually for all the democracies .
the supply of these tools will not fail -- it will increase .
with greatly augmented strength , the united states and the other american republics now chart their course in the situation of today .
your government knows what terms hitler , if victorious , would impose .
they are , indeed , the only terms on which he would accept a so - called " negotiated " peace .
and , under those terms , germany would literally parcel out the world -- hoisting the swastika itself over vast territories and populations , and setting up puppet governments of its own choosing , wholly subject to the will and the policy of a conqueror .
to the people of the americas , a triumphant hitler would say , as he said after the seizure of austria , and as he said after munich , and as he said after the seizure of czechoslovakia : " i am now completely satisfied .
this is the last territorial readjustment i will seek . "
and he would of course add : " all we want is peace , friendship , and profitable trade relations with you in the new world . "
were any of us in the americas so incredibly simple and forgetful as to accept those honeyed words , what would then happen ?
those in the new world who were seeking profits would be urging that all that the dictatorships desired was " peace . "
they would oppose toil and taxes for more american armament .
and meanwhile , the dictatorships would be forcing the enslaved peoples of their old world conquests into a system they are even now organizing to build a naval and air force intended to gain and hold and be master of the atlantic and the pacific as well .
they would fasten an economic stranglehold upon our several nations .
quislings would be found to subvert the governments in our republics ; and the nazis would back their fifth columns with invasion , if necessary .
no , i am not speculating about all this .
i merely repeat what is already in the nazi book of world conquest .
they plan to treat the latin american nations as they are now treating the balkans .
they plan then to strangle the united states of america and the dominion of canada .
the american laborer would have to compete with slave labor in the rest of the world .
minimum wages , maximum hours ?
nonsense !
wages and hours would be fixed by hitler .
the dignity and power and standard of living of the american worker and farmer would be gone .
trade unions would become historical relics , and collective bargaining a joke .
farm income ?
what happens to all farm surpluses without any foreign trade ?
the american farmer would get for his products exactly what hitler wanted to give .
the farmer would face obvious disaster and complete regimentation .
tariff walls -- chinese walls of isolation -- would be futile .
freedom to trade is essential to our economic life .
we do not eat all the food we can produce ; and we do not burn all the oil we can pump ; we do not use all the goods we can manufacture .
it would not be an american wall to keep nazi goods out ; it would be a nazi wall to keep us in .
the whole fabric of working life as we know it -- business and manufacturing , mining and agriculture -- all would be mangled and crippled under such a system .
yet to maintain even that crippled independence would require permanent conscription of our manpower ; it would curtail the funds we could spend on education , on housing , on public works , on flood control , on health and , instead , we should be permanently pouring our resources into armaments ; and , year in and year out , standing day and night watch against the destruction of our cities .
yes , even our right of worship would be threatened .
the nazi world does not recognize any god except hitler ; for the nazis are as ruthless as the communists in the denial of god .
what place has religion which preaches the dignity of the human being , the majesty of the human soul , in a world where moral standards are measured by treachery and bribery and fifth columnists ?
will our children , too , wander off , goose - stepping in search of new gods ?
we do not accept , we will not permit , this nazi " shape of things to come . "
it will never be forced upon us , if we act in this present crisis with the wisdom and the courage which have distinguished our country in all the crises of the past .
today , the nazis have taken military possession of the greater part of europe .
in africa they have occupied tripoli and libya , and they are threatening egypt , the suez canal , and the near east .
but their plans do not stop there , for the indian ocean is the gateway to the farther east .
they also have the armed power at any moment to occupy spain and portugal ; and that threat extends not only to french north africa and the western end of the mediterranean but it extends also to the atlantic fortress of dakar , and to the island outposts of the new world -- the azores and cape verde islands .
the cape verde islands are only seven hours ' distance from brazil by bomber or troop -- carrying planes .
they dominate shipping routes to and from the south atlantic .
the war is approaching the brink of the western hemisphere itself .
it is coming very close to home .
control or occupation by nazi forces of any of the islands of the atlantic would jeopardize the immediate safety of portions of north and south america , and of the island possessions of the united states , and , therefore , the ultimate safety of the continental united states itself .
hitler 's plan of world domination would be near its accomplishment today , were it not for two factors : one is the epic resistance of britain , her colonies , and the great dominions , fighting not only to maintain the existence of the island of britain , but also to hold the near east and africa .
the other is the magnificent defense of china , which will , i have reason to believe , increase in strength .
all of these , together , are preventing the axis from winning control of the seas by ships and aircraft .
the axis powers can never achieve their objective of world domination unless they first obtain control of the seas .
that is their supreme purpose today ; and to achieve it , they must capture great britain .
they could then have the power to dictate to the western hemisphere .
no spurious argument , no appeal to sentiment , no false pledges like those given by hitler at munich , can deceive the american people into believing that he and his axis partners would not , with britain defeated , close in relentlessly on this hemisphere of ours .
but if the axis powers fail to gain control of the seas , then they are certainly defeated .
their dreams of world domination will then go by the board ; and the criminal leaders who started this war will suffer inevitable disaster .
both they and their people know this- and they and their people are afraid .
that is why they are risking everything they have , conducting desperate attempts to break through to the command of the ocean .
once they are limited to a continuing land war , their cruel forces of occupation will be unable to keep their heel on the necks of the millions of innocent , oppressed peoples on the continent of europe ; and in the end , their whole structure will break into little pieces .
and let us remember , the wider the nazi land effort , the greater is their ultimate danger .
we do not forget the silenced peoples .
the masters of germany have marked these silenced peoples and their children 's children for slavery- those , at least , who have not been assassinated or escaped to free soil .
but those people -- spiritually unconquered : austrians , czechs , poles , norwegians , dutch , belgians , frenchmen , greeks , southern slavs -- yes , even those italians and germans who themselves have been enslaved -- will prove to be a powerful force in the final disruption of the nazi system .
all freedom- meaning freedom to live , and not freedom to conquer and subjugate other peoples - depends on freedom of the seas .
all of american history -- north , central , and south american history -- has been inevitably tied up with those words , " freedom of the seas . "
since 1799 , 142 years ago , when our infant navy made the west indies and the caribbean and the gulf of mexico safe for american ships ; since 1804 and 1805 when we made all peaceful commerce safe from the depredations of the barbary pirates ; since the war of 1812 , which was fought for the preservation of sailors ' rights ; since 1867 , when our sea power made it possible for the mexicans to expel the french army of louis napoleon , we have striven and fought in defense of freedom of the seas for our own shipping , for the commerce of our sister republics , for the right of all nations to use the highways of world trade -- and for our own safety .
during the first world war we were able to escort merchant ships by the use of small cruisers , gunboats , and destroyers ; and that type , called a convoy , was effective against submarines .
in this second world war , however , the problem is greater .
it is different because the attack on the freedom of the seas is now fourfold : first -- the improved submarine ; second -- the much greater use of the heavily armed raiding cruiser or the hit - and - run battleship ; third -- the bombing airplane , which is capable of destroying merchant ships seven or eight hundred miles from its nearest base ; and fourth -- the destruction of merchant ships in those ports of the world that are accessible to bombing attack .
the battle of the atlantic now extends from the icy waters of the north pole to the frozen continent of the antarctic .
throughout this huge area , there have been sinkings of merchant ships in alarming and increasing numbers by nazi raiders or submarines .
there have been sinkings even of ships carrying neutral flags .
there have been sinkings in the south atlantic , off west africa and the cape verde islands ; between the azores and the islands off the american coast ; and between greenland and iceland .
great numbers of these sinkings have been actually within the waters of the western hemisphere itself .
the blunt truth is this -- and i reveal this with the full knowledge of the british government : the present rate of nazi sinkings of merchant ships is more than three times as high as the capacity of british shipyards to replace them ; it is more than twice the combined british and american output of merchant ships today .
we can answer this peril by two simultaneous measures : first , by speeding up and increasing our own great shipbuilding program ; and second , by helping to cut down the losses on the high seas .
attacks on shipping off the very shores of land which we are determined to protect , present an actual military danger to the americas .
and that danger has recently been heavily underlined by the presence in western hemisphere waters of a nazi battleship of great striking power .
you remember that most of the supplies for britain go by a northerly route , which comes close to greenland and the nearby island of iceland .
germany 's heaviest attack is on that route .
nazi occupation of iceland or bases in greenland would bring the war close to our own continental shores , because those places are stepping - stones to labrador and newfoundland , to nova scotia , yes , to the northern united states itself , including the great industrial centers of the north , the east , and the middle west .
equally , the azores and the cape verde islands , if occupied or controlled by germany , would directly endanger the freedom of the atlantic and our own american physical safety .
under german domination those islands would become bases for submarines , warships , and airplanes raiding the waters that lie immediately off our own coasts and attacking the shipping in the south atlantic .
they would provide a springboard for actual attack against the integrity and the independence of brazil and her neighboring republics .
i have said on many occasions that the united states is mustering its men and its resources only for purposes of defense- only to repel attack .
i repeat that statement now .
but we must be realistic when we use the word " attack " ; we have to relate it to the lightning speed of modern warfare .
some people seem to think that we are not attacked until bombs actually drop in the streets of new york or san francisco or new orleans or chicago .
but they are simply shutting their eyes to the lesson that we must learn from the fate of every nation that the nazis have conquered .
the attack on czechoslovakia began with the conquest of austria .
the attack on norway began with the occupation of denmark .
the attack on greece began with occupation of albania and bulgaria .
the attack on the suez canal began with the invasion of the balkans and north africa , and the attack on the united states can begin with the domination of any base which menaces our security -- north or south .
nobody can foretell tonight just when the acts of the dictators will ripen into attack on this hemisphere and us .
but we know enough by now to realize that it would be suicide to wait until they are in our front yard .
when your enemy comes at you in a tank or a bombing plane , if you hold your fire until you see the whites of his eyes , you will never know what hit you .
our bunker hill of tomorrow may be several thousand miles from boston .
anyone with an atlas , anyone with a reasonable knowledge of the sudden striking force of modern war , knows that it is stupid to wait until a probable enemy has gained a foothold from which to attack .
old - fashioned common sense calls for the use of a strategy that will prevent such an enemy from gaining a foothold in the first place .
we have , accordingly , extended our patrol in north and south atlantic waters .
we are steadily adding more and more ships and planes to that patrol .
it is well known that the strength of the atlantic fleet has been greatly increased during the past year , and that it is constantly being built up .
these ships and planes warn of the presence of attacking raiders , on the sea , under the sea , and above the sea .
the danger from these raiders is , of course , greatly lessened if their location is definitely known .
we are thus being forewarned .
we shall be on our guard against efforts to establish nazi bases closer to our hemisphere .
the deadly facts of war compel nations , for simple self - preservation , to make stern choices .
it does not make sense , for instance , to say , " i believe in the defense of all the western hemisphere , " and in the next breath to say , " i will not fight for that defense until the enemy has landed on our shores . "
if we believe in the independence and the integrity of the americas , we must be willing to fight , to fight to defend them just as much as we would to fight for the safety of our own homes .
it is time for us to realize that the safety of american homes even in the center of this our own country has a very definite relationship to the continued safety of homes in nova scotia or trinidad or brazil .
our national policy today , therefore , is this : 
 first , we shall actively resist wherever necessary , and with all our resources , every attempt by hitler to extend his nazi domination to the western hemisphere , or to threaten it .
we shall actively resist his every attempt to gain control of the seas .
we insist upon the vital importance of keeping hitlerism away from any point in the world which could be used or would be used as a base of attack against the americas .
second , from the point of view of strict naval and military necessity , we shall give every possible assistance to britain and to all who , with britain , are resisting hitlerism or its equivalent with force of arms .
our patrols are helping now to insure delivery of the needed supplies to britain .
all additional measures necessary to deliver the goods will be taken .
any and all further methods or combination of methods , which can or should be utilized , are being devised by our military and naval technicians , who , with me , will work out and put into effect such new and additional safeguards as may be needed .
i say that the delivery of needed supplies to britain is imperative .
i say that this can be done ; it must be done ; and it will be done .
to the other american nations- twenty republics and the dominion of canada -- i say this : the united states does not merely propose these purposes , but is actively engaged today in carrying them out .
i say to them further : you may disregard those few citizens of the united states who contend that we are disunited and can not act .
there are some timid ones among us who say that we must preserve peace at any price- lest we lose our liberties forever .
to them i say this : never in the history of the world has a nation lost its democracy by a successful struggle to defend its democracy .
we must not be defeated by the fear of the very danger which we are preparing to resist .
our freedom has shown its ability to survive war , but our freedom would never survive surrender . "
the only thing we have to fear is fear itself . "
there is , of course , a small group of sincere , patriotic men and women whose real passion for peace has shut their eyes to the ugly realities of international banditry and to the need to resist it at all costs .
i am sure they are embarrassed by the sinister support they are receiving from the enemies of democracy in our midst the bundists , the fascists , and communists , and every group devoted to bigotry and racial and religious intolerance .
it is no mere coincidence that all the arguments put forward by these enemies of democracy -- all their attempts to confuse and divide our people and to destroy public confidence in our government -- all their defeatist forebodings that britain and democracy are already beaten -- all their selfish promises that we can " do business " with hitler -- all of these are but echoes of the words that have been poured out from the axis bureaus of propaganda .
those same words have been used before in other countries -- to scare them , to divide them , to soften them up .
invariably , those same words have formed the advance guard of physical attack .
your government has the right to expect of all citizens that they take part in the common work of our common defense take loyal part from this moment forward .
i have recently set up the machinery for civilian defense .
it will rapidly organize , locality by locality .
it will depend on the organized effort of men and women everywhere .
all will have opportunities and responsibilities to fulfill .
defense today means more than merely fighting .
it means morale , civilian as well as military ; it means using every available resource ; it means enlarging every useful plant .
it means the use of a greater american common sense in discarding rumor and distorted statement .
it means recognizing , for what they are , racketeers and fifth columnists , who are the incendiary bombs in this country of the moment .
all of us know that we have made very great social progress in recent years .
we propose to maintain that progress and strengthen it .
when the nation is threatened from without , however , as it is today , the actual production and transportation of the machinery of defense must not be interrupted by disputes between capital and capital , labor and labor , or capital and labor .
the future of all free enterprise -- of capital and labor alike -- is at stake .
this is no time for capital to make , or be allowed to retain , excess profits .
articles of defense must have undisputed right of way in every industrial plant in the country .
a nation - wide machinery for conciliation and mediation of industrial disputes has been set up .
that machinery must be used promptly -- and without stoppage of work .
collective bargaining will be retained , but the american people expect that impartial recommendations of our government conciliation and mediation services will be followed both by capital and by labor .
the overwhelming majority of our citizens expect their government to see that the tools of defense are built ; and for the very purpose of preserving the democratic safeguards of both labor and management , this government is determined to use all of its power to express the will of its people , and to prevent interference with the production of materials essential to our nation 's security .
today the whole world is divided between human slavery and human freedom -- between pagan brutality and the christian ideal .
we choose human freedom -- which is the christian ideal .
no one of us can waver for a moment in his courage or his faith .
we will not accept a hitler - dominated world .
and we will not accept a world , like the postwar world of the 1920 's , in which the seeds of hitlerism can again be planted and allowed to grow .
we will accept only a world consecrated to freedom of speech and expression -- freedom of every person to worship god in his own way -- freedom from want -- and freedom from terror .
is such a world impossible of attainment ?
magna charta , the declaration of independence , the constitution of the united states , the emancipation proclamation , and every other milestone in human progress -- all were ideals which seemed impossible of attainment -- and yet they were attained .
as a military force , we were weak when we established our independence , but we successfully stood off tyrants , powerful in their day , tyrants who are now lost in the dust of history .
odds meant nothing to us then .
shall we now , with all our potential strength , hesitate to take every single measure necessary to maintain our american liberties ?
our people and our government will not hesitate to meet that challenge .
as the president of a united and determined people , i say solemnly : 
 we reassert the ancient american doctrine of freedom of the seas .
we reassert the solidarity of the twenty - one american republics and the dominion of canada in the preservation of the independence of the hemisphere .
we have pledged material support to the other democracies of the world -- and we will fulfill that pledge .
we in the americas will decide for ourselves whether , and when , and where , our american interests are attacked or our security is threatened .
we are placing our armed forces in strategic military position .
we will not hesitate to use our armed forces to repel attack .
we reassert our abiding faith in the vitality of our constitutional republic as a perpetual home of freedom , of tolerance , and of devotion to the word of god .
therefore , with profound consciousness of my responsibilities to my countrymen and to my country 's cause , i have tonight issued a proclamation that an unlimited national emergency exists and requires the strengthening of our defense to the extreme limit of our national power and authority .
the nation will expect all individuals and all groups to play their full parts , without stint , and without selfishness , and without doubt that our democracy will triumphantly survive .
i repeat the words of the signers of the declaration of independence -- that little band of patriots , fighting long ago against overwhelming odds , but certain , as we are now , of ultimate victory : " with a firm reliance on the protection of divine providence , we mutually pledge to each other our lives , our fortunes , and our sacred honor . "

my friends : 
 i wish that all ( the ) americans ( people ) could read all the citations for various medals recommended for our soldiers and sailors and marines .
i am picking out one of these citations which tells of the accomplishments of lieutenant john james powers , united states navy , during three days of the battles with japanese forces in the coral sea .
during the first two days , lieutenant powers , flying a dive - bomber in the face of blasting enemy anti - aircraft fire , demolished one large enemy gunboat , put another gunboat out of commission , severely damaged an aircraft tender and a twenty - thousand - ton transport , and scored a direct hit on an aircraft carrier which burst into flames and sank soon after .
the official citation then describes the morning of the third day of battle .
as the pilots of his squadron left the ready room to man their planes , lieutenant powers said to them , " remember , the folks back home are counting on us .
i am going to get a hit if i have to lay it on their flight deck .
he led his section down to the target from an altitude of 18,000 feet , through a wall of bursting anti - aircraft shells and swarms of enemy planes .
he dived almost to the very deck of the enemy carrier , and did not release his bomb until he was sure of a direct hit .
he was last seen attempting recovery from his dive at the extremely low altitude of two hundred feet , amid a terrific barrage of shell and bomb fragments , and smoke and flame and debris from the stricken vessel .
his own plane was destroyed by the explosion of his own bomb .
but he had made good his promise to " lay it on the flight deck . "
i have received a recommendation from the secretary of the navy that lieutenant john james powers of new york city , missing in action , be awarded the medal of honor .
i hereby and now make this award .
you and i are " the folks back home " for whose protection lieutenant powers fought and repeatedly risked his life .
he said that we counted on him and his men .
we did not count in vain .
but have not those men a right to be counting on us ?
how are we playing our part " back home " in winning this war ?
the answer is that we are not doing enough .
today i sent a message to the congress , pointing out the overwhelming urgency of the serious domestic economic crisis with which we are threatened .
some call it " inflation , " which is a vague sort of term , and others call it a " rise in the cost of living , " which is much more easily understood by most families .
that phrase , " the cost of living , " means essentially what a dollar can buy .
from january 1 , 1941 , to may of this year , nearly a year and a half , the cost of living went up about 15 % .
and at that point last may we undertook to freeze the cost of living .
but we could not do a complete job of it , because the congressional authority at the time exempted a large part of farm products used for food and for making clothing , although several weeks before , i had asked the congress for legislation to stabilize all farm prices .
at that time i had told the congress that there were seven elements in our national economy , all of which had to be controlled ; and that if any one essential element remained exempt , the cost of living could not be held down .
on only two of these points -- both of them vital however -- did i call for congressional action .
these two vital points were : first , taxation ; and , second , the stabilization of all farm prices at parity .
" parity " is a standard for the maintenance of good farm prices .
it was established as our national policy way back in 1933 .
it means that the farmer and the city worker are on the same relative ratio with each other in purchasing power as they were during a period some thirty years ( ago ) before -- at a time then the farmer had a satisfactory purchasing power .
100 percent of parity , therefore , has been accepted by farmers as the fair standard for the prices they receive .
last january , however , the congress passed a law forbidding ceilings on farm prices below 110 percent of parity on some commodities .
and on other commodities the ceiling was even higher , so that the average possible ceiling is now about 116 percent of parity for agricultural products as a whole .
this act of favoritism for one particular group in the community increased the cost of food to everybody -- not only to the workers in the city or in the munitions plants , and their families , but also to the families of the farmers themselves .
since last may , ceilings have been set on nearly all commodities , rents ( and ) services , except the exempted farm products .
installment buying , for example , has been ( effectively ) effectually stabilized and controlled .
wages in certain key industries have been stabilized on the basis of the present cost of living .
but it is obvious to all of us ( however ) that if the cost of food continues to go up , as it is doing at present , the wage earner , particularly in the lower brackets , will have a right to an increase in his wages .
i think that would be essential justice and a practical necessity .
our experience with the control of other prices during the past few months has brought out one important fact -- the rising cost of living can be controlled , providing that all elements making up the cost of living are controlled at the same time .
i think that also is an essential justice and a practical necessity .
we know that parity prices for farm products not now controlled will not put up the cost of living more than a very small amount ; but we also know that if we must go up to an average of 116 % of parity for food and other farm products -- which is necessary at present under the emergency price control act before we can control all farm prices -- the cost of living will get well out of hand .
we are face to face with this danger today .
let us meet it and remove it .
i realize that it may seem out of proportion to you to be ( worrying about ) over - stressing these economic problems at a time like this , when we are all deeply concerned about the news from far distant fields of battle .
but i give you the solemn assurance that failure to solve this problem here at home -- and to solve it now -- will make more difficult the winning of this war .
if the vicious spiral of inflation ever gets under way , the whole economic system will stagger .
prices and wages will go up so rapidly that the entire production program will be endangered .
the cost of the war , paid by taxpayers , will jump beyond all present calculations .
it will mean an uncontrollable rise in prices and in wages , which can result in raising the overall cost of living as high as another 20 percent soon .
that would mean that the purchasing power of every dollar that you have in your pay envelope , or in the bank , or included in your insurance policy or your pension , would be reduced to about eighty cents worth .
i need not tell you that this would have a demoralizing effect on our people , soldiers and civilians alike .
overall stabilization of prices , and salaries , and wages and profits is necessary to the continued increasing production of planes and tanks and ships and guns .
in my message to congress today , i have ( told the congress ) said that this must be done quickly .
if we wait for two or three or four or six months it may well be too late .
i have told the congress that the administration can not hold the actual cost of food and clothing down to the present level beyond october first .
therefore , i have asked the congress to pass legislation under which the president would be specifically authorized to stabilize the cost of living , including the price of all farm commodities .
the purpose should be to hold farm prices at parity , or at levels of a recent date , whichever is higher .
the purpose should also be to keep wages at a point stabilized with today 's cost of living .
both must be regulated at the same time ; and neither one of them can or should be regulated without the other .
at the same time that farm prices are stabilized , i will stabilize wages .
that is plain justice -- and plain common sense .
and so i have asked the congress to take this action by the first of october .
we must now act with the dispatch , which the stern necessities of war require .
i have told the congress that inaction on their part by that date will leave me with an inescapable responsibility , a responsibility to the people of this country to see to it that the war effort is no longer imperiled by the threat of economic chaos .
as i said in my message to the congress : 
 in the event that the congress should fail to act , and act adequately , i shall accept the responsibility , and i will act .
the president has the powers , under the constitution and under congressional acts , to take measures necessary to avert a disaster which would interfere with the winning of the war .
i have given the most careful and thoughtful consideration to meeting this issue without further reference to the congress .
i have determined , however , on this vital matter to consult with the congress .
there may be those who will say that , if the situation is as grave as i have stated it to be , i should use my powers and act now .
i can only say that i have approached this problem from every angle , and that i have decided that the course of conduct which i am following in this case is consistent with my sense of responsibility as president in time of war , and with my deep and unalterable devotion to the processes of democracy .
the responsibilities of the president in wartime to protect the nation are very grave .
this total war , with our fighting fronts all over the world , makes the use of the executive power far more essential than in any previous war .
if we were invaded , the people of this country would expect the president to use any and all means to repel the invader .
now the revolution and the war between the states were fought on our own soil , but today this war will be won or lost on other continents and in remote seas .
i can not tell what powers may have to be exercised in order to win this war .
the american people can be sure that i will use my powers with a full sense of responsibility to the constitution and to my country .
the american people can also be sure that i shall not hesitate to use every power vested in me to accomplish the defeat of our enemies in any part of the world where our own safety demands such defeat .
and when the war is won , the powers under which i act will automatically revert to the people of the united states -- to the people to whom ( they ) those powers belong .
i think i know the american farmers .
i know ( that ) they are as wholehearted in their patriotism as any other group .
they have suffered from the constant fluctuations of farm prices -- occasionally too high , more often too low .
nobody knows better than farmers the disastrous effects of wartime inflationary booms , and post - war deflationary panics .
so i have also suggested today ( suggested ) that the congress make our agricultural economy more stable .
i have recommended that in addition to putting ceilings on all farm products now , we also place a definite floor under those prices for a period beginning now , continuing through the war , and for as long as necessary after the war .
in this way we will be able to avoid the collapse of farm prices ( which ) that happened after the last war .
the farmers must be assured of a fair minimum price during the readjustment period which will follow the great , excessive world food demands ( which ) that now prevail .
we must have some floor under farm prices , as we must have under wages , if we are to avoid the dangers of a post - war inflation on the one hand , or the catastrophe of a crash in farm prices and wages on the other .
today i have also advised the congress of the importance of speeding up the passage of the tax bill .
the federal treasury is losing millions of dollars ( a ) each and every day because the bill has not yet been passed .
taxation is the only practical way of preventing the incomes and profits of individuals and corporations from getting too high .
i have told the congress once more that all net individual incomes , after payment of all taxes , should be limited effectively by further taxation to a maximum net income of ( $ 25,000 ) 25 thousand dollars a year .
and it is equally important that corporate profits should not exceed a reasonable amount in any case .
the nation must have more money to run the war .
people must stop spending for luxuries .
our country needs a far greater share of our incomes .
for this is a global war , and it will cost this nation nearly one hundred billion dollars in 1943 .
in that global war there are now four main areas of combat ; and i should like to speak briefly of them , not in the order of their importance , for all of them are vital and all of them are interrelated .
( 1 ) the russian front .
here the germans are still unable to gain the smashing victory which , almost a year ago , hitler announced he had already achieved .
germany has been able to capture important russian territory .
nevertheless , hitler has been unable to destroy a single russian army ; and this , you may be sure , has been , and still is , his main objective .
millions of german troops seem doomed to spend another cruel and bitter winter on the russian front .
yes , the russians are killing more nazis , and destroying more airplanes and tanks than are being smashed on any other front .
they are fighting not only bravely but brilliantly .
in spite of any setbacks russia will hold out , and with the help of her allies will ultimately drive every nazi from her soil .
( 2 ) the pacific ocean area .
this area must be grouped together as a whole --every part of it , land and sea .
we have stopped one major japanese offensive ; and we have inflicted heavy losses on their fleet .
but they still possess great strength ; they seek to keep the initiative ; and they will undoubtedly strike hard again .
we must not over - rate the importance of our successes in the solomon islands , though we may be proud of the skill with which these local operations were conducted .
at the same time , we need not under - rate the significance of our victory at midway .
there we stopped the major japanese offensive .
( 3 ) in the mediterranean and the middle east area the british , together with the south africans , australians , new zealanders , indian troops and others of the united nations , including ourselves , are fighting a desperate battle with the germans and italians .
the axis powers are fighting to gain control of that area , dominate the mediterranean and the indian ocean , and gain contact with the japanese navy .
the battle in the middle east is now joined .
we are well aware of our danger , but we are hopeful of the outcome .
( 4 ) the european area .
here the aim is an offensive against germany .
there are at least a dozen different points at which attacks can be launched .
you , of course , do not expect me to give details of future plans , but you can rest assured that preparations are being made here and in britain toward this purpose .
the power of germany must be broken on the battlefields of europe .
various people urge that we concentrate our forces on one or another of these four areas , although no one suggests that any one of the four areas should be abandoned .
certainly , it could not be seriously urged that we abandon aid to russia , or that we surrender all of the pacific to japan , or the mediterranean and middle east to germany , or give up an offensive against germany .
the american people may be sure that we shall neglect none of the four great theaters of war .
certain vital military decisions have been made .
in due time you will know what these decisions are -- and so will our enemies .
i can say now that all of these decisions are directed toward taking the offensive .
today , exactly nine months after pearl harbor , we have sent overseas three times more men than we transported to france in the first nine months of the first world war .
we have done this in spite of greater danger and fewer ships .
and every week sees a gain in the actual number of american men and weapons in the fighting areas .
these reinforcements in men and munitions are continuing , and will continue to go forward .
this war will finally be won by the coordination of all the armies , navies and air forces of all of the united nations operating in unison against our enemies .
this will require vast assemblies of weapons and men at all the vital points of attack .
we and our allies have worked for years to achieve superiority in weapons .
we have no doubts about the superiority of our men .
we glory in the individual exploits of our soldiers , our sailors , our marines , our merchant seamen .
lieutenant john james powers was one of these -- and there are thousands of others in the forces of the united nations .
several thousand americans have met death in battle .
other thousands will lose their lives .
but many millions stand ready to step into their places -- to engage in a struggle to the very death .
for they know that the enemy is determined to destroy us , our homes and our institutions -- that in this war it is kill or be killed .
battles are not won by soldiers or sailors who think first of their own personal safety .
and wars are not won by people who are concerned primarily with their own comfort , their own convenience , their own pocketbooks .
we americans of today bear the gravest of responsibilities .
and all of the united nations share them .
all of us here at home are being tested -- for our fortitude , for our selfless devotion to our country and to our cause .
this is the toughest war of all time .
we need not leave it to historians of the future to answer the question whether we are tough enough to meet this unprecedented challenge .
we can give that answer now .
the answer is " yes . "

five months have gone by since i last spoke to the people of the nation about the state of the nation .
i had hoped to be able to defer this talk until next week because , as we all know , this is holy week .
but what i want to say to you , the people of the country , is of such immediate need and relates so closely to the lives of human beings and the prevention of human suffering that i have felt that there should be no delay .
in this decision i have been strengthened by the thought that by speaking tonight there may be greater peace of mind and that the hope of easter may be more real at firesides everywhere , and therefore that it is not inappropriate to encourage peace when so many of us are thinking of the prince of peace .
five years ago we faced a very serious problem of economic and social recovery .
for four and a half years that recovery proceeded apace .
it is only in the past seven months that it has received a visible setback .
and it is only within the past two months , as we have waited patiently to see whether the forces of business itself would counteract it , that it has become apparent that government itself can no longer safely fail to take aggressive government steps to meet it .
this recession has not returned to us ( to ) the disasters and suffering of the beginning of 1933 .
your money in the bank is safe ; farmers are no longer in deep distress and have greater purchasing power ; dangers of security speculation have been minimized ; national income is almost 50 % higher than it was in 1932 ; and government has an established and accepted responsibility for relief .
but i know that many of you have lost your jobs or have seen your friends or members of your families lose their jobs , and i do not propose that the government shall pretend not to see these things .
i know that the effect of our present difficulties has been uneven ; that they have affected some groups and some localities seriously but that they have been scarcely felt in others .
but i conceive the first duty of government is to protect the economic welfare of all the people in all sections and in all groups .
i said in my message opening the last session of the congress that if private enterprise did not provide jobs this spring , government would take up the slack -- that i would not let the people down .
we have all learned the lesson that government can not afford to wait until it has lost the power to act .
therefore , my friends , i have sent a message of far - reaching importance to the congress .
i want to read to you tonight certain passages from that message , and to talk with you about them .
in that message i analyzed the causes of the collapse of 1929 in these words : 
 " over - speculation in and over - production of practically every article or instrument used by man .... millions of people , to be sure , had been put to work , but the products of their hands had exceeded the purchasing power of their pocketbooks ... under the inexorable law of supply and demand , supplies so overran demand ( which would pay)that production was compelled to stop .
unemployment and closed factories resulted .
hence the tragic years from 1929 to 1933 . "
today i pointed out to the congress that the national income -- not the government 's income but the total of the income of all the individual citizens and families of the united states -- every farmer , every worker , every banker , every professional man and every person who lived on income derived from investments -- that national income had amounted , in the year 1929 , to eighty - one billion dollars .
by 1932 this had fallen to thirty - eight billion dollars .
gradually , and up to a few months ago , it had risen to a total , an annual total ; of sixty - eight billion dollars -- a pretty good come- back from the low point .
i then said this to the congress : 
 " but the very vigor of the recovery in both durable goods and consumers ' goods brought into the picture early in 1937 , a year ago , certain highly undesirable practices , which were in large part responsible for the economic decline which began in the later months of that year .
again production had ( outran ) outrun the ability to buy . "
" there were many reasons for this over - production .
one of them was fear -- fear of war abroad , fear of inflation , fear of nation - wide strikes .
none of these fears have been borne out . "
" ... production in many important lines of goods outran the ability of the public to purchase them , as i have said .
for example , through the winter and spring of 1937 cotton factories in hundreds of cases were running on a three - shift basis , piling up cotton goods in the factory , ( and ) goods in the hands of middle men and retailers .
for example , also , automobile manufacturers not only turned out a normal increase of finished cars , but encouraged the normal increase to run into abnormal figures , using every known method to push their sales .
this meant , of course , that the steel mills of the nation ran on a twenty - four hour basis , and the tire companies and cotton factories and glass factories and others speeded up to meet the same type of abnormally stimulated demand .
yes , the buying power of the nation lagged behind . "
" thus by the autumn of 1937 , last autumn , the nation again had stocks on hand which the consuming public could not buy because the purchasing power of the consuming public had not kept pace with the production . "
" during the same period ... the prices of many vital products had risen faster than was warranted . ( .... )
for example , copper -- which undoubtedly can be produced at a profit in this country for from ten to twelve cents a pound -- was pushed up and up to seventeen cents a pound .
the price of steel products of many kinds was increased far more than was justified by the increased wages of steel workers .
in the case of many commodities the price to the consumer was raised well above the inflationary boom prices of 1929 .
in many lines of goods and materials , prices got so high in the summer of 1937 that buyers and builders ceased to buy or to build . "
" ... the economic process of getting out the raw materials , putting them through the manufacturing and finishing processes , selling them to the retailers , selling them to the consumer , and finally using them , got completely out of balance . "
" ... the laying off of workers came upon us last autumn and has been continuing at such a pace ever since that all of us , government and banking and business and workers , and those faced with destitution , recognize the need for action . "
all of this i said to the congress today and i repeat it to you , the people of the country tonight .
i went on to point out to the senate and the house of representatives that all the energies of government and business must be directed to increasing the national income , to putting more people into private jobs , to giving security and a feeling of security to all people in all walks of life .
i am constantly thinking of all our people -- unemployed and employed alike -- of their human problems , their human problems of food and clothing and homes and education and health and old age .
you and i agree that security is our greatest need -- the chance to work , the opportunity of making a reasonable profit in our business -- whether it be a very small business or a larger one -- the possibility of selling our farm products for enough money for our families to live on decently .
i know these are the things that decide the well - being of all our people .
therefore , i am determined to do all in my power to help you attain that security and because i know that the people themselves have a deep conviction that secure prosperity of that kind can not be a lasting one except on a basis of ( business ) fair business dealing and a basis where all from the top to the bottom share in the prosperity .
i repeated to the congress today that neither it nor the chief executive can afford 
 " to weaken or destroy great reforms which , during the past five years , have been effected on behalf of the american people .
in our rehabilitation of the banking structure and of agriculture , in our provisions for adequate and cheaper credit for all types of business , in our acceptance of national responsibility for unemployment relief , in our strengthening of the credit of state and local government , in our encouragement of housing , and slum clearance and home ownership , in our supervision of stock exchanges and public utility holding companies and the issuance of new securities , in our provision for social security itself , the electorate of america wants no backward steps taken . "
" we have recognized the right of labor to free organization , to collective bargaining ; and machinery for the handling of labor relations is now in existence .
the principles are established even though we can all admit that , through the evolution of time , administration and practices can be improved .
such improvement can come about most quickly and most peacefully through sincere efforts to understand and assist on the part of labor leaders and employers alike . "
" the never - ceasing evolution of human society will doubtless bring forth new problems which will require new adjustments .
our immediate task is to consolidate and maintain the gains we have achieved . "
" in this situation there is no reason and no occasion for any american to allow his fears to be aroused or his energy and enterprise to be paralyzed by doubt or uncertainty . "
i came to the conclusion that the present - day problem calls for action both by the government and by the people , that we suffer primarily from a failure of consumer demand because of lack of buying power .
therefore it is up to us to create an economic upturn . "
how and where can and should the government help to start an ( upward spiral ) economic upturn ? "
i went on in my message today to propose three groups of measures and i will summarize my recommendations .
first , i asked for certain appropriations which are intended to keep the government expenditures for work relief and similar purposes during the coming fiscal year that begins on the first of july , keep that going at the same rate of expenditure as at present .
that includes additional money for the works progress administration ; additional funds for the farm security administration ; additional allotments for the national youth administration , and more money for the civilian conservation corps , in order that it can maintain the existing number of camps now in operation .
these appropriations , made necessary by increased unemployment , will cost about a billion and a quarter dollars more than the estimates which i sent to the congress on the third of january last .
second , i told the congress that the administration proposes to make additional bank reserves available for the credit needs of the country .
about one billion four hundred million dollars of gold now in the treasury will be used to pay these additional expenses of the government , and three - quarters of a billion dollars of additional credit will be made available to the banks by reducing the reserves now required by the federal reserve board .
these two steps taking care of relief needs and adding to bank credits are in our best judgment insufficient by themselves to start the nation on a sustained upward movement .
therefore , i came to the third kind of government action which i consider to be vital .
i said to the congress : 
 " you and i can not afford to equip ourselves with two rounds of ammunition where three rounds are necessary .
if we stop at relief and credit , we may find ourselves without ammunition before the enemy is routed .
if we are fully equipped with the third round of ammunition , we stand to win the battle against adversity . "
this third proposal is to make definite additions to the purchasing power of the nation by providing new work over and above the continuing of the old work .
first , to enable the united states housing authority to undertake the immediate construction of about three hundred million dollars worth of additional slum clearance projects .
second , to renew a public works program by starting as quickly as possible about one billion dollars worth of needed permanent public improvements in our states , and their counties and cities .
third , to add one hundred million dollars to the estimate for federal aid highways in excess of the amount that i recommended in january .
fourth , to add thirty - seven million dollars over and above the former estimate of sixty - three million for flood control and reclamation .
fifth , to add twenty - five million dollars additional for federal buildings in various parts of the country .
in recommending this program i am thinking not only of the immediate economic needs of the people of the nation , but also of their personal liberties --the most precious possession of all americans .
i am thinking of our democracy .
i am thinking of the recent trend in other parts of the world away from the democratic ideal .
democracy has disappeared in several other great nations -- disappeared not because the people of those nations disliked democracy , but because they had grown tired of unemployment and insecurity , of seeing their children hungry while they sat helpless in the face of government confusion , government weakness , -- weakness through lack of leadership in government .
finally , in desperation , they chose to sacrifice liberty in the hope of getting something to eat .
we in america know that our own democratic institutions can be preserved and made to work .
but in order to preserve them we need to act together , to meet the problems of the nation boldly , and to prove that the practical operation of democratic government is equal to the task of protecting the security of the people .
not only our future economic soundness but the very soundness of our democratic institutions depends on the determination of our government to give employment to idle men .
the people of america are in agreement in defending their liberties at any cost , and the first line of that defense lies in the protection of economic security .
your government , seeking to protect democracy , must prove that government is stronger than the forces of business depression .
history proves that dictatorships do not grow out of strong and successful governments but out of weak and helpless governments .
if by democratic methods people get a government strong enough to protect them from fear and starvation , their democracy succeeds , but if they do not , they grow impatient .
therefore , the only sure bulwark of continuing liberty is a government strong enough to protect the interests of the people , and a people strong enough and well enough informed to maintain its sovereign control over its government .
we are a rich nation ; we can afford to pay for security and prosperity without having to sacrifice our liberties into the bargain .
in the first century of our republic we were short of capital , short of workers and short of industrial production , but we were rich , very rich in free land , and free timber and free mineral wealth .
the federal government of those days rightly assumed the duty of promoting business and relieving depression by giving subsidies of land and other resources .
thus , from our earliest days we have had a tradition of substantial government help to our system of private enterprise .
but today the government no longer has vast tracts of rich land to give away and we have discovered , too , that we must spend large sums of money to conserve our land from further erosion and our forests from further depletion .
the situation is also very different from the old days , because now we have plenty of capital , banks and insurance companies loaded with idle money ; plenty of industrial productive capacity and many millions of workers looking for jobs .
it is following tradition as well as necessity , if government strives to put idle money and idle men to work , to increase our public wealth and to build up the health and strength of the people --to help our system of private enterprise to function again .
it is going to cost something to get out of this recession this way but the profit of getting out of it will pay for the cost several times over .
lost working time is lost money .
every day that a workman is unemployed , or a machine is unused , or a business organization is marking time , it is a loss to the nation .
because of idle men and idle machines this nation lost one hundred billion dollars between 1929 and the spring of 1933 , in less than four years .
this year you , the people of this country , are making about twelve billion dollars less than you were last year .
if you think back to the experiences of the early years of this administration you will remember the doubts and fears expressed about the rising expenses of government .
but to the surprise of the doubters , as we proceeded to carry on the program which included public works and work relief , the country grew richer instead of poorer .
it is worthwhile to remember that the annual national people 's income was thirty billion dollars more last year in 1937 than it was in 1932 .
it is true that the national debt increased sixteen billion dollars , but remember that in that increase must be included several billion dollars worth of assets which eventually will reduce that debt and that many billion dollars of permanent public improvements -- schools , roads , bridges , tunnels , public buildings , parks and a host of other things meet your eye in every one of the thirty - one hundred counties in the united states .
no doubt you will be told that the government spending program of the past five years did not cause the increase in our national income .
they will tell you that business revived because of private spending and investment .
that is true in part , for the government spent only a small part of the total .
but that government spending acted as a trigger , a trigger to set off private activity .
that is why the total addition to our national production and national income has been so much greater than the contribution of the government itself .
in pursuance of that thought i said to the congress today : 
 " i want to make it clear that we do not believe that we can get an adequate rise in national income merely by investing , and lending or spending public funds .
it is essential in our economy that private funds must be put to work and all of us recognize that such funds are entitled to a fair profit . "
as national income rises , " let us not forget that government expenditures will go down and government tax receipts will go up . "
the government contribution of land that we once made to business was the land of all the people .
and the government contribution of money which we now make to business ultimately comes out of the labor of all the people .
it is , therefore , only sound morality , as well as a sound distribution of buying power , that the benefits of the prosperity coming from this use of the money of all the people ought to be distributed among all the people -- the people at the bottom as well as the people at the top .
consequently , i am again expressing my hope that the congress will enact at this session a wage and hour bill putting a floor under industrial wages and a limit on working hours -- to ensure a better distribution of our prosperity , a better distribution of available work , and a sounder distribution of buying power .
you may get all kinds of impressions in regard to the total cost of this new program , or in regard to the amount that will be added to the net national debt .
it is a big program .
last autumn in a sincere effort to bring government expenditures and government income into closer balance , the budget i worked out called for sharp de creases in government spending during the coming year .
but , in the light of present conditions , conditions of today , those estimates turned out to have been far too low .
this new program adds two billion and sixty - two million dollars to direct treasury expenditures and another nine hundred and fifty million dollars to government loans -- the latter sum , because they are loans , will come back to the treasury in the future .
the net effect on the debt of the government is this -- between now and july 1 , 1939 -- fifteen months away -- the treasury will have to raise less than a billion and a half dollars of new money .
such an addition to the net debt of the united states need not give concern to any citizen , for it will return to the people of the united states many times over in increased buying power and eventually in much greater government tax receipts because of the increase in the citizen income .
what i said to the congress today in the close of my message i repeat to you now . "
let us unanimously recognize the fact that the federal debt , whether it be twenty - five billions or forty billions , can only be paid if the nation obtains a vastly increased citizen income .
i repeat that if this citizen income can be raised to eighty billion dollars a year the national government and the overwhelming majority of state and local governments will be definitely ' out of the red . '
the higher the national income goes the faster will we be able to reduce the total of federal and state and local debts .
viewed from every angle , today 's purchasing power -the citizens ' income of today -- is not at this time sufficient to drive the economic system of america at higher speed .
responsibility of government requires us at this time to supplement the normal processes and in so supplementing them to make sure that the addition is adequate .
we must start again on a long steady upward incline in national income . "
" ... and in that process , which i believe is ready to start , let us avoid the pitfalls of the past -- the overproduction , the over - speculation , and indeed all the extremes which we did not succeed in avoiding in 1929 .
in all of this , government can not and should not act alone .
business must help .
and i am sure business will help . "
" we need more than the materials of recovery .
we need a united national will . "
" we need to recognize nationally that the demands of no group , however just , can be satisfied unless that group is prepared to share in finding a way to produce the income from which they and all other groups can be paid ... you , as the congress , i , as the president , must by virtue of our offices , seek the national good by preserving the balance between all groups and all sections . "
" we have at our disposal the national resources , the money , the skill of hand and head to raise our economic level -- our citizens ' income .
our capacity is limited only by our ability to work together .
what is needed is the will . "
" the time has come to bring that will into action with every driving force at our command .
and i am determined to do my share . "
" ..... certain positive requirements seem to me to accompany the will -- if we have that will . "
" there is placed on all of us the duty of self - restraint .
that is the discipline of a democracy .
every patriotic citizen must say to himself or herself , that immoderate statement , appeals to prejudice , the creation of unkindness , are offenses not against an individual or individuals , but offenses against the whole population of the united states ... " 
 " use of power by any group , however situated , to force its interest or to use its strategic position in order to receive more from the common fund than its contribution to the common fund justifies , is an attack against and not an aid to our national life . "
" self - restraint implies restraint by articulate public opinion , trained to distinguish fact from falsehood , trained to believe that bitterness is never a useful instrument in public affairs .
there can be no dictatorship by an individual or by a group in this nation , save through division fostered by hate .
such division there must never be . "
and finally i should like to say a personal word to you .
i never forget that i live in a house owned by all the american people and that i have been given their trust .
i try always to remember that their deepest problems are human .
i constantly talk with those who come to tell me their own points of view -- with those who manage the great industries and financial institutions of the country --with those who represent the farmer and the worker -- and often , very often with average citizens without high position who come to this house .
and constantly i seek to look beyond the doors of the white house , beyond the officialdom of the national capital , into the hopes and fears of men and women in their homes .
i have travelled the country over many times .
my friends , my enemies , my daily mail bring to me reports of what you are thinking and hoping .
i want to be sure that neither battles nor burdens of office shall ever blind me to an intimate knowledge of the way the american people want to live and the simple purposes for which they put me here .
in these great problems of government i try not to forget that what really counts at the bottom of it all is that the men and women willing to work can have a decent job , -- a decent job to take care of themselves and their homes and their children adequately ; that the farmer , the factory worker , toe storekeeper , the gas station man , the manufacturer , the merchant -- big and small -- the banker who takes pride in the help that he can give to the building of his community -- that all of these can be sure of a reasonable profit and safety for the earnings that they make -- not for today nor tomorrow alone , but as far ahead as they can see .
i can hear your unspoken wonder as to where we are headed in this troubled world .
i can not expect all of the people to understand all of the people 's problems ; but it is my job to try to understand all of the problems .
i always try to remember that reconciling differences can not satisfy everyone completely .
because i do not expect too much , i am not disappointed .
but i know that i must never give up -- that i must never let the greater interest of all the people down , merely because that might be for the moment the easiest personal way out .
i believe that we have been right in the course we have charted .
to abandon our purpose of building a greater , a more stable and a more tolerant america would be to miss the tide and perhaps to miss the port .
i propose to sail ahead .
i feel sure that your hopes and i feel sure that your help are with me .
for to reach a port , we must sail -- sail , not lie at anchor , sail , not drift .

this afternoon i have issued a proclamation calling a special session of the congress to convene on monday , november 15 , 1937 .
i do this in order to give to the congress an opportunity to consider important legislation before the regular session in january and to enable the congress to avoid a lengthy session next year , extending through the summer .
i know that many enemies of democracy will say that it is bad for business , bad for the tranquility of the country , to have a special session -- even one beginning only six weeks before the regular session .
but i have never had sympathy with the point of view that a session of the congress is an unfortunate intrusion of what they call " politics " into our national affairs .
those who do not like democracy want to keep legislators at home .
but the congress is an essential instrument of democratic government , and democratic government can never be considered an intruder into the affairs of a democratic nation .
i shall ask this special session to consider immediately certain important legislation , which my recent trip through the nation convinces me the american people immediately need .
this does not mean that other legislation , to which i am not referring tonight , is not an important ( for ) part of our national well - being .
but other legislation can be more readily discussed at the regular session .
anyone charged with proposing or judging national policies should have first - hand knowledge of the nation as a whole .
that is why again this year i have taken trips to all parts of the country .
last spring i visited the southwest .
this summer i made several trips in the east .
now i am just back from a trip from a trip all the way across the continent , and later this autumn i hope to pay my annual visit to the southeast .
for a president especially it is a duty to think in national terms .
he must think not only of this year but of future years , when someone else will be president .
he must look beyond the average of the prosperity and well - being of the country ( for ) because averages easily cover up danger spots of poverty and instability .
he must not let the country be deceived by a merely temporary prosperity , which depends on wasteful exploitation of resources , which can not last .
he must think not only of keeping us out of war today , but also of keeping us out of war in generations to come .
the kind of prosperity we want is the sound and permanent kind which is not built up temporarily at the expense of ( any ) a section or any group .
and the kind of peace we want is the sound and permanent kind , which is built on the cooperative search for peace by all the nations which want peace .
the other day i was asked to state my outstanding impression gained on this recent trip to the pacific coast and back , and i said that it seemed to me to be the general understanding on the part of the average citizen , understanding of the broad objectives and policies which i have just outlined .
five years of fierce discussion and debate -- five years of information through the radio and the moving picture -- have taken the whole nation to school in the nation 's business .
even those who have most attacked our objectives have , by their very criticism , encouraged the mass of our citizens to think about and understand the issues involved , and , understanding , to approve .
out of that process , we have learned to think as a nation .
and out of that process we have learned to feel ourselves a nation .
as never before in our history , each section of america says to every other section , " thy people shall be my people . "
for most of the country this has been a good year -- better in dollars and cents than for many years -- far better in the soundness of its prosperity . (
and ) everywhere i went i found particular optimism about the good effect on business which is expected from the steady spending by farmers of the largest farm income in many years .
but we have not yet done all that must be done to make this prosperity stable .
the people of the united states were checked in their efforts to prevent future piling up of huge agricultural surpluses and the tumbling prices , which inevitably follow them .
they were checked in their efforts to secure reasonable minimum wages and maximum hours and the end of child labor .
and because they were checked , many groups in many parts of the country still have less purchasing power and a lower standard of living than the nation as a whole can permanently allow .
americans realize these facts .
that is why they ask government not to stop overning simply because prosperity has come back a long way .
they do not look on government as an interloper in their affairs .
on the contrary , they regard it as the most effective form of organized self - help .
sometimes i get bored sitting in washington hearing certain people talk and talk about all that government ought not to do -- people who got all they wanted from government back in the days when the financial institutions and the railroads were being bailed out in 1933 , bailed out by the government .
it is refreshing to go out through the country and feel the common wisdom that the time to repair the roof is when the sun is shining .
they want the financial budget balanced .
but they want the human budget balanced as well .
they want to set up a national economy which balances itself with as little government subsidy as possible , for they realize that persistent subsidies ultimately bankrupt their government .
they are less concerned that every detail be immediately right than they are that the direction be right .
they know that just so long as we are traveling on the right road , it does not make much difference if occasionally we hit a " thank you marm . "
the overwhelming majority of our citizens who live by agriculture are thinking ( very ) clearly how they want government to help them in connection with the production of crops .
they want government help in two ways -- first , in the control of surpluses , and , second , in the proper use of land .
the other day a reporter told me that he had never been able to understand why the government seeks to curtail crop production and , at the same time , to open up new irrigated acres .
he was confusing two totally separate objectives .
crop surplus control relates to the total amount of any major crop grown in the whole nation on all cultivated land , ( good or bad ) good land or poor land -- control by the cooperation of the crop growers and with the help of the government .
land use ( on the other hand ) is a policy of providing each farmer with the best quality and type of land we have , or can make available , for his part in that total production .
adding good new land for diversified crops is offset by abandoning poor land now uneconomically farmed .
the total amount of production largely determines the price of the crop , and , therefore , the difference between comfort and misery for the farmer .
let me give you an example : if we americans were foolish enough to run every shoe factory twenty - four hours a day , seven days a week , we would soon have more shoes than the nation could possibly buy -- a surplus of shoes so great that it would have to be destroyed , or given away , or sold at prices far below the cost of production .
that simple ( law ) illustration , that simple law of supply and demand equally affects the price of all our major crops .
you and i have heard big manufacturers talk about control of production by the farmer as an indefensible " economy of scarcity , " as they call it .
and yet these same manufacturers never hesitate to shut down their own huge plants , throw men out of work , and cut down the purchasing power of the whole community ( communities ) whenever they think that they must adjust their production to an oversupply of the goods they make .
when it is their baby who has the measles , they call it not " an economy of scarcity " but " sound business judgment . "
of course , speaking seriously , what you and i want is such governmental rules of the game that labor and agriculture and industry will all produce a balanced abundance without waste .
so we intend this winter to find a way to prevent four - and - a - half cent cotton and nine cent corn and thirty cent wheat -- with all the disaster those prices mean for all of us -- to prevent those prices from ever coming back again .
to do that , the farmers themselves want to cooperate to build an all - weather farm program so that in the long run prices will be more stable .
they believe this can be done , and the national budget kept out of the red .
and when we have found that way to protect the farmers ' prices from the effects of alternating crop surpluses and crop scarcities , we shall also have found the way to protect the nation 's food supply from the effects of the same fluctuation .
we ought always to have enough food at prices within the reach of the consuming public .
for the consumers in the cities of america , we must find a way to help the farmers to store up in years of plenty enough to avoid hardship in the years of scarcity .
our land use policy is a different thing .
i have just visited much of the work that the national government is doing to stop soil erosion , to save our forests , to prevent floods , to produce electric power for more general use , and to give people a chance to move from poor land ( on ) to better land by irrigating thousands of acres that need only water to provide an opportunity to make a good living .
i saw bare and burned hillsides where only a few years ago great forests were growing .
they are now being planted to young trees , not only to stop erosion , but to provide a lumber supply for the future .
i saw ccc boys and wpa workers building check - dams and small ponds and terraces to raise the water table and make it possible for farms and villages to remain in safety where they now are .
i saw the harnessing of the turbulent missouri , a muddy stream , with the topsoil of many states .
and i saw barges on new channels carrying produce and freight athwart the nation .
let me give you two simple illustrations of why government projects of this type have a national importance for the whole country , and not merely a local importance .
in the boise valley in idaho i saw a district which had been recently irrigated to enormous fertility so that a family can now make a pretty good living from forty acres of its land .
many of the families , who are making good in that valley today , moved there from a thousand miles away .
they came from the dust strip that runs through the middle of the nation all the way from the canadian border to ( mexico ) texas -- a strip which includes large portions of ten states .
that valley in western idaho , therefore , assumes at once a national importance as a second chance for willing farmers .
and , year by year , we propose to add more valleys to take care of thousands of other families who need the same kind of second chance in new green pastures .
the other illustration was at the grand coulee dam in the state of washington .
the engineer in charge told me that almost half of the whole cost of that dam to date had been spent for materials that were manufactured east of the mississippi river , giving employment and wages to thousands of industrial workers in the eastern third of the nation , two thousand miles away .
all of this work needs , of course , a more business - like system of planning , ( and ) a greater foresight than we use today .
and that is why i recommended to the last session of the congress the creation of seven planning regions , in which local people will originate and coordinate recommendations as to the kind of this work ( of this kind ) to be done in their particular regions .
the congress ( will ) , of course , will determine the projects to be selected within the budget limits .
to carry out any twentieth century program , we must give the executive branch of the government twentieth century machinery to work with .
i recognize that democratic processes are necessarily and , i think , rightly slower than dictatorial processes .
but i refuse to believe that democratic processes need be dangerously slow .
for many years we have all known that the executive and administrative departments of the government in washington are a higgledy - piggledy patchwork of duplicate responsibilities and overlapping powers .
the reorganization of this vast government machinery which i proposed to the congress last winter does not conflict with the principle of the democratic process , as some people say .
it only makes that process work more efficiently .
on my recent trip many people have talked to me about the millions of men and women and children who still work at insufficient wages and overlong hours .
american industry has searched the outside world to find new markets -- but it can create on its very doorstep the biggest and most permanent market it has ever ( had ) seen .
it needs the reduction of trade barriers to improve its foreign markets , but it should not overlook the chance to reduce the domestic trade barrier right here -- right away -- without waiting for any treaty .
a few more dollars a week in wages , a better distribution of jobs with a shorter working day will almost overnight make millions of our lowest - paid workers actual buyers of billions of dollars of industrial and farm products .
that increased volume of sales ought to lessen other cost of production so much that even a considerable increase in labor costs can be absorbed without imposing higher prices on the consumer .
i am a firm believer in fully adequate pay for all labor .
but right now i am most greatly concerned in increasing the pay of the lowest - paid labor -- those who are our most numerous consuming group but who today do not make enough to maintain a decent standard of living or to buy the food , and the clothes and the other articles necessary to keep our factories and farms fully running .
i think that farsighted businessmen already understand and agree with this policy .
they agree also that no one section of the country can permanently benefit itself , or the rest of the country , by maintaining standards of wages and hours ( far ) that are far inferior to other sections of the country .
most businessmen , big and little , know that their government neither wants to put them out of business nor to prevent them from earning a decent profit .
in spite of the alarms of a few who seek to regain control ( of ) over american life , most businessmen , big and little , know that their government is trying to make property more secure than ever before by giving every family a real chance to have a property stake in the nation .
whatever danger there may be to the property and profits of the many , if there be any danger , comes not from government 's attitude toward business but from restraints now imposed upon business by private monopolies and financial oligarchies .
the average businessman knows that a high cost of living is a great deterrent to business and that business prosperity depends much upon a low price policy which encourages the widest possible consumption .
as one of the country 's leading economists recently said -- " the continuance of business recovery in the united states depends far more ( up)on business policies , business pricing policies , than it does on anything that may be done , or not done , in washington . "
our competitive system is , of course , not altogether competitive .
anybody who buys any large quantity of manufactured goods knows this , whether it be the government or an individual buyer .
we have anti - trust laws , to be sure , but they have not been adequate to check the growth of many monopolies .
whether or not they might have been ( adequate ) originally adequate , interpretation by the courts and the difficulties and delays of legal procedure have now definitely limited their effectiveness .
we are already studying how to strengthen our anti - trust laws in order to end monopoly -- not to hurt but to free legitimate business of the nation .
i have touched briefly on these important subjects , which , taken together , make a program for the immediate future .
and i know you will realize that to attain it , legislation is necessary .
as we plan today for the creation of ever higher standards of living for the people of the united states , we are aware that our plans may be most seriously affected by events in the world outside our borders .
by a series of trade agreements , we have been attempting to recreate the trade of the world ( which ) that trade of the world that plays so important a part in our domestic prosperity ; but we know that if the world outside our borders falls into the chaos of war , world trade will be completely disrupted .
nor can we view with indifference the destruction of civilized values throughout the world .
we seek peace , not only for our generation but also for the generation of our children .
we seek for them , our children , the continuance of world civilization in order that their american civilization may continue to be invigorated , helped by the achievements of civilized men and women in all the rest of the world .
i want our great democracy to be wise enough to realize that aloofness from war is not promoted by unawareness of war .
in a world of mutual suspicions , peace must be affirmatively reached for .
it can not just be wished for .
and it can not just be waited for .
we have now made known our willingness to attend a conference of the parties to the nine power treaty of 1922 -- the treaty of washington , of which we are one of the original signatories .
the purpose of this conference will be to seek by agreement a solution of the present situation in china .
in efforts to find that solution , it is our purpose to cooperate with the other signatories to this treaty , including china and japan .
such cooperation would be an example of one of the possible paths to follow in our search for means toward peace throughout the whole world .
the development of civilization and of human welfare is based on the acceptance by individuals of certain fundamental decencies in their relations with each other .
and , equally , the development of peace in the world is dependent similarly on the acceptance by nations of certain fundamental decencies in their relations with each other .
ultimately , i hope each nation will accept the fact that violations of these rules of conduct are an injury to the well - being of all nations .
meanwhile , remember that from 1913 to 1921 , i personally was fairly close to world events , and in that period , while i learned much of what to do , i also learned much of what not to do .
the common sense , the intelligence of the people of america agree with my statement that " america hates war .
america hopes for peace .
therefore , america actively engages in the search for peace . "

it is three months since i have talked with the people of this country about our national problems ; but during this period many things have happened , and i am glad to say that the major part of them have greatly helped the well - being of the average citizens .
because , in every step which your government is taking we are thinking in terms of the average of you -- in the old words , " the greatest good to the greatest number " -- we , as reasonable people , can not expect to bring definite benefits to every person or to every occupation or business , or industry or agriculture .
in the same way , no reasonable person can expect that in this short space of time , during which new machinery had to be not only put to work , but first set up , that every locality in every one of the 48 states of the country could share equally and simultaneously in the trend to better times .
the whole picture , however -- the average of the whole territory from coast to coast -- the average of the whole population of 120,000,000 people -- shows to any person willing to look , facts and action of which you and i can be proud .
in the early spring of this year there were actually and proportionately more people out of work in this country than in any other nation in the world .
fair estimates showed 12 or 13 millions unemployed last march .
among those there were , of course , several millions who could be classed as normally unemployed -- people who worked occasionally when they felt like it , and others who preferred not to work at all .
it seems , therefore , fair to say that there were about 10 millions of our citizens who earnestly , and in many cases hungrily , were seeking work and could not get it .
of these , in the short space of a few months , i am convinced that at least 4 millions have been given employment -- or , saying it another way , 40 percent of those seeking work have found it .
that does not mean , my friends , that i am satisfied , or that you are satisfied that our work is ended .
we have a long way to go but we are on the way .
how are we constructing the edifice of recovery -- the temple which , when completed , will no longer be a temple of money - changers or of beggars , but rather a temple dedicated to and maintained for a greater social justice , a greater welfare for america -- the habitation of a sound economic life ?
we are building , stone by stone , the columns which will support that habitation .
those columns are many in number and though , for a moment the progress of one column may disturb the progress on the pillar next to it , the work on all of them must proceed without let or hindrance .
we all know that immediate relief for the unemployed was the first essential of such a structure and that is why i speak first of the fact that three hundred thousand young men have been given employment and are being given employment all through this winter in the civilian conservation corps camps in almost every part of the nation .
so , too , we have , as you know , expended greater sums in cooperation with states and localities for work relief and home relief than ever before -- sums which during the coming winter can not be lessened for the very simple reason that though several million people have gone back to work , the necessities of those who have not yet obtained work is more severe than at this time last year .
then we come to the relief that is being given to those who are in danger of losing their farms or their homes .
new machinery had to be set up for farm credit and for home credit in every one of the thirty - one hundred counties of the united states , and every day that passes is saving homes and farms to hundreds of families .
i have publicly asked that foreclosures on farms and chattels and on homes be delayed until every mortgagor in the country shall have had full opportunity to take advantage of federal credit .
i make the further request which many of you know has already been made through the great federal credit organizations that if there is any family in the united states about to lose its home or about to lose its chattels , that family should telegraph at once either to the farm credit administration or the home owners loan corporation in washington requesting their help .
two other great agencies are in full swing .
the reconstruction finance corporation continues to lend large sums to industry and finance with the definite objective of making easy the extending of credit to industry , commerce and finance .
the program of public works in three months has advanced to this point : out of a total appropriated for public works of three billion three hundred million , one billion eight hundred million has already been allocated to federal projects of all kinds and literally in every part of the united states and work on these is starting forward .
in addition , three hundred millions have been allocated to public works to be carried out by states , municipalities and private organizations , such as those undertaking slum clearance .
the balance of the public works money , nearly all of it intended for state or local projects , waits only on the presentation of proper projects by the states and localities themselves .
washington has the money and is waiting for the proper projects to which to allot it .
another pillar in the making is the agricultural adjustment administration .
i have been amazed by the extraordinary degree of cooperation given to the government by the cotton farmers in the south , the wheat farmers of the west , the tobacco farmers of the southeast , and i am confident that the corn - hog farmers of the middle west will come through in the same magnificent fashion .
the problem we seek to solve had been steadily getting worse for twenty years , but during the last six months we have made more rapid progress than any nation has ever made in a like period of time .
it is true that in july farm commodity prices had been pushed up higher than they are today , but that push came in part from pure speculation by people who could not tell you the difference between wheat and rye , by people who had never seen cotton growing , by people who did not know that hogs were fed on corn -- people who have no real interest in the farmer and his problems .
in spite , however , of the speculative reaction from the speculative advance , it seems to be well established that during the course of the year 1933 the farmers of the united states will receive 33 percent more dollars for what they have produced than they received in the year 1932 .
put in another way , they will receive $ 400 in 1933 , where they received $ 300 the year before .
that , remember , is for the average of the country , for i have reports that some sections are not any better off than they were a year ago .
this applies among the major products , especially to cattle raising and the dairy industry .
we are going after those problems as fast as we can .
i do not hesitate to say , in the simplest , clearest language of which i am capable , that although the prices of many products of the farm have gone up and although many farm families are better off than they were last year , i am not satisfied either with the amount or the extent of the rise , and that it is definitely a part of our policy to increase the rise and to extend it to those products which have as yet felt no benefit .
if we can not do this one way we will do it another .
do it , we will .
standing beside the pillar of the farm -- the a. a.a. -- is the pillar of industry --the n. r.a. its object is to put industry and business workers into employment and to increase their purchasing power through increased wages .
it has abolished child labor .
it has eliminated the sweat shop .
it has ended sixty cents a week paid in some mills and eighty cents a week paid in some mines .
the measure of the growth of this pillar lies in the total figures of reemployment which i have already given you and in the fact that reemployment is continuing and not stopping .
the secret of n. r.a. is cooperation .
that cooperation has been voluntarily given through the signing of the blanket codes and through the signing of specific codes which already include all of the greater industries of the nation .
in the vast majority of cases , in the vast majority of localities -- the n. r.a. has been given support in unstinted measure .
we know that there are chiselers .
at the bottom of every case of criticism and obstruction we have found some selfish interest , some private axe to grind .
ninety percent of complaints come from misconception .
for example , it has been said that n. r.a. has failed to raise the price of wheat and corn and hogs ; that n. r.a. has not loaned enough money for local public works .
of course , n. r.a. has nothing whatsoever to do with the price of farm products , nor with public works .
it has to do only with industrial organization for economic planning to wipe out unfair practices and to create reemployment .
even in the field of business and industry , n. r. a. does not apply to the rural communities or to towns of under twenty - five hundred population , except in so far as those towns contain factories or chain stores which come under a specific code .
it is also true that among the chiselers , to whom i have referred , there are not only the big chiselers but also petty chiselers who seek to make undue profit on untrue statements .
let me cite to you the example of the salesman in a store in a large eastern city who tried to justify the increase in the price of a cotton shirt from one dollar and a half to two dollars and a half by saying to the customer that it was due to the cotton processing tax .
actually in that shirt there was about one pound of cotton and the processing tax amounted to four and a quarter cents on that pound of cotton .
at this point it is only fair that i should give credit to the sixty or seventy million people who live in the cities and larger towns of the nation for their understanding and their willingness to go along with the payment of even these small processing taxes , though they know full well that the proportion of the processing taxes on cotton goods and on food products paid for by city dwellers goes one hundred per cent towards increasing the agricultural income of the farm dwellers of the land .
the last pillar of which i speak is that of the money of the country in the banks of the country .
there are two simple facts .
first , the federal government is about to spend one billion dollars as an immediate loan on the frozen or non - liquid assets of all banks closed since january 1 , 1933 , giving a liberal appraisal to those assets .
this money will be in the hands of the depositors as quickly as it is humanly possible to get it out .
secondly , the government bank deposit insurance on all accounts up to $ 2500 goes into effect on january first .
we are now engaged in seeing to it that on or before that date the banking capital structure will be built up by the government to the point that the banks will be in sound condition when the insurance goes into effect .
finally , i repeat what i have said on many occasions , that ever since last march the definite policy of the government has been to restore commodity price levels .
the object has been the attainment of such a level as will enable agriculture and industry once more to give work to the unemployed .
it has been to make possible the payment of public and private debts more nearly at the price level at which they were incurred .
it has been gradually to restore a balance in the price structure so that farmers may exchange their products for the products of industry on a fairer exchange basis .
it has been and is also the purpose to prevent prices from rising beyond the point necessary to attain these ends .
the permanent welfare and security of every class of our people ultimately depends on our attainment of these purposes .
obviously , and because hundreds of different kinds of crops and industrial occupations in the huge territory that makes up this nation are involved , we can not reach the goal in only a few months .
we may take one year or two years or three years .
no one who considers the plain facts of our situation believes that commodity prices , especially agricultural prices , are high enough yet .
some people are putting the cart before the horse .
they want a permanent revaluation of the dollar first .
it is the government 's policy to restore the price level first .
i would not know , and no one else could tell , just what the permanent valuation of the dollar will be .
to guess at a permanent gold valuation now would certainly require later changes caused by later facts .
when we have restored the price level , we shall seek to establish and maintain a dollar which will not change its purchasing and debt paying power during the succeeding generation .
i said that in my message to the american delegation in london last july .
and i say it now once more .
because of conditions in this country and because of events beyond our control in other parts of the world , it becomes increasingly important to develop and apply the further measures which may be necessary from time to time to control the gold value of our own dollar at home .
our dollar is now altogether too greatly influenced by the accidents of international trade , by the internal policies of other nations and by political disturbance in other continents .
therefore the united states must take firmly in its own hands the control of the gold value of our dollar .
this is necessary in order to prevent dollar disturbances from swinging us away from our ultimate goal , namely , the continued recovery of our commodity prices .
as a further effective means to this end , i am going to establish a government market for gold in the united states .
therefore , under the clearly defined authority of existing law , i am authorizing the reconstruction finance corporation to buy gold newly mined in the united states at prices to be determined from time to time after consultation with the secretary of the treasury and the president .
whenever necessary to the end in view , we shall also buy or sell gold in the world market .
my aim in taking this step is to establish and maintain continuous control .
this is a policy and not an expedient .
it is not to be used merely to offset a temporary fall in prices .
we are thus continuing to move towards a managed currency .
you will recall the dire predictions made last spring by those who did not agree with our common policies of raising prices by direct means .
what actually happened stood out in sharp contrast with those predictions .
government credit is high , prices have risen in part .
doubtless prophets of evil still exist in our midst .
but government credit will be maintained and a sound currency will accompany a rise in the american commodity price level .
i have told you tonight the story of our steady but sure work in building our common recovery .
in my promises to you both before and after march 4th , i made two things plain : first , that i pledged no miracles and , second , that i would do my best .
i thank you for your patience and your faith .
our troubles will not be over tomorrow , but we are on our way and we are headed in the right direction .

it has been several months since i have talked with you concerning the problems of government .
since january , those of us in whom you have vested responsibility have been engaged in the fulfillment of plans and policies which had been widely discussed in previous months .
it seemed to us our duty not only to make the right path clear but also to tread that path .
as we review the achievements of this session of the seventy - third congress , it is made increasingly clear that its task was essentially that of completing and fortifying the work it had begun in march , l933 .
that was no easy task , but the congress was equal to it .
it has been well said that while there were a few exceptions , this congress displayed a greater freedom from mere partisanship than any other peace - time congress since the administration of president washington himself .
the session was distinguished by the extent and variety of legislation enacted and by the intelligence and good will of debate upon these measures .
i mention only a few of the major enactments .
it provided for the readjustment of the debt burden through the corporate and municipal bankruptcy acts and the farm relief act .
it lent a hand to industry by encouraging loans to solvent industries unable to secure adequate help from banking institutions .
it strengthened the integrity of finance through the regulation of securities exchanges .
it provided a rational method of increasing our volume of foreign trade through reciprocal trading agreements .
it strengthened our naval forces to conform with the intentions and permission of existing treaty rights .
it made further advances towards peace in industry through the labor adjustment act .
it supplemented our agricultural policy through measures widely demanded by farmers themselves and intended to avert price destroying surpluses .
it strengthened the hand of the federal government in its attempts to suppress gangster crime .
it took definite steps towards a national housing program through an act which i signed today designed to encourage private capital in the rebuilding of the homes of the nation .
it created a permanent federal body for the just regulation of all forms of communication , including the telephone , the telegraph and the radio .
finally , and i believe most important , it reorganized , simplified and made more fair and just our monetary system , setting up standards and policies adequate to meet the necessities of modern economic life , doing justice to both gold and silver as the metal bases behind the currency of the united states .
in the consistent development of our previous efforts toward the saving and safeguarding of our national life , i have continued to recognize three related steps .
the first was relief , because the primary concern of any government dominated by the humane ideals of democracy is the simple principle that in a land of vast resources no one should be permitted to starve .
relief was and continues to be our first consideration .
it calls for large expenditures and will continue in modified form to do so for a long time to come .
we may as well recognize that fact .
it comes from the paralysis that arose as the after - effect of that unfortunate decade characterized by a mad chase for unearned riches and an unwillingness of leaders in almost every walk of life to look beyond their own schemes and speculations .
in our administration of relief we follow two principles : first , that direct giving shall , wherever possible , be supplemented by provision for useful and remunerative work and , second , that where families in their existing surroundings will in all human probability never find an opportunity for full self - maintenance , happiness and enjoyment , we will try to give them a new chance in new surroundings .
the second step was recovery , and it is sufficient for me to ask each and every one of you to compare the situation in agriculture and in industry today with what it was fifteen months ago .
at the same time we have recognized the necessity of reform and reconstruction --reform because much of our trouble today and in the past few years has been due to a lack of understanding of the elementary principles of justice and fairness by those in whom leadership in business and finance was placed -- reconstruction because new conditions in our economic life as well as old but neglected conditions had to be corrected .
substantial gains well known to all of you have justified our course .
i could cite statistics to you as unanswerable measures of our national progress -- statistics to show the gain in the average weekly pay envelope of workers in the great majority of industries --statistics to show hundreds of thousands reemployed in private industries and other hundreds of thousands given new employment through the expansion of direct and indirect government assistance of many kinds , although , of course , there are those exceptions in professional pursuits whose economic improvement , of necessity , will be delayed .
i also could cite statistics to show the great rise in the value of farm products -- statistics to prove the demand for consumers ' goods , ranging all the way from food and clothing to automobiles and of late to prove the rise in the demand for durable goods -- statistics to cover the great increase in bank deposits and to show the scores of thousands of homes and of farms which have been saved from foreclosure .
but the simplest way for each of you to judge recovery lies in the plain facts of your own individual situation .
are you better off than you were last year ?
are your debts less burdensome ?
is your bank account more secure ?
are your working conditions better ?
is your faith in your own individual future more firmly grounded ?
also , let me put to you another simple question : have you as an individual paid too high a price for these gains ?
plausible self - seekers and theoretical die - hards will tell you of the loss of individual liberty .
answer this question also out of the facts of your own life .
have you lost any of your rights or liberty or constitutional freedom of action and choice ?
turn to the bill of rights of the constitution , which i have solemnly sworn to maintain and under which your freedom rests secure .
read each provision of that bill of rights and ask yourself whether you personally have suffered the impairment of a single jot of these great assurances .
i have no question in my mind as to what your answer will be .
the record is written in the experiences of your own personal lives .
in other words , it is not the overwhelming majority of the farmers or manufacturers or workers who deny the substantial gains of the past year .
the most vociferous of the doubting thomases may be divided roughly into two groups : first , those who seek special political privilege and , second , those who seek special financial privilege .
about a year ago i used as an illustration the 90 percent of the cotton manufacturers of the united states who wanted to do the right thing by their employees and by the public but were prevented from doing so by the 10 percent who undercut them by unfair practices and un - american standards .
it is well for us to remember that humanity is a long way from being perfect and that a selfish minority in every walk of life -- farming , business , finance and even government service itself -- will always continue to think of themselves first and their fellow - being second .
in the working out of a great national program which seeks the primary good of the greater number , it is true that the toes of some people are being stepped on and are going to be stepped on .
but these toes belong to the comparative few who seek to retain or to gain position or riches or both by some short cut which is harmful to the greater good .
in the execution of the powers conferred on it by congress , the administration needs and will tirelessly seek the best ability that the country affords .
public service offers better rewards in the opportunity for service than ever before in our history -- not great salaries , but enough to live on .
in the building of this service there are coming to us men and women with ability and courage from every part of the union .
the days of the seeking of mere party advantage through the misuse of public power are drawing to a close .
we are increasingly demanding and getting devotion to the public service on the part of every member of the administration , high and low .
the program of the past year is definitely in operation and that operation month by month is being made to fit into the web of old and new conditions .
this process of evolution is well illustrated by the constant changes in detailed organization and method going on in the national recovery administration .
with every passing month we are making strides in the orderly handling of the relationship between employees and employers .
conditions differ , of course , in almost every part of the country and in almost every industry .
temporary methods of adjustment are being replaced by more permanent machinery and , i am glad to say , by a growing recognition on the part of employers and employees of the desirability of maintaining fair relationships all around .
so also , while almost everybody has recognized the tremendous strides in the elimination of child labor , in the payment of not less than fair minimum wages and in the shortening of hours , we are still feeling our way in solving problems which relate to self - government in industry , especially where such self - government tends to eliminate the fair operation of competition .
in this same process of evolution we are keeping before us the objectives of protecting on the one hand industry against chiselers within its own ranks , and on the other hand the consumer through the maintenance of reasonable competition for the prevention of the unfair sky - rocketing of retail prices .
but , in addition to this our immediate task , we must still look to the larger future .
i have pointed out to the congress that we are seeking to find the way once more to well - known , long - established but to some degree forgotten ideals and values .
we seek the security of the men , women and children of the nation .
that security involves added means of providing better homes for the people of the nation .
that is the first principle of our future program .
the second is to plan the use of land and water resources of this country to the end that the means of livelihood of our citizens may be more adequate to meet their daily needs .
and , finally , the third principle is to use the agencies of government to assist in the establishment of means to provide sound and adequate protection against the vicissitudes of modern life -- in other words , social insurance .
later in the year i hope to talk with you more fully about these plans .
a few timid people , who fear progress , will try to give you new and strange names for what we are doing .
sometimes they will call it " fascism " , sometimes " communism " , sometimes " regimentation " , sometimes " socialism " .
but , in so doing , they are trying to make very complex and theoretical something that is really very simple and very practical .
i believe in practical explanations and in practical policies .
i believe that what we are doing today is a necessary fulfillment of what americans have always been doing -- a fulfillment of old and tested american ideals .
let me give you a simple illustration : while i am away from washington this summer , a long needed renovation of and addition to our white house office building is to be started .
the architects have planned a few new rooms built into the present all too small one - story structure .
we are going to include in this addition and in this renovation modern electric wiring and modern plumbing and modern means of keeping the offices cool in the hot washington summers .
but the structural lines of the old executive office building will remain .
the artistic lines of the white house buildings were the creation of master builders when our republic was young .
the simplicity and the strength of the structure remain in the face of every modern test .
but within this magnificent pattern , the necessities of modern government business require constant reorganization and rebuilding .
if i were to listen to the arguments of some prophets of calamity who are talking these days , i should hesitate to make these alterations .
i should fear that while i am away for a few weeks the architects might build some strange new gothic tower or a factory building or perhaps a replica of the kremlin or of the potsdam palace .
but i have no such fears .
the architects and builders are men of common sense and of artistic american tastes .
they know that the principles of harmony and of necessity itself require that the building of the new structure shall blend with the essential lines of the old .
it is this combination of the old and the new that marks orderly peaceful progress -- not only in building buildings but in building government itself .
our new structure is a part of and a fulfillment of the old .
all that we do seeks to fulfill the historic traditions of the american people .
other nations may sacrifice democracy for the transitory stimulation of old and discredited autocracies .
we are restoring confidence and well - being under the rule of the people themselves .
we remain , as john marshall said a century ago , " emphatically and truly , a government of the people . "
our government " in form and in substance ... emanates from them .
its powers are granted by them , and are to be exercised directly on them , and for their benefits . "
before i close , i want to tell you of the interest and pleasure with which i look forward to the trip on which i hope to start in a few days .
it is a good thing for everyone who can possibly do so to get away at least once a year for a change of scene .
i do not want to get into the position of not being able to see the forest because of the thickness of the trees .
i hope to visit our fellow americans in puerto rico , in the virgin islands , in the canal zone and in hawaii .
and , incidentally , it will give me an opportunity to exchange a friendly word of greeting to the presidents of our sister republics : haiti , colombia and panama .
after four weeks on board ship , i plan to land at a port in our pacific northwest , and then will come the best part of the whole trip , for i am hoping to inspect a number of our new great national projects on the columbia , missouri and mississippi rivers , to see some of our national parks and , incidentally , to learn much of actual conditions during the trip across the continent back to washington .
while i was in france during the war our boys used to call the united states " god 's country " .
let us make it and keep it " god 's country " .

mr. vice president , and mr. speaker , and members of the senate and house of representatives : 
 yesterday , december 7 , 1941 -- a date which will live in infamy -- the united states of america was suddenly and deliberately attacked by naval and air forces of the empire of japan .
the united states was at peace with that nation and , at the solicitation of japan , was still in conversation with its government and its emperor looking toward the maintenance of peace in the pacific .
indeed , one hour after japanese air squadrons had commenced bombing in the american island of oahu , the japanese ambassador to the united states and his colleague delivered to our secretary of state a formal reply to a recent american message .
and while this reply stated that it seemed useless to continue the existing diplomatic negotiations , it contained no threat or hint of war or of armed attack .
it will be recorded that the distance of hawaii from japan makes it obvious that the attack was deliberately planned many days or even weeks ago .
during the intervening time the japanese government has deliberately sought to deceive the united states by false statements and expressions of hope for continued peace .
the attack yesterday on the hawaiian islands has caused severe damage to american naval and military forces .
i regret to tell you that very many american lives have been lost .
in addition american ships have been reported torpedoed on the high seas between san francisco and honolulu .
yesterday the japanese government also launched an attack against malaya .
last night japanese forces attacked hong kong .
last night japanese forces attacked guam .
last night japanese forces attacked the philippine islands .
last night the japanese attacked wake island .
and this morning the japanese attacked midway island .
japan has , therefore , undertaken a surprise offensive extending throughout the pacific area .
the facts of yesterday and today speak for themselves .
the people of the united states have already formed their opinions and well understand the implications to the very life and safety of our nation .
as commander in chief of the army and navy i have directed that all measures be taken for our defense .
but always will our whole nation remember the character of the onslaught against us .
no matter how long it may take us to overcome this premeditated invasion , the american people in their righteous might will win through to absolute victory .
i believe that i interpret the will of the congress and of the people when i assert that we will not only defend ourselves to the uttermost but will make it very certain that this form of treachery shall never again endanger us .
hostilities exist .
there is no blinking at the fact that our people , our territory , and our interests are in grave danger .
with confidence in our armed forces -- with the unbounding determination of our people -- we will gain the inevitable triumph , so help us god .
i ask that the congress declare that since the unprovoked and dastardly attack by japan on sunday , december 7 , 1941 , a state of war has existed between the united states and the japanese empire .

my fellow americans : 
 over a year and a half ago i said this to the congress : " the militarists in berlin , and rome and tokyo started this war , but the massed angered forces of common humanity will finish it . "
today that prophecy is in the process of being fulfilled .
the massed , angered forces of common humanity are on the march .
they are going forward -- on the russian front , in the vast pacific area , and into europe -- converging upon their ultimate objectives : berlin and tokyo .
i think the first crack in the axis has come .
the criminal , corrupt fascist regime in italy is going to pieces .
the pirate philosophy of the fascists and the nazis can not stand adversity .
the military superiority of the united nations -- on sea and land , and in the air -- has been applied in the right place and at the right time .
hitler refused to send sufficient help to save mussolini .
in fact , hitler 's troops in sicily stole the italians ' motor equipment , leaving italian soldiers so stranded that they had no choice but to surrender .
once again the germans betrayed their italian allies , as they had done time and time again on the russian front and in the long retreat from egypt , through libya and tripoli , to the final surrender in tunisia .
and so mussolini came to the reluctant conclusion that the " jig was up " ; he could see the shadow of the long arm of justice .
but he and his fascist gang will be brought to book , and punished for their crimes against humanity .
no criminal will be allowed to escape by the expedient of " resignation . "
so our terms to italy are still the same as our terms to germany and japan --"unconditional surrender . "
we will have no truck with fascism in any way , in any shape or manner .
we will permit no vestige of fascism to remain .
eventually italy will reconstitute herself .
it will be the people of italy who will do that , choosing their own government in accordance with the basic democratic principles of liberty and equality .
in the meantime , the united nations will not follow the pattern set by mussolini and hitler and the japanese for the treatment of occupied countries --the pattern of pillage and starvation .
we are already helping the italian people in sicily .
with their cordial cooperation , we are establishing and maintaining security and order -- we are dissolving the organizations which have kept them under fascist tyranny -- we are providing them with the necessities of life until the time comes when they can fully provide for themselves .
indeed , the people in sicily today are rejoicing in the fact that for the first time in years they are permitted to enjoy the fruits of their own labor(s ) -- they can eat what they themselves grow , instead of having it stolen from them by the fascists and the nazis .
in every country conquered by the nazis and the fascists , or the japanese militarists , the people have been reduced to the status of slaves or chattels .
it is our determination to restore these conquered peoples to the dignity of human beings , masters of their own fate , entitled to freedom of speech , freedom of religion , freedom from want , and freedom from fear .
we have started to make good on that promise .
i am sorry if i step on the toes of those americans who , playing party politics at home , call that kind of foreign policy " crazy altruism " and " starry - eyed dreaming . "
meanwhile , the war in sicily and italy goes on .
it must go on , and will go on , until the italian people realize the futility of continuing to fight in a lost cause -- a cause to which the people of italy never gave their wholehearted approval and support .
it 's a little over a year since we planned the north african campaign .
it is six months since we planned the sicilian campaign .
i confess that i am of an impatient disposition , but i think that i understand and that most people understand the amount of time necessary to prepare for any major military or naval operation .
we can not just pick up the telephone and order a new campaign to start the next week .
for example , behind the invasion forces in ( of ) north africa , the invasion forces that went out of north africa , were thousands of ships and planes guarding the long , perilous sea lanes , carrying the men , carrying the equipment and the supplies to the point of attack .
and behind all these were the railroad lines and the highways here back home that carried the men and the munitions to the ports of embarkation -- there were the factories and the mines and the farms here back home that turned out the materials -- there were the training camps here back home where the men learned how to perform the strange and difficult and dangerous tasks which were to meet them on the beaches and in the deserts and in the mountains .
all this had to be repeated , first in north africa and then in ( in the attack on ) sicily .
here the factor -- in sicily -- the factor of air attack was added -- for we could use north africa as the base for softening up the landing places and lines of defense in sicily , and the lines of supply in italy .
it is interesting for us to realize that every flying fortress that bombed harbor installations at , for example , naples , bombed it from its base in north africa , required 1,110 gallons of gasoline for each single mission , and that this is the equal of about 375 " a " ration tickets -- enough gas to drive your car five times across this continent .
you will better understand your part in the war -- and what gasoline rationing means -- if you multiply this by the gasoline needs of thousands of planes and hundreds of thousands of jeeps , and trucks and tanks that are now serving overseas .
i think that the personal convenience of the individual , or the individual family back home here in the united states will appear somewhat less important when i tell you that the initial assault force on sicily involved 3,000 ships which carried 160,000 men -- americans , british , canadians and french -- together with 14,000 vehicles , 600 tanks , and 1,800 guns .
and this initial force was followed every day and every night by thousands of reinforcements .
the meticulous care with which the operation in sicily was planned has paid dividends . (
for ) our casualties in men , in ships and material have been low -- in fact , far below our estimate .
and all of us are proud of the superb skill and courage of the officers and men who have conducted and are conducting those ( this ) operations .
the toughest resistance developed on the front of the british eighth army , which included the canadians .
but that is no new experience for that magnificent fighting force which has made the germans pay a heavy price for each hour of delay in the final victory .
the american seventh army , after a stormy landing on the exposed beaches of southern sicily , swept with record speed across the island into the capital at palermo .
for many of our troops this was their first battle experience , but they have carried themselves like veterans .
and we must give credit for the coordination of the diverse forces in the field , and for the planning of the whole campaign , to the wise and skillful leadership of general eisenhower .
admiral cunningham , general alexander and sir marshal tedder have been towers of strength in handling the complex details of naval and ground and air activities .
you have heard some people say that the british and the americans can never get along well together -- you have heard some people say that the army and the navy and the air forces can never get along well together -- that real cooperation between them is impossible .
tunisia and sicily have given the lie , once and for all , to these narrow - minded prejudices .
the dauntless fighting ( spirit ) of the british people in this war has been expressed in the historic words and deeds of winston churchill -- and the world knows how the american people feel about him .
ahead of us are much bigger fights .
we and our allies will go into them as we went into sicily - together .
and we shall carry on together .
today our production of ships is almost unbelievable .
this year we are producing over nineteen million tons of merchant shipping and next year our production will be over twenty - one million tons .
and in addition to our shipments across the atlantic , we must realize that in this war we are operating in the aleutians , in the distant parts of the southwest pacific , in india , and off the shores of south america .
for several months we have been losing fewer ships by sinkings , and we have been destroying more and more u - boats .
we hope this will continue .
but we can not be sure .
we must not lower our guard for one single instant .
an example -- a tangible result of our great increase in merchant shipping -- which i think will be good news to civilians at home -- is that tonight we are able to terminate the rationing of coffee .
and we also expect ( that ) within a short time we shall get greatly increased allowances of sugar .
those few americans who grouse and complain about the inconveniences of life here in the united states should learn some lessons from the civilian populations of our allies -- britain , and china , and russia -- and of all the lands occupied by our common enemy ( enemies ) .
the heaviest and most decisive fighting today is going on in russia .
i am glad that the british and we have been able to contribute somewhat to the great striking power of the russian armies .
in 1941 - 1942 the russians were able to retire without breaking , to move many of their war plants from western russia far into the interior , to stand together with complete unanimity in the defense of their homeland .
the success of the russian armies has shown that it is dangerous to make prophecies about them -- a fact which has been forcibly brought home to that mystic master of strategic intuition , herr hitler .
the short - lived german offensive , launched early this month , was a desperate attempt to bolster the morale of the german people .
the russians were not fooled by this .
they went ahead with their own plans for attack -- plans which coordinate with the whole united nations ' offensive strategy .
the world has never seen greater devotion , determination and self - sacrifice than have been displayed by the russian people and their armies , under the leadership of marshal joseph stalin .
with a nation which in saving itself is thereby helping to save all the world from the nazi menace , this country of ours should always be glad to be a good neighbor and a sincere friend in the world of the future .
in the pacific , we are pushing the japs around from the aleutians to new guinea .
there too we have taken the initiative -- and we are not going to let go of it .
it becomes clearer and clearer that the attrition , the whittling down process against the japanese is working .
the japs have lost more planes and more ships than they have been able to replace .
the continuous and energetic prosecution of the war of attrition will drive the japs back from their over - extended line running from burma ( and siam ) and the straits settlement and siam through the netherlands indies to eastern new guinea and the solomons .
and we have good reason to believe that their shipping and their air power can not support such outposts .
our naval and land and air strength in the pacific is constantly growing .
and if the japanese are basing their future plans for the pacific on a long period in which they will be permitted to consolidate and exploit their conquered resources , they had better start revising their plans now .
i give that to them merely as a helpful suggestion .
we are delivering planes and vital war supplies for the heroic armies of generalissimo chiang sai - shek , and we must do more at all costs .
our air supply line from india to china across enemy territory continues despite attempted japanese interference .
we have seized the initiative from the japanese in the air over burma and now we enjoy superiority .
we are bombing japanese communications , supply dumps , and bases in china , in indo - china , in ( and ) burma .
but we are still far from our main objectives in the war against japan .
let us remember , however , how far we were a year ago from any of our objectives in the european theatre .
we are pushing forward to occupation of positions which in time will enable us to attack the japanese islands themselves from the north , from the south , from the east , and from the west .
you have heard it said that while we are succeeding greatly on the fighting front , we are failing miserably on the home front .
i think this is another of those immaturities -- a false slogan easy to state but untrue in the essential facts .
for the longer this war goes on the clearer it becomes that no one can draw a blue pencil down the middle of a page and call one side " the fighting front " and the other side " the home front . "
for the two of them are inexorably tied together .
every combat division , every naval task force , every squadron of fighting planes is dependent for its equipment and ammunition and fuel and food , as indeed it is for its manpower , dependent on the american people in civilian clothes in the offices and in the factories and on the farms at home .
the same kind of careful planning that gained victory in north africa and sicily is required , if we are to make victory an enduring reality and do our share in building the kind of peaceful world that ( which ) will justify the sacrifices made in this war .
the united nations are substantially agreed on the general objectives for the post - war world .
they are also agreed that this is not the time to engage in an international discussion of all the terms of peace and all the details of the future .
let us win the war first .
we must not relax our pressure on the enemy by taking time out to define every boundary and settle every political controversy in every part of the world .
the important thing -- the all - important thing now is to get on with the war -- and to win it .
while concentrating on military victory , we are not neglecting the planning of the things to come , the freedoms which we know will make for more decency and greater justice throughout the world .
among many other things we are , today , laying plans for the return to civilian life of our gallant men and women in the armed services .
they must not be demobilized into an environment of inflation and unemployment , to a place on a bread line , or on a corner selling apples .
we must , this time , have plans ready -- instead of waiting to do a hasty , inefficient , and ill - considered job at the last moment .
i have assured our men in the armed forces that the american people would not let them down when the war is won .
i hope that the congress will help in carrying out this assurance , for obviously the executive branch of the government can not do it alone .
may the congress do its duty in this regard .
the american people will insist on fulfilling this american obligation to the men and women in the armed forces who are winning this war for us .
of course , the returning soldier and sailor and marine are a part of the problem of demobilizing the rest of the millions of americans who have been ( working and ) living in a war economy since 1941 .
that larger objective of reconverting wartime america to a peacetime basis is one for which your government is laying plans to be submitted to the congress for action .
but the members of the armed forces have been compelled to make greater economic sacrifice and every other kind of sacrifice than the rest of us , and they are entitled to definite action to help take care of their special problems .
the least to which they are entitled , it seems to me , is something like this : 
 first ( 1 . )
mustering - out pay to every member of the armed forces and merchant marine when he or she is honorably discharged , mustering - out pay large enough in each case to cover a reasonable period of time between his discharge and the finding of a new job .
secondly ( 2 . )
in case no job is found after diligent search , then unemployment insurance if the individual registers with the united states employment service .
third ( 3 . )
an opportunity for members of the armed services to get further education or trade training at the cost of the government .
fourth ( 4 . )
allowance of credit to all members of the armed forces , under unemployment compensation and federal old - age and survivors ' insurance , for their period of service .
for these purposes they ought to ( should ) be treated as if they had continued their employment in private industry .
fifth ( 5 . )
improved and liberalized provisions for hospitalization , for rehabilitation , for ( and ) medical care of disabled members of the armed forces and the merchant marine .
and finally ( 6 . ) ,
sufficient pensions for disabled members of the armed forces .
your government is drawing up other serious , constructive plans for certain immediate forward moves .
they concern food , manpower , and other domestic problems that ( but they ) tie in with our armed forces .
within a few weeks i shall speak with you again in regard to definite actions to be taken by the executive branch of the government , together with ( and ) specific recommendations for new legislation by the congress .
all our calculations for the future , however , must be based on clear understanding of the problems involved .
and that can be gained only by straight thinking -- not guess work , not ( or ) political manipulation .
i confess that i myself am sometimes bewildered by conflicting statements that i see in the press .
one day i read an " authoritative " statement that we will ( shall ) win the war this year , 1943 -- and the next day comes another statement equally " authoritative , " that the war will still be going on in 1949 .
of course , both extremes -- of optimism and pessimism -- are wrong .
the length of the war will depend upon the uninterrupted continuance of all - out effort on the fighting fronts and here at home , and that ( the ) effort is all one .
the american soldier does not like the necessity of waging war .
and yet -- if he lays off for a ( one ) single instant he may lose his own life and sacrifice the lives of his comrades .
by the same token -- a worker here at home may not like the driving , wartime conditions under which he has to work and ( or ) live .
and yet -- if he gets complacent or indifferent and slacks on his job , he too may sacrifice the lives of american soldiers and contribute to the loss of an important battle .
the next time anyone says to you that this war is " in the bag , " or says ( and ) " it 's all over but the shouting , " you should ask him these questions : 
 " are you working full time on your job ? "
" are you growing all the food you can ? "
" are you buying your limit of war bonds ? "
" are you loyally and cheerfully cooperating with your government in preventing inflation and profiteering , and in making rationing work with fairness to all ? "
" because -- if your answer is ' no ' -- then the war is going to last a lot longer than you think .
the plans we made for the knocking out of mussolini and his gang have largely succeeded .
but we still have to knock out hitler and his gang , and tojo and his gang .
no one of us pretends that this will be an easy matter .
we still have to defeat hitler and tojo on their own home grounds .
but this will require a far greater concentration of our national energy and our ingenuity and our skill .
it is not too much to say that we must pour into this war the entire strength and intelligence and will power of the united states .
we are a great nation -- a rich nation -- but we are not so great or so rich that we can afford to waste our substance or the lives or our men by relaxing along the way .
we shall not settle for less than total victory .
that is the determination of every american on the fighting fronts .
that must be , and will be , the determination of every american here at home .

after the adjournment of the historical special session of the congress five weeks ago i purposely refrained from addressing you for two very good reasons .
first , i think that we all wanted the opportunity of a little quiet thought to examine and assimilate in a mental picture the crowding events of the hundred days which had been devoted to the starting of the wheels of the new deal .
secondly , i wanted a few weeks in which to set up the new administrative organization and to see the first fruits of our careful planning .
i think it will interest you if i set forth the fundamentals of this planning for national recovery ; and this i am very certain will make it abundantly clear to you that all of the proposals and all of the legislation since the fourth day of march have not been just a collection of haphazard schemes but rather the orderly component parts of a connected and logical whole .
long before inauguration day i became convinced that individual effort and local effort and even disjointed federal effort had failed and of necessity would fail and , therefore , that a rounded leadership by the federal government had become a necessity both of theory and of fact .
such leadership , however , had its beginning in preserving and strengthening the credit of the united states government , because without that no leadership was a possibility .
for years the government had not lived within its income .
the immediate task was to bring our regular expenses within our revenues .
that has been done .
it may seem inconsistent for a government to cut down its regular expenses and at the same time to borrow and to spend billions for an emergency .
but it is not inconsistent because a large portion of the emergency money has been paid out in the form of sound loans which will be repaid to the treasury over a period of years ; and to cover the rest of the emergency money we have imposed taxes to pay the interest and the installments on that part of the debt .
so you will see that we have kept our credit good .
we have built a granite foundation in a period of confusion .
that foundation of the federal credit stands there broad and sure .
it is the base of the whole recovery plan .
then came the part of the problem that concerned the credit of the individual citizens themselves .
you and i know of the banking crisis and of the great danger to the savings of our people .
on march sixth every national bank was closed .
one month later 90 per cent of the deposits in the national banks had been made available to the depositors .
today only about 5 per cent of the deposits in national banks are still tied up .
the condition relating to state banks , while not quite so good on a percentage basis , is shoving a steady reduction in the total of frozen deposits -- a result much better than we had expected three months ago .
the problem of the credit of the individual was made more difficult because of another fact .
the dollar was a different dollar from the one with which the average debt had been incurred .
for this reason large numbers of people were actually losing possession of and title to their farms and homes .
all of you know the financial steps which have been taken to correct this inequality .
in addition the home loan act , the farm loan act and the bankruptcy act were passed .
it was a vital necessity to restore purchasing power by reducing the debt and interest charges upon our people , but while we were helping people to save their credit it was at the same time absolutely essential to do something about the physical needs of hundreds of thousands who were in dire straits at that very moment .
municipal and state aid were being stretched to the limit .
we appropriated half a billion dollars to supplement their efforts and in addition , as you know , we have put 300,000 young men into practical and useful work in our forests and to prevent flood and soil erosion .
the wages they earn are going in greater part to the support of the nearly one million people who constitute their families .
in this same classification we can properly place the great public works program running to a total of over three billion dollars -- to be used for highways and ships and flood prevention and inland navigation and thousands of self - sustaining state and municipal improvements .
two points should be made clear in the allotting and administration of these projects -- first , we are using the utmost care to choose labor creating quick - acting , useful projects , avoiding the smell of the pork barrel ; and secondly , we are hoping that at least half of the money will come back to the government from projects which will pay for themselves over a period of years .
thus far i have spoken primarily of the foundation stones -- the measures that were necessary to re - establish credit and to head people in the opposite direction by preventing distress and providing as much work as possible through governmental agencies .
now i come to the links which will build us a more lasting prosperity .
i have said that we can not attain that in a nation half boom and half broke .
if all of our people have work and fair wages and fair profits , they can buy the products of their neighbors and business is good .
but if you take away the wages and the profits of half of them , business is only half as good .
it does n't help much if the fortunate half is very prosperous -- the best way is for everybody to be reasonably prosperous .
for many years the two great barriers to a normal prosperity have been low farm prices and the creeping paralysis of unemployment .
these factors have cut the purchasing power of the country in half .
i promised action .
congress did its part when it passed the farm and the industrial recovery acts .
today we are putting these two acts to work and they will work if people understand their plain objectives .
first , the farm act : it is based on the fact that the purchasing power of nearly half our population depends on adequate prices for farm products .
we have been producing more of some crops than we consume or can sell in a depressed world market .
the cure is not to produce so much .
without our help the farmers can not get together and cut production , and the farm bill gives them a method of bringing their production down to a reasonable level and of obtaining reasonable prices for their crops .
i have clearly stated that this method is in a sense experimental , but so far as we have gone we have reason to believe that it will produce good results .
it is obvious that if we can greatly increase the purchasing power of the tens of millions of our people who make a living from farming and the distribution of farm crops , we will greatly increase the consumption of those goods which are turned out by industry .
that brings me to the final step -- bringing back industry along sound lines .
last autumn , on several occasions , i expressed my faith that we can make possible by democratic self - discipline in industry general increases in wages and shortening of hours sufficient to enable industry to pay its own workers enough to let those workers buy and use the things that their labor produces .
this can be done only if we permit and encourage cooperative action in industry because it is obvious that without united action a few selfish men in each competitive group will pay starvation wages and insist on long hours of work .
others in that group must either follow suit or close up shop .
we have seen the result of action of that kind in the continuing descent into the economic hell of the past four years .
there is a clear way to reverse that process : if all employers in each competitive group agree to pay their workers the same wages -- reasonable wages -- and require the same hours -- reasonable hours -- then higher wages and shorter hours will hurt no employer .
moreover , such action is better for the employer than unemployment and low wages , because it makes more buyers for his product .
that is the simple idea which is the very heart of the industrial recovery act .
on the basis of this simple principle of everybody doing things together , we are starting out on this nationwide attack on unemployment .
it will succeed if our people understand it -- in the big industries , in the little shops , in the great cities and in the small villages .
there is nothing complicated about it and there is nothing particularly new in the principle .
it goes back to the basic idea of society and of the nation itself that people acting in a group can accomplish things which no individual acting alone could even hope to bring about .
here is an example .
in the cotton textile code and in other agreements already signed , child labor has been abolished .
that makes me personally happier than any other one thing with which i have been connected since i came to washington .
in the textile industry -- an industry which came to me spontaneously and with a splendid cooperation as soon as the recovery act was signed , -- child labor was an old evil .
but no employer acting alone was able to wipe it out .
if one employer tried it , or if one state tried it , the costs of operation rose so high that it was impossible to compete with the employers or states which had failed to act .
the moment the recovery act was passed , this monstrous thing which neither opinion nor law could reach through years of effort went out in a flash .
as a british editorial put it , we did more under a code in one day than they in england had been able to do under the common law in eighty - five years of effort .
i use this incident , my friends , not to boast of what has already been done but to point the way to you for even greater cooperative efforts this summer and autumn .
we are not going through another winter like the last .
i doubt if ever any people so bravely and cheerfully endured a season half so bitter .
we can not ask america to continue to face such needless hardships .
it is time for courageous action , and the recovery bill gives us the means to conquer unemployment with exactly the same weapon that we have used to strike down child labor .
the proposition is simply this : 
 if all employers will act together to shorten hours and raise wages we can put people back to work .
no employer will suffer , because the relative level of competitive cost will advance by the same amount for all .
but if any considerable group should lag or shirk , this great opportunity will pass us by and we will go into another desperate winter .
this must not happen .
we have sent out to all employers an agreement which is the result of weeks of consultation .
this agreement checks against the voluntary codes of nearly all the large industries which have already been submitted .
this blanket agreement carries the unanimous approval of the three boards which i have appointed to advise in this , boards representing the great leaders in labor , in industry and in social service .
the agreement has already brought a flood of approval from every state , and from so wide a cross - section of the common calling of industry that i know it is fair for all .
it is a plan --deliberate , reasonable and just -- intended to put into effect at once the most important of the broad principles which are being established , industry by industry , through codes .
naturally , it takes a good deal of organizing and a great many hearings and many months , to get these codes perfected and signed , and we can not wait for all of them to go through .
the blanket agreements , however , which i am sending to every employer will start the wheels turning now , and not six months from now .
there are , of course , men , a few of them who might thwart this great common purpose by seeking selfish advantage .
there are adequate penalties in the law , but i am now asking the cooperation that comes from opinion and from conscience .
these are the only instruments we shall use in this great summer offensive against unemployment .
but we shall use them to the limit to protect the willing from the laggard and to make the plan succeed .
in war , in the gloom of night attack , soldiers wear a bright badge on their shoulders to be sure that comrades do not fire on comrades .
on that principle , those who cooperate in this program must know each other at a glance .
that is why we have provided a badge of honor for this purpose , a simple design with a legend . "
we do our part , " and i ask that all those who join with me shall display that badge prominently .
it is essential to our purpose .
already all the great , basic industries have come forward willingly with proposed codes , and in these codes they accept the principles leading to mass reemployment .
but , important as is this heartening demonstration , the richest field for results is among the small employers , those whose contribution will give new work for from one to ten people .
these smaller employers are indeed a vital part of the backbone of the country , and the success of our plans lies largely in their hands .
already the telegrams and letters are pouring into the white house --messages from employers who ask that their names be placed on this special roll of honor .
they represent great corporations and companies , and partnerships and individuals .
i ask that even before the dates set in the agreements which we have sent out , the employers of the country who have not already done so -- the big fellows and the little fellows -- shall at once write or telegraph to me personally at the white house , expressing their intention of going through with the plan .
and it is my purpose to keep posted in the post office of every town , a roll of honor of all those who join with me .
i want to take this occasion to say to the twenty - four governors who are now in conference in san francisco , that nothing thus far has helped in strengthening this great movement more than their resolutions adopted at the very outset of their meeting , giving this plan their instant and unanimous approval , and pledging to support it in their states .
to the men and women whose lives have been darkened by the fact or the fear of unemployment , i am justified in saying a word of encouragement because the codes and the agreements already approved , or about to be passed upon , prove that the plan does raise wages , and that it does put people back to work .
you can look on every employer who adopts the plan as one who is doing his part , and those employers deserve well of everyone who works for a living .
it will be clear to you , as it is to me , that while the shirking employer may undersell his competitor , the saving he thus makes is made at the expense of his country 's welfare .
while we are making this great common effort there should be no discord and dispute .
this is no time to cavil or to question the standard set by this universal agreement .
it is time for patience and understanding and cooperation .
the workers of this country have rights under this law which can not be taken from them , and nobody will be permitted to whittle them away , but , on the other hand , no aggression is now necessary to attain those rights .
the whole country will be united to get them for you .
the principle that applies to the employers applies to the workers as well , and i ask you workers to cooperate in the same spirit .
when andrew jackson , " old hickory , " died , someone asked , " will he go to heaven ? "
and the answer was , " he will if he wants to . "
if i am asked whether the american people will pull themselves out of this depression , i answer , " they will if they want to . "
the essence of the plan is a universal limitation of hours of work per week for any individual by common consent , and a universal payment of wages above a minimum , also by common consent .
i can not guarantee the success of this nationwide plan , but the people of this country can guarantee its success .
i have no faith in " cure - alls " but i believe that we can greatly influence economic forces .
i have no sympathy with the professional economists who insist that things must run their course and that human agencies can have no influence on economic ills .
one reason is that i happen to know that professional economists have changed their definition of economic laws every five or ten years for a very long time , but i do have faith , and retain faith , in the strength of common purpose , and in the strength of unified action taken by the american people .
that is why i am describing to you the simple purposes and the solid foundations upon which our program of recovery is built .
that is why i am asking the employers of the nation to sign this common covenant with me -- to sign it in the name of patriotism and humanity .
that is why i am asking the workers to go along with us in a spirit of understanding and of helpfulness .

my friends : 
 at this moment of sadness throughout most of the world , i want to talk with you about a number of subjects that directly affect the future of the united states .
we are shocked by the almost incredible eyewitness stories that come to us , stories of what is happening at this moment to the civilian populations of norway and holland and belgium and luxembourg and france .
i think it is right on this sabbath evening that i should say a word in behalf of women and children and old men who need help -- immediate help in their present distress -- help from us across the seas , help from us who are still free to give it .
tonight over the once peaceful roads of belgium and france millions are now moving , running from their homes to escape bombs and shells and fire and machine gunning , without shelter , and almost wholly without food .
they stumble on , knowing not where the end of the road will be .
i ( remind ) speak to you of these people because each one of you that is listening to me tonight has a way of helping them .
the american red cross ( which ) that represents each of us , is rushing food and clothing and medical supplies to these destitute civilian millions .
please -- i beg you -- please give according to your means to your nearest red cross chapter , give as generously as you can .
i ask this in the name of our common humanity .
let us sit down ( again ) , together again , you and i , to consider our own pressing problems that confront us .
there are many among us who in the past closed their eyes to events abroad --because they believed in utter good faith what some of their fellow americans told them -- that what was taking place in europe was none of our business ; that no matter what happened over there , the united states could always pursue its peaceful and unique course in the world .
there are many among us who closed their eyes , from lack of interest or lack of knowledge ; honestly and sincerely thinking that the many hundreds of miles of salt water made the american hemisphere so remote that the people of north and central and south america could go on living in the midst of their vast resources without reference to , or danger from , other continents of the world .
there are some among us who were persuaded by minority groups that we could maintain our physical safety by retiring within our continental boundaries -- the atlantic on the east , the pacific on the west , canada on the north and mexico on the south .
i illustrated the futility -- the impossibility -- of that idea in my message to the congress last week .
obviously , a defense policy based on that is merely to invite future attack .
and , finally , there are a few among us who have deliberately and consciously closed their eyes because they were determined to be opposed to their government , its foreign policy and every other policy , to be partisan , and to believe that anything that the government did was wholly wrong .
to those who have closed their eyes for any of these many reasons , to those who would not admit the possibility of the approaching storm -- to all of them the past two weeks have meant the shattering of many illusions .
they have lost the illusion that we are remote and isolated and , therefore , secure against the dangers from which no other land is free .
in some quarters , with this rude awakening has come fear , fear bordering on panic .
it is said that we are defenseless .
it is whispered by some that , only by abandoning our freedom , our ideals , our way of life , can we build our defenses adequately , can we match the strength of the aggressors .
i did not share those illusions .
i do not share these fears .
today we are ( now ) more realistic .
but let us not be calamity - howlers and discount our strength .
let us have done with both fears and illusions .
on this sabbath evening , in our homes in the midst of our american families , let us calmly consider what we have done and what we must do .
in the past two or three weeks all kinds of stories have been handed out to the american public about our lack of preparedness .
it has even been charged that the money we have spent on our military and naval forces during the last few years has gone down the rat - hole .
i think that it is a matter of fairness to the nation that you hear the facts .
yes , we have spent large sums of money on the national defense .
this money has been used to make our army and navy today the largest , the best equipped , and the best trained peace - time military establishment in the whole history of this country .
let me tell you just a few of the many things accomplished during the past few years .
i do not propose , i can not ( to ) go into every detail .
it is a known fact , however , that in 1933 , when this administration came into office , the united states navy had fallen in standing among the navies of the world , in power of ships and in efficiency , to a relatively low ebb .
the relative fighting power on the navy had been greatly diminished by failure to replace ships and equipment , which had become out - of - date .
but between 1933 and this year , 1940 -- seven fiscal years -- your government will have spent ( $ 1,487,000,000 ) a billion , four hundred eighty - seven million dollars more than it spent on the navy during the seven years ( before ) that preceded 1933 .
what did we get for the money , money , incidentally , not included in the new defense appropriations -- only the money heretofore appropriated ?
the fighting personnel of the navy rose from 79,000 to 145,000 .
during this period 215 ships for the fighting fleet have been laid down or commissioned , practically seven times the number in the preceding ( similar ) seven year period .
of these 215 ships we have commissioned 12 cruisers ; 63 destroyers ; 26 submarines ; 3 aircraft carriers ; 2 gunboats ; 7 auxiliaries and many smaller craft .
and among the many ships now being built and paid for as we build them are 8 new battleships .
ship construction , of course , costs millions of dollars more in the united states than anywhere else in the world ; but it is a fact that we can not have adequate navy defense for all american waters without ships -- ships that sail the surface of the ocean , ships that move under the surface and ships that move through the air .
and , speaking of airplanes , airplanes that work with the navy , in 1933 we had 1,127 of them , 1,127 useful aircraft , and today we have 2,892 on hand and on order .
of course , nearly all of the old planes of 1933 ( planes ) have been replaced by new planes because they became obsolete or worn out .
the navy is far stronger today than at any peace - time period in the whole long history of the nation .
in hitting power and in efficiency , i would even make the assertion that it is stronger today than it was during the world war .
the army of the united states : in 1933 it consisted of 122,000 enlisted men .
now , in 1940 , that number has been practically doubled .
the army of 1933 had been given few new implements of war since 1919 , and had been compelled to draw on old reserve stocks left over from the world war .
the net result of all this was that our army by l933 had very greatly declined in its ratio of strength with the armies of europe and of the far east .
that was the situation i found .
but , since then , great changes have taken place .
between 1933 and 1940 -- these past seven fiscal years -- your government will have spent $ 1,292,000,000 more than it spent on the army the previous seven years .
what did we get for this money ?
the personnel of the army , as i have said , has been almost doubled .
and by the end of this year every existing unit of the present regular army will be equipped with its complete requirements of modern weapons .
existing units of the national guard will also be largely equipped with similar items .
here are some striking examples taken from a large number of them : 
 since 1933 we have actually purchased 5,640 airplanes , including the most modern type of long - range bombers and fast pursuit planes , though , of course , many of these which were delivered 4 and 5 and 6 ( or ) and 7 years ago have worn out through use and been scrapped .
we must remember that these planes cost money -- a lot of it .
for example , one modern four - engine long - range bombing plane costs $ 350,000 ; one modern interceptor pursuit plane costs $ 133,000 ; one medium bomber costs $ 160,000 .
to go on : in 1933 we had only 355 anti - aircraft guns .
we now have more than 1,700 modern anti - craft guns of all types on hand or on order .
and you ought to know that a three - inch anti - aircraft gun costs $ 40,000 without any of the fire control equipment that goes with it .
in 1933 there were only 24 modern infantry mortars in the entire army .
we now have on hand and on order more than 1,600 .
in 1933 we had only 48 modern tanks and armored cars ; today we have on hand and on order 1,700 .
each one of our heavier tanks costs $ 46,000 .
there are many other items in which our progress since 1933 has been rapid .
and the great proportion of this advance ( has been during the last two years ) consists of really modern equipment .
for instance , in 1933 , on the personnel side we had 1,263 army pilots .
today the army alone has more than 3,200 of the best fighting flyers in the world , flyers who last year flew more than one million hours in combat training . (
this ) and that figure does not include the hundreds of splendid pilots in the national guard and in the organized reserves .
within the past year the productive capacity of the aviation industry to produce military planes has been tremendously increased .
in the past year the capacity more than doubled , but ( this ) that capacity ( today , however , ) is still inadequate .
but the government , working with industry is determined to increase ( this ) that capacity to meet our needs .
we intend to harness the efficient machinery of these manufacturers to the government 's program of being able to get 50,000 planes a year .
one additional word about aircraft , about which we read so much .
recent wars , including the current war in europe , have demonstrated beyond doubt that fighting efficiency depends on unity of command , unity of control .
in sea operations the airplane is just as much an integral part of the unity of operations as are the submarine , the destroyer and the battleship , and in land warfare the airplane is just as much a part of military operations as are the tank corps , the engineers , the artillery or the infantry itself .
therefore , the air forces should continue to be part of the army and navy .
in line with my request the congress , this week , is voting the largest appropriation ever asked by the army or the navy in peacetime , and the equipment and training provided ( by ) for them will be in addition to the figures i have given you .
the world situation may so change that it will be necessary to reappraise our program at any time .
and in such case i am confident that the congress and the chief executive will work in harmony as a team -- work in harmony as they are doing today .
i will not hesitate at any moment to ask for additional funds when they are required .
in this era of swift , mechanized warfare , we all have to remember that what is modern today and up - to - date , what is efficient and practical , becomes obsolete and outworn tomorrow .
even while the production line turns out airplanes , new airplanes ( ones)are being designed on the drafting table .
even as a cruiser slides down the launching ways , plans for improvement , plans for increased efficiency in the next model , are taking shape in the blueprints of designers .
every day 's fighting in europe , on land , on sea , and in the air , discloses constant changes in methods of warfare .
we are constantly improving and redesigning , testing new weapons , learning the lessons of the immediate war , and seeking to produce in accordance with the latest that the brains on science can conceive .
yes , we are calling upon the resources , the efficiency and the ingenuity of the american manufacturers of war material of all kinds -- airplanes and tanks and guns and ships , and all the hundreds of products that go into this material .
the government of the united states itself manufactures few of the implements of war .
private industry will continue to be the source of most of this material , and private industry will have to be speeded up to produce it at the rate and efficiency called for by the needs of the times .
i know that private business can not be expected to make all of the capital investment required for expansions of plants and factories and personnel which this program calls for at once .
it would be unfair to expect industrial corporations or their investors to do this , when there is a chance that a change in international affairs may stop or curtail future orders a year or two hence .
therefore , the government of the united states stands ready to advance the necessary money to help provide for the enlargement of factories , the establishment of new plants , the employment of thousands of necessary workers , the development of new sources of supply for the hundreds of raw materials required , the development of quick mass transportation of supplies .
and the details of all of this are now being worked out in washington , day and night .
we are calling on men now engaged in private industry to help us in carrying out this program and you will hear more of this in detail in the next few days .
this does not mean that the men we call upon will be engaged in the actual production of this material .
that will still have to be carried on in the plants and factories throughout the land .
private industry will have the responsibility of providing the best , speediest and most efficient mass production of which it is capable .
the functions of the businessmen whose assistance we are calling upon will be to coordinate this program -- to see to it that all of the plants continue to operate at maximum speed and efficiency .
patriotic americans of proven merit and of unquestioned ability in their special fields are coming to washington to help the government with their training , their experience and their capability .
it is our purpose not only to speed up production but to increase the total facilities of the nation in such a way that they can be further enlarged to meet emergencies of the future .
but as this program proceeds there are several things we must continue to watch and safeguard , things which are just as important to the sound defense of a nation as physical armament itself .
while our navy and our airplanes and our guns and our ships may be our first line of defense , it is still clear that way down at the bottom , underlying them all , giving them their strength , sustenance and power , are the spirit and morale of a free people .
for that reason , we must make sure , in all that we do , that there be no breakdown or cancellation of any of the great social gains which we have made in these past years .
we have carried on an offensive on a broad front against social and economic inequalities and abuses which had made our society weak .
that offensive should not now be broken down by the pincers movement of those who would use the present needs of physical military defense to destroy it .
there is nothing in our present emergency to justify making the workers of our nation toll for longer hours than now limited by statute .
as more orders come in and as more work has to be done , tens of thousands of people , who are now unemployed , will , i believe , receive employment .
there is nothing in our present emergency to justify a lowering of the standards of employment .
minimum wages should not be reduced .
it is my hope , indeed , that the new speed - up of production will cause many businesses which now pay below the minimum standards to bring their wages up .
there is nothing in our present emergency to justify a breaking down of old age pensions or of unemployment insurance .
i would rather see the systems extended to other groups who do not now enjoy them .
there is nothing in our present emergency to justify a retreat from any of our social objectives -- from conservation of natural resources , assistance to agriculture , housing , and help to the underprivileged .
conversely , however , i am sure that responsible leaders will not permit some specialized group , which represents a minority of the total employees of a plant or an industry , to break up the continuity of employment of the majority of the employees .
let us remember that the policy and the laws that provide ( providing ) for collective bargaining are still in force .
and i can assure you that labor will be adequately represented in washington in ( this defense program . )
the carrying out of this program of defense .
and one more point on this : ( also ) our present emergency and a common sense of decency make it imperative that no new group of war millionaires shall come into being in this nation as a result of the struggles abroad .
the american people will not relish the idea of any american citizen growing rich and fat in an emergency of blood and slaughter and human suffering .
and , ( finally ) last of all , this emergency demands that the consumers of america be protected so that our general cost of living can be maintained at a reasonable level .
we ought to avoid the spiral processes of the world war , the rising spiral of costs of all kinds .
the soundest policy is for every employer in the country to help give useful employment to the millions who are unemployed .
by giving to those millions an increased purchasing power , the prosperity of the whole ( country ) nation will rise to a much higher level .
today 's threat to our national security is not a matter of military weapons alone .
we know of ( new ) other methods , new methods of attack .
the trojan horse .
the fifth column that betrays a nation unprepared for treachery .
spies , saboteurs and traitors are the actors in this new strategy .
with all of these we must and will deal vigorously .
but there is an added technique for weakening a nation at its very roots , for disrupting the entire pattern of life of a people .
and it is important that we understand it .
the method is simple .
it is , first , discord , a dissemination of discord .
a group --not too large -- a group that may be sectional or racial or political -- is encouraged to exploit ( their ) its prejudices through false slogans and emotional appeals .
the aim of those who deliberately egg on these groups is to create confusion of counsel , public indecision , political paralysis and eventually , a state of panic .
sound national policies come to be viewed with a new and unreasoning skepticism , not through the wholesome ( political ) debates of honest and free men , but through the clever schemes of foreign agents .
as a result of these new techniques , armament programs may be dangerously delayed .
singleness of national purpose may be undermined .
men can lose confidence in each other , and therefore lose confidence in the efficacy of their own united action .
faith and courage can yield to doubt and fear .
the unity of the state ( is ) can be so sapped that its strength is destroyed .
all this is no idle dream .
it has happened time after time , in nation after nation , ( during ) here in the last two years .
fortunately , american men and women are not easy dupes .
campaigns of group hatred or class struggle have never made much headway among us , and are not making headway now .
but new forces are being unleashed , deliberately planned propaganda to divide and weaken us in the face of danger as other nations have been weakened before .
these dividing forces ( are ) i do not hesitate to call undiluted poison .
they must not be allowed to spread in the new world as they have in the old .
our moral , ( and ) our mental defenses must be raised up as never before against those who would cast a smoke - screen across our vision .
the development of our defense program makes it essential that each and every one of us , men and women , feel that we have some contribution to make toward the security of our ( country ) nation .
at this time , when the world -- and the world includes our own american hemisphere -- when the world is threatened by forces of destruction , it is my resolve and yours to build up our armed defenses .
we shall build them to whatever heights the future may require .
we shall rebuild them swiftly , as the methods of warfare swiftly change .
for more than three centuries we americans have been building on this continent a free society , a society in which the promise of the human spirit may find fulfillment .
commingled here are the blood and genius of all the peoples of the world who have sought this promise .
we have built well .
we are continuing our efforts to bring the blessings of a free society , of a free and productive economic system , to every family in the land .
this is the promise of america .
it is this that we must continue to build -- this that we must continue to defend .
it is the task of our generation , yours and mine .
but we build and defend not for our generation alone .
we defend the foundations laid down by our fathers .
we build a life for generations yet unborn .
we defend and we build a way of life , not for america alone , but for all mankind .
ours is a high duty , a noble task .
day and night i pray for the restoration of peace in this mad world of ours .
it is not necessary that i , the president ask the american people to pray in behalf of such a cause -- for i know you are praying with me .
i am certain that out of the hearts of every man , woman and child in this land , in every waking minute , a supplication goes up to almighty god ; that all of us beg that suffering and starving , that death and destruction may end -- and that peace may return to the world .
in common affection for all mankind , your prayers join with mine -- that god will heal the wounds and the hearts of humanity .

i am glad to come once again to chicago and especially to have the opportunity of taking part in the dedication of this important project of civic betterment .
on my trip across the continent and back i have been shown many evidences of the result of common sense cooperation between municipalities and the federal government , and i have been greeted by tens of thousands of americans who have told me in every look and word that their material and spiritual well - being has made great strides forward in the past few years .
and yet , as i have seen with my own eyes , the prosperous farms , the thriving factories and the busy railroads , as i have seen the happiness and security and peace which covers our wide land , almost inevitably i have been compelled to contrast our peace with very different scenes being enacted in other parts of the world .
it is because the people of the united states under modern conditions must , for the sake of their own future , give thought to the rest of the world , that i , as the responsible executive head of the nation , have chosen this great inland city and this gala occasion to speak to you on a subject of definite national importance .
the political situation in the world , which of late has been growing progressively worse , is such as to cause grave concern and anxiety to all the peoples and nations who wish to live in peace and amity with their neighbors .
some fifteen years ago the hopes of mankind for a continuing era of international peace were raised to great heights when more than sixty nations solemnly pledged themselves not to resort to arms in furtherance of their national aims and policies .
the high aspirations expressed in the briand - kellogg peace pact and the hopes for peace thus raised have of late given way to a haunting fear of calamity .
the present reign of terror and international lawlessness began a few years ago .
it began through unjustified interference in the internal affairs of other nations or the invasion of alien territory in violation of treaties ; and has now reached a stage where the very foundations of civilization are seriously threatened .
the landmarks and traditions which have marked the progress of civilization toward a condition of law , order and justice are being wiped away .
without a declaration of war and without warning or justification of any kind , civilians , including vast numbers of women and children , are being ruthlessly murdered with bombs from the air .
in times of so - called peace , ships are being attacked and sunk by submarines without cause or notice .
nations are fomenting and taking sides in civil warfare in nations that have never done them any harm .
nations claiming freedom for themselves deny it to others .
innocent peoples , innocent nations , are being cruelly sacrificed to a greed for power and supremacy which is devoid of all sense of justice and humane considerations .
to paraphrase a recent author " perhaps we foresee a time when men , exultant in the technique of homicide , will rage so hotly over the world that every precious thing will be in danger , every book and picture and harmony , every treasure garnered through two millenniums , the small , the delicate , the defenseless -- all will be lost or wrecked or utterly destroyed . "
if those things come to pass in other parts of the world , let no one imagine that america will escape , that america may expect mercy , that this western hemisphere will not be attacked and that it will continue tranquilly and peacefully to carry on the ethics and the arts of civilization .
if those days come " there will be no safety by arms , no help from authority , no answer in science .
the storm will rage till every flower of culture is trampled and all human beings are leveled in a vast chaos . "
if those days are not to come to pass -- if we are to have a world in which we can breathe freely and live in amity without fear -- the peace - loving nations must make a concerted effort to uphold laws and principles on which alone peace can rest secure .
the peace - loving nations must make a concerted effort in opposition to those violations of treaties and those ignorings of humane instincts which today are creating a state of international anarchy and instability from which there is no escape through mere isolation or neutrality .
those who cherish their freedom and recognize and respect the equal right of their neighbors to be free and live in peace , must work together for the triumph of law and moral principles in order that peace , justice and confidence may prevail in the world .
there must be a return to a belief in the pledged word , in the value of a signed treaty .
there must be recognition of the fact that national morality is as vital as private morality .
a bishop wrote me the other day : " it seems to me that something greatly needs to be said in behalf of ordinary humanity against the present practice of carrying the horrors of war to helpless civilians , especially women and children .
it may be that such a protest might be regarded by many , who claim to be realists , as futile , but may it not be that the heart of mankind is so filled with horror at the present needless suffering that that force could be mobilized in sufficient volume to lessen such cruelty in the days ahead .
even though it may take twenty years , which god forbid , for civilization to make effective its corporate protest against this barbarism , surely strong voices may hasten the day . "
there is a solidarity and interdependence about the modern world , both technically and morally , which makes it impossible for any nation completely to isolate itself from economic and political upheavals in the rest of the world , especially when such upheavals appear to be spreading and not declining .
there can be no stability or peace either within nations or between nations except under laws and moral standards adhered to by all international anarchy destroys every foundation for peace .
it jeopardizes either the immediate or the future security of every nation , large or small .
it is , therefore , a matter of vital interest and concern to the people of the united states that the sanctity of international treaties and the maintenance of international morality be restored .
the overwhelming majority of the peoples and nations of the world today want to live in peace .
they seek the removal of barriers against trade .
they want to exert themselves in industry , in agriculture and in business , that they may increase their wealth through the production of wealth - producing goods rather than striving to produce military planes and bombs and machine guns and cannon for the destruction of human lives and useful property .
in those nations of the world which seem to be piling armament on armament for purposes of aggression , and those other nations which fear acts of aggression against them and their security , a very high proportion of their national income is being spent directly for armaments .
it runs from thirty to as high as fifty percent .
we are fortunate .
the proportion that we in the united states spend is far less- eleven or twelve percent .
how happy we are that the circumstances of the moment permit us to put our money into bridges and boulevards , dams and reforestation , the conservation of our soil and many other kinds of useful works rather than into huge standing armies and vast supplies of implements of war .
i am compelled and you are compelled , nevertheless , to look ahead .
the peace , the freedom and the security of ninety percent of the population of the world is being jeopardized by the remaining ten percent .
who are threatening a breakdown of all international order and law .
surely the ninety percent who want to live in peace under law and in accordance with moral standards that have received almost universal acceptance through the centuries , can and must find some way to make their will prevail .
the situation is definitely of universal concern .
the questions involved relate not merely to violations of specific provisions of particular treaties ; they are questions of war and of peace , of international law and 
 especially of principles of humanity .
it is true that they involve definite 
 violations of agreements , and especially of the covenant of the league of 
 nations , the briand - kellogg pact and the nine power treaty .
but they also 
 involve problems of world economy , world security and world humanity .
it is true that the moral consciousness of the world must recognize the importance of removing injustices and well - founded grievances ; but at the same time it must be aroused to the cardinal necessity of honoring sanctity of treaties , of respecting the rights and liberties of others and of putting an end to acts of international aggression .
it seems to be unfortunately true that the epidemic of world lawlessness is spreading .
when an epidemic of physical disease starts to spread , the community approves and joins in a quarantine of the patients in order to protect the health of the community against the spread of the disease .
it is my determination to pursue a policy of peace .
it is my determination to adopt every practicable measure to avoid involvement in war .
it ought to be inconceivable that in this modern era , and in the face of experience , any nation could be so foolish and ruthless as to run the risk of plunging the whole world into war by invading and violating , in contravention of solemn treaties , the territory of other nations that have done them no real harm and are too weak to protect themselves adequately .
yet the peace of the world and the welfare and security of every nation , including our own , is today being threatened by that very thing .
no nation which refuses to exercise forbearance and to respect the freedom and rights of others can long remain strong and retain the confidence and respect of other nations .
no nation ever loses its dignity or its good standing by conciliating its differences , and by exercising great patience with , and consideration for , the rights of other nations .
war is a contagion , whether it be declared or undeclared .
it can engulf states and peoples remote from the original scene of hostilities .
we are determined to keep out of war , yet we can not insure ourselves against the disastrous effects of war and the dangers of involvement .
we are adopting such measures as will minimize our risk of involvement , but we can not have complete protection in a world of disorder in which confidence and security have broken down .
if civilization is to survive the principles of the prince of peace must be restored .
trust between nations must be revived .
most important of all , the will for peace on the part of peace - loving nations must express itself to the end that nations that may be tempted to violate their agreements and the rights of others will desist from such a course .
there must be positive endeavors to preserve peace .
america hates war .
america hopes for peace .
therefore , america actively engages in the search for peace .

my fellow americans : 
 the navy department of the united states has reported to me that on the morning of september fourth the united states destroyer greer , proceeding in full daylight towards iceland , had reached a point southeast of greenland .
she was carrying american mail to iceland .
she was flying the american flag .
her identity as an american ship was unmistakable .
she was then and there attacked by a submarine .
germany admits that it was a german submarine .
the submarine deliberately fired a torpedo at the greer , followed later by another torpedo attack .
in spite of what hitler 's propaganda bureau has invented , and in spite of what any american obstructionist organization may prefer to believe , i tell you the blunt fact that the german submarine fired first upon this american destroyer without warning , and with deliberate design to sink her .
our destroyer , at the time , was in waters which the government of the united states had declared to be waters of self - defense -- surrounding outposts of american protection in the atlantic .
in the north of the atlantic , outposts have been established by us in iceland , in greenland , in labrador and in newfoundland .
through these waters there pass many ships of many flags .
they bear food and other supplies to civilians ; and they bear material of war , for which the people of the united states are spending billions of dollars , and which , by congressional action , they have declared to be essential for the defense of ( their ) our own land .
the united states destroyer , when attacked , was proceeding on a legitimate mission .
if the destroyer was visible to the submarine when the torpedo was fired , then the attack was a deliberate attempt by the nazis to sink a clearly identified american warship .
on the other hand , if the submarine was beneath the surface of the sea and , with the aid of its listening devices , fired in the direction of the sound of the american destroyer without even taking the trouble to learn its identity -- as the official german communique would indicate -- then the attack was even more outrageous .
for it indicates a policy of indiscriminate violence against any vessel sailing the seas --belligerent or non - belligerent .
this was piracy -- piracy legally and morally .
it was not the first nor the last act of piracy which the nazi government has committed against the american flag in this war .
for attack has followed attack .
a few months ago an american flag merchant ship , the robin moor , was sunk by a nazi submarine in the middle of the south atlantic , under circumstances violating long - established international law and violating every principle of humanity .
the passengers and the crew were forced into open boats hundreds of miles from land , in direct violation of international agreements signed by nearly all nations including the government of germany .
no apology , no allegation of mistake , no offer of reparations has come from the nazi government .
in july , 1941 , nearly two months ago an american battleship in north american waters was followed by a submarine which for a long time sought to maneuver itself into a position of attack upon the battleship .
the periscope of the submarine was clearly seen .
no british or american submarines were within hundreds of miles of this spot at the time , so the nationality of the submarine is clear .
five days ago a united states navy ship on patrol picked up three survivors of an american - owned ship operating under the flag of our sister republic of panama -- the s. s. sessa .
on august seventeenth , she had been first torpedoed without warning , and then shelled , near greenland , while carrying civilian supplies to iceland .
it is feared that the other members of her crew have been drowned .
in view of the established presence of german submarines in this vicinity , there can be no reasonable doubt as to the identity of the flag of the attacker .
five days ago , another united states merchant ship , the steel seafarer , was sunk by a german aircraft in the red sea two hundred and twenty miles south of suez .
she was bound for an egyptian port .
so four of the vessels sunk or attacked flew the american flag and were clearly identifiable .
two of these ships were warships of the american navy .
in the fifth case , the vessel sunk clearly carried the flag of our sister republic of panama .
in the face of all this , we americans are keeping our feet on the ground .
our type of democratic civilization has outgrown the thought of feeling compelled to fight some other nation by reason of any single piratical attack on one of our ships .
we are not becoming hysterical or losing our sense of proportion .
therefore , what i am thinking and saying tonight does not relate to any isolated episode .
instead , we americans are taking a long - range point of view in regard to certain fundamentals ( and ) -- a point of view in regard to a series of events on land and on sea which must be considered as a whole -- as a part of a world pattern .
it would be unworthy of a great nation to exaggerate an isolated incident , or to become inflamed by some one act of violence .
but it would be inexcusable folly to minimize such incidents in the face of evidence which makes it clear that the incident is not isolated , but is part of a general plan .
the important truth is that these acts of international lawlessness are a manifestation of a design ( which ) -- a design that has been made clear to the american people for a long time .
it is the nazi design to abolish the freedom of the seas , and to acquire absolute control and domination of ( the ) these seas for themselves .
for with control of the seas in their own hands , the way can obviously become clear for their next step -- domination of the united states ( and the ) -- domination of the western hemisphere by force of arms .
under nazi control of the seas , no merchant ship of the united states or of any other american republic would be free to carry on any peaceful commerce , except by the condescending grace of this foreign and tyrannical power .
the atlantic ocean which has been , and which should always be , a free and friendly highway for us would then become a deadly menace to the commerce of the united states , to the coasts of the united states , and even to the inland cities of the united states .
the hitler government , in defiance of the laws of the sea , ( and ) in defiance of the recognized rights of all other nations , has presumed to declare , on paper , that great areas of the seas -- even including a vast expanse lying in the western hemisphere -- are to be closed , and that no ships may enter them for any purpose , except at peril of being sunk .
actually they are sinking ships at will and without warning in widely separated areas both within and far outside of these far - flung pretended zones .
this nazi attempt to seize control of the oceans is but a counterpart of the nazi plots now being carried on throughout the western hemisphere -- all designed toward the same end .
for hitler 's advance guards -- not only his avowed agents but also his dupes among us -- have sought to make ready for him footholds , ( and ) bridgeheads in the new world , to be used as soon as he has gained control of the oceans .
his intrigues , his plots , his machinations , his sabotage in this new world are all known to the government of the united states .
conspiracy has followed conspiracy .
for example , last year a plot to seize the government of uruguay was smashed by the prompt action of that country , which was supported in full by her american neighbors .
a like plot was then hatching in argentina , and that government has carefully and wisely blocked it at every point .
more recently , an endeavor was made to subvert the government of bolivia .
and within the past few weeks the discovery was made of secret air - landing fields in colombia , within easy range of the panama canal .
i could multiply instance(s ) upon instance .
to be ultimately successful in world mastery , hitler knows that he must get control of the seas .
he must first destroy the bridge of ships which we are building across the atlantic and over which we shall continue to roll the implements of war to help destroy him , ( and)to destroy all his works in the end .
he must wipe out our patrol on sea and in the air if he is to do it .
he must silence the british navy .
i think it must be explained ( again and ) over and over again to people who like to think of the united states navy as an invincible protection , that this can be true only if the british navy survives .
and that , my friends , is simple arithmetic .
for if the world outside of the americas falls under axis domination , the shipbuilding facilities which the axis powers would then possess in all of europe , in the british isles and in the far east would be much greater than all the shipbuilding facilities and potentialities of all of the americas -- not only greater , but two or three times greater , enough to win .
even if the united states threw all its resources into such a situation , seeking to double and even redouble the size of our navy , the axis powers , in control of the rest of the world , would have the manpower and the physical resources to outbuild us several times over .
it is time for all americans , americans of all the americas to stop being deluded by the romantic notion that the americas can go on living happily and peacefully in a nazi - dominated world .
generation after generation , america has battled for the general policy of the freedom of the seas .
and that policy is a very simple one , but a basic , a fundamental one .
it means that no nation has the right to make the broad oceans of the world at great distances from the actual theatre of land war , unsafe for the commerce of others .
that has been our policy , proved time and ( time ) again , in all of our history .
our policy has applied from ( time immemorial ) the earliest days of the republic -- and still applies -- not merely to the atlantic but to the pacific and to all other oceans as well .
unrestricted submarine warfare in 1941 constitutes defiance -- an act of aggression -- against that historic american policy .
it is now clear that hitler has begun his campaign to control the seas by ruthless force and by wiping out every vestige of international law , ( and ) every vestige of humanity .
his intention has been made clear .
the american people can have no further illusions about it .
no tender whisperings of appeasers that hitler is not interested in the western hemisphere , no soporific lullabies that a wide ocean protects us from him -- can long have any effect on the hard - headed , far - sighted and realistic american people .
because of these episodes , because of the movements and operations of german warships , and because of the clear , repeated proof that the present government of germany has no respect for treaties or for international law , that it has no decent attitude toward neutral nations or human life -- we americans are now face to face not with abstract theories but with cruel , relentless facts .
this attack on the greer was no localized military operation in the north atlantic .
this was no mere episode in a struggle between two nations .
this was one determined step towards creating a permanent world system based on force , on terror and on murder .
and i am sure that even now the nazis are waiting , waiting to see whether the united states will by silence give them the green light to go ahead on this path of destruction .
the nazi danger to our western world has long ceased to be a mere possibility .
the danger is here now -- not only from a military enemy but from an enemy of all law , all liberty , all morality , all religion .
there has now come a time when you and i must see the cold inexorable necessity of saying to these inhuman , unrestrained seekers of world conquest and permanent world domination by the sword : " you seek to throw our children and our children 's children into your form of terrorism and slavery .
you have now attacked our own safety .
you shall go no further . "
normal practices of diplomacy -- note writing -- are of no possible use in dealing with international outlaws who sink our ships and kill our citizens .
one peaceful nation after another has met disaster because each refused to look the nazi danger squarely in the eye until it had actually had them by the throat .
the united states will not make that fatal mistake .
no act of violence , ( or ) no act of intimidation will keep us from maintaining intact two bulwarks of american defense : first , our line of supply of material to the enemies of hitler ; and second , the freedom of our shipping on the high seas .
no matter what it takes , no matter what it costs , we will keep open the line of legitimate commerce in these defensive water of ours .
we have sought no shooting war with hitler .
we do not seek it now .
but neither do we want peace so much , that we are willing to pay for it by permitting him to attack our naval and merchant ships while they are on legitimate business .
i assume that the german leaders are not deeply concerned , tonight or any other time , by what we americans or the american government say or publish about them .
we can not bring about the downfall of nazi - ism by the use of long - range invective .
but when you see a rattlesnake poised to strike , you do not wait until he has struck before you crush him .
these nazi submarines and raiders are the rattlesnakes of the atlantic .
they are a menace to the free pathways of the high seas .
they are a challenge to our own sovereignty .
they hammer at our most precious rights when they attack ships of the american flag -- symbols of our independence , our freedom , our very life .
it is clear to all americans that the time has come when the americas themselves must now be defended .
a continuation of attacks in our own waters or in waters ( which ) that could be used for further and greater attacks on us , will inevitably weaken our american ability to repel hitlerism .
do not let us ( split hairs ) be hair - splitters .
let us not ask ourselves whether the americas should begin to defend themselves after the ( fifth ) first attack , or the ( tenth ) fifth attack , or the tenth attack , or the twentieth attack .
the time for active defense is now .
do not let us split hairs .
let us not say : " we will only defend ourselves if the torpedo succeeds in getting home , or if the crew and the passengers are drowned " .
this is the time for prevention of attack .
if submarines or raiders attack in distant waters , they can attack equally well within sight of our own shores .
their very presence in any waters which america deems vital to its defense constitutes an attack .
in the waters which we deem necessary for our defense , american naval vessels and american planes will no longer wait until axis submarines lurking under the water , or axis raiders on the surface of the sea , strike their deadly blow -- first .
upon our naval and air patrol -- now operating in large number over a vast expanse of the atlantic ocean -- falls the duty of maintaining the american policy of freedom of the seas -- now .
that means , very simply , ( and ) very clearly , that our patrolling vessels and planes will protect all merchant ships -- not only american ships but ships of any flag -- engaged in commerce in our defensive waters .
they will protect them from submarines ; they will protect them from surface raiders .
this situation is not new .
the second president of the united states , john adams , ordered the united states navy to clean out european privateers and european ships of war which were infesting the caribbean and south american waters , destroying american commerce .
the third president of the united states , thomas jefferson , ordered the united states navy to end the attacks being made upon american and other ships by the corsairs of the nations of north africa .
my obligation as president is historic ; it is clear .
yes , it is inescapable .
it is no act of war on our part when we decide to protect the seas ( which ) that are vital to american defense .
the aggression is not ours .
ours is solely defense .
but let this warning be clear .
from now on , if german or italian vessels of war enter the waters , the protection of which is necessary for american defense , they do so at their own peril .
the orders which i have given as commander - in - chief ( to ) of the united states army and navy are to carry out that policy -- at once .
the sole responsibility rests upon germany .
there will be no shooting unless germany continues to seek it .
that is my obvious duty in this crisis .
that is the clear right of this sovereign nation . (
that ) this is the only step possible , if we would keep tight the wall of defense which we are pledged to maintain around this western hemisphere .
i have no illusions about the gravity of this step .
i have not taken it hurriedly or lightly .
it is the result of months and months of constant thought and anxiety and prayer .
in the protection of your nation and mine it can not be avoided .
the american people have faced other grave crises in their history -- with american courage , ( and ) with american resolution .
they will do no less today .
they know the actualities of the attacks upon us .
they know the necessities of a bold defense against these attacks .
they know that the times call for clear heads and fearless hearts .
and with that inner strength that comes to a free people conscious of their duty , ( and ) conscious of the righteousness of what they do , they will -- with divine help and guidance -- stand their ground against this latest assault upon their democracy , their sovereignty , and their freedom .

my friends : 
 i have recently ( just ) returned from extensive journeying in the region of the mediterranean and as far as the borders of russia .
i have conferred with the leaders of britain and russia and china on military matters of the present --especially on plans for stepping - up our successful attack on our enemies as quickly as possible and from many different points of the compass .
on this christmas eve there are over ten million men in the armed forces of the united states alone .
one year ago 1,700,000 were serving overseas .
today , this figure has been more than doubled to 3,800,000 on duty overseas .
by next july first that number overseas will rise to over 5,000,000 men and women .
that this is truly a world war was demonstrated to me when arrangements were being made with our overseas broadcasting agencies for the time to speak today to our soldiers , and sailors , and marines and merchant seamen in every part of the world .
in fixing the time for this ( the ) broadcast , we took into consideration that at this moment here in the united states , and in the caribbean and on the northeast coast of south america , it is afternoon .
in alaska and in hawaii and the mid - pacific , it is still morning .
in iceland , in great britain , in north africa , in italy and the middle east , it is now evening .
in the southwest pacific , in australia , in china and burma and india , it is already christmas day .
so we can correctly say that at this moment , in those far eastern parts where americans are fighting , today is tomorrow .
but everywhere throughout the world -- through(out ) this war that ( which ) covers the world -- there is a special spirit that ( which ) has warmed our hearts since our earliest childhood -- a spirit that ( which ) brings us close to our homes , our families , our friends and neighbors -- the christmas spirit of " peace on earth , goodwill toward men . "
it is an unquenchable spirit .
during the past years of international gangsterism and brutal aggression in europe and in asia , our christmas celebrations have been darkened with apprehension for the future .
we have said , " merry christmas -- a happy new year , " but we have known in our hearts that the clouds which have hung over our world have prevented us from saying it with full sincerity and conviction .
and ( but ) even this year , we still have much to face in the way of further suffering , and sacrifice , and personal tragedy .
our men , who have been through the fierce battles in the solomons , and the gilberts , and tunisia and italy know , from their own experience and knowledge of modern war , that many bigger and costlier battles are still to be fought .
but -- on christmas eve this year -- i can say to you that at last we may look forward into the future with real , substantial confidence that , however great the cost , " peace on earth , good will toward men " can be and will be realized and ensured .
this year i can say that .
last year i could not do more than express a hope .
today i express -- a certainty though the cost may be high and the time may be long .
within the past year -- within the past few weeks -- history has been made , and it is far better history for the whole human race than any that we have known , or even dared to hope for , in these tragic times through which we pass .
a great beginning was made in the moscow conference last ( in ) october by mr. molotov , mr. eden and our own mr. hull .
there and then the way was paved for the later meetings .
at cairo and teheran we devoted ourselves not only to military matters , we devoted ourselves also to consideration of the future -- to plans for the kind of world which alone can justify all the sacrifices of this war .
of course , as you all know , mr. churchill and i have happily met many times before , and we know and understand each other very well .
indeed , mr. churchill has become known and beloved by many millions of americans , and the heartfelt prayers of all of us have been with this great citizen of the world in his recent serious illness .
the cairo and teheran conferences , however , gave me my first opportunity to meet the generalissimo , chiang kai - shek , and marshal stalin -- and to sit down at the table with these unconquerable men and talk with them face to face .
we had planned to talk to each other across the table at cairo and teheran ; but we soon found that we were all on the same side of the table .
we came to the conferences with faith in each other .
but we needed the personal contact .
and now we have supplemented faith with definite knowledge .
it was well worth traveling thousands of miles over land and sea to bring about this personal meeting , and to gain the heartening assurance that we are absolutely agreed with one another on all the major objectives -- and on the military means of obtaining them .
at cairo , prime minister churchill and i spent four days with the generalissimo , chiang kai - shek .
it was the first time that we had ( had ) an opportunity to go over the complex situation in the far east with him personally .
we were able not only to settle upon definite military strategy , but also to discuss certain long - range principles which we believe can assure peace in the far east for many generations to come .
those principles are as simple as they are fundamental .
they involve the restoration of stolen property to its rightful owners , and the recognition of the rights of millions of people in the far east to build up their own forms of self - government without molestation .
essential to all peace and security in the pacific and in the rest of the world is the permanent elimination of the empire of japan as a potential force of aggression .
never again must our soldiers and sailors and marines -- and other soldiers , sailors and marines -- be compelled to fight from island to island as they are fighting so gallantly and so successfully today .
increasingly powerful forces are now hammering at the japanese at many points over an enormous arc which curves down through the pacific from the aleutians to the jungles of burma .
our own army and navy , our air forces , the australians and new zealanders , the dutch , and the british land , air and sea forces are all forming a band of steel which is slowly but surely closing in on japan .
and ( on ) the mainland of asia , under the generalissimo 's leadership , the chinese ground and air forces augmented by american air forces are playing a vital part in starting the drive which will push the invaders into the sea .
following out the military decisions at cairo , general marshall has just flown around the world and has had conferences with general macarthur and admiral nimitz -- conferences which will spell plenty of bad news for the japs in the not too far distant future .
i met in the generalissimo a man of great vision , ( and ) great courage , and a remarkably keen understanding of the problems of today and tomorrow .
we discussed all the manifold military plans for striking at japan with decisive force from many directions , and i believe i can say that he returned to chungking with the positive assurance of total victory over our common enemy .
today we and the republic of china are closer together than ever before in deep friendship and in unity of purpose .
after the cairo conference , mr. churchill and i went by airplane to teheran .
there we met with marshal stalin .
we talked with complete frankness on every conceivable subject connected with the winning of the war and the establishment of a durable peace after the war .
within three days of intense and consistently amicable discussions , we agreed on every point concerned with the launching of a gigantic attack upon germany .
the russian army will continue its stern offensives on germany 's eastern front , the allied armies in italy and africa will bring relentless pressure on germany from the south , and now the encirclement will be complete as great american and british forces attack from other points of the compass .
the commander selected to lead the combined attack from these other points is general dwight d. eisenhower .
his performances in africa , in sicily and in italy have been brilliant .
he knows by practical and successful experience the way to coordinate air , sea and land power .
all of these will be under his control .
lieutenant general carl ( d. ) spaatz will command the entire american strategic bombing force operating against germany .
general eisenhower gives up his command in the mediterranean to a british officer whose name is being announced by mr. churchill .
we now pledge that new commander that our powerful ground , sea and air forces in the vital mediterranean area will stand by his side until every objective in that bitter theatre is attained .
both of these new commanders will have american and british subordinate commanders whose names will be announced to the world in a few days .
during the last two days in ( at ) teheran , marshal stalin , mr. churchill and i looked ahead -- ahead to the days and months and years that ( which ) will follow germany 's defeat .
we were united in determination that germany must be stripped of her military might and be given no opportunity within the foreseeable future to regain that might .
the united nations have no intention to enslave the german people .
we wish them to have a normal chance to develop , in peace , as useful and respectable members of the european family .
but we most certainly emphasize that word " respectable " -- for we intend to rid them once and for all of nazism and prussian militarism and the fantastic and disastrous notion that they constitute the " master race . "
we did discuss international relationships from the point of view of big , broad objectives , rather than details .
but on the basis of what we did discuss , i can say even today that i do not think any insoluble differences will arise among russia , great britain and the united states .
in these conferences we were concerned with basic principles -- principles which involve the security and the welfare and the standard of living or human beings in countries large and small .
to use an american and somewhat ungrammatical colloquialism , i may say that i " got along fine " with marshal stalin .
he is a man who combines a tremendous , relentless determination with a stalwart good humor .
i believe he is truly representative of the heart and soul of russia ; and i believe that we are going to get along very well with him and the russian people -- very well indeed .
britain , russia , china and the united states and their allies represent more than three - quarters of the total population of the earth .
as long as these four nations with great military power stick together in determination to keep the peace there will be no possibility of an aggressor nation arising to start another world war .
but those four powers must be united with and cooperate with ( all ) the freedom - loving peoples of europe , and asia , and africa and the americas .
the rights of every nation , large or small , must be respected and guarded as jealously as are the rights of every individual within our own republic .
the doctrine that the strong shall dominate the weak is the doctrine of our enemies -- and we reject it .
but , at the same time , we are agreed that if force is necessary to keep international peace , international force will be applied -- for as long as it may be necessary .
it has been our steady policy -- and it is certainly a common sense policy -- that the right of each nation to freedom must be measured by the willingness of that nation to fight for freedom .
and today we salute our unseen allies in occupied countries -- the underground resistance groups and the armies of liberation .
they will provide potent forces against our enemies , when the day of the counter - invasion comes .
through the development of science the world has become so much smaller that we have had to discard the geographical yardsticks of the past .
for instance , through our early history the atlantic and pacific oceans were believed to be walls of safety for the united states .
time and distance made it physically possible , for example , for us and for the other american republics to obtain and maintain ( our ) independence against infinitely stronger powers .
until recently very few people , even military experts , thought that the day would ever come when we might have to defend our pacific coast against japanese threats of invasion .
at the outbreak of the first world war relatively few people thought that our ships and shipping would be menaced by german submarines on the high seas or that the german militarists would ever attempt to dominate any nation outside of central europe .
after the armistice in 1918 , we thought and hoped that the militaristic philosophy of germany had been crushed ; and being full of the milk of human kindness we spent the next twenty ( fifteen ) years disarming , while the germans whined so pathetically that the other nations permitted them -- and even helped them -- to rearm .
for too many years we lived on pious hopes that aggressor and warlike nations would learn and understand and carry out the doctrine of purely voluntary peace .
the well - intentioned but ill - fated experiments of former years did not work .
it is my hope that we will not try them again .
no -- that is putting it too weakly -- it is my intention to do all that i humanly can as president and commander - in - chief to see to it that these tragic mistakes shall not be made again .
there have always been cheerful idiots in this country who believed that there would be no more war for us , if everybody in america would only return into their homes and lock their front doors behind them .
assuming that their motives were of the highest , events have shown how unwilling they were to face the facts .
the overwhelming majority of all the people in the world want peace .
most of them are fighting for the attainment of peace -- not just a truce , not just an armistice -- but peace that is as strongly enforced and as durable as mortal man can make it .
if we are willing to fight for peace now , is it not good logic that we should use force if necessary , in the future , to keep the peace ?
i believe , and i think i can say , that the other three great nations who are fighting so magnificently to gain peace are in complete agreement that we must be prepared to keep the peace by force .
if the people of germany and japan are made to realize thoroughly that the world is not going to let them break out again , it is possible , and , i hope , probable , that they will abandon the philosophy of aggression -- the belief that they can gain the whole world even at the risk of losing their own souls .
i shall have more to say about the cairo and teheran conferences when i make my report to the congress in about two weeks ' time .
and , on that occasion , i shall also have a great deal to say about certain conditions here at home .
but today i wish to say that in all my travels , at home and abroad , it is the sight of our soldiers and sailors and their magnificent achievements which have given me the greatest inspiration and the greatest encouragement for the future .
to the members of our armed forces , to their wives , mothers and fathers , i want to affirm the great faith and confidence that we have in general marshall and in admiral king who direct all of our armed might throughout the world .
upon them falls the ( great ) responsibility of planning the strategy of determining ( when and ) where and when we shall fight .
both of these men have already gained high places in american history , places which will record in that history many evidences of their military genius that can not be published today .
some of our men overseas are now spending their third christmas far from home .
to them and to all others overseas or soon to go overseas , i can give assurance that it is the purpose of their government to win this war and to bring them home at the earliest possible time ( date ) .
( and ) we here in the united states had better be sure that when our soldiers and sailors do come home they will find an america in which they are given full opportunities for education , and rehabilitation , social security , and employment and business enterprise under the free american system -- and that they will find a government which , by their votes as american citizens , they have had a full share in electing .
the american people have had every reason to know that this is a tough and destructive war .
on my trip abroad , i talked with many military men who had faced our enemies in the field .
these hard - headed realists testify to the strength and skill and resourcefulness of the enemy generals and men whom we must beat before final victory is won .
the war is now reaching the stage where we shall all have to look forward to large casualty lists -- dead , wounded and missing .
war entails just that .
there is no easy road to victory .
and the end is not yet in sight .
i have been back only for a week .
it is fair that i should tell you my impression .
i think i see a tendency in some of our people here to assume a quick ending of the war -- that we have already gained the victory .
and , perhaps as a result of this false reasoning , i think i discern an effort to resume or even encourage an outbreak of partisan thinking and talking .
i hope i am wrong .
for , surely , our first and most foremost tasks are all concerned with winning the war and winning a just peace that will last for generations .
the massive offensives which are in the making both in europe and the far east -- will require every ounce of energy and fortitude that we and our allies can summon on the fighting fronts and in all the workshops at home .
as i have said before , you can not order up a great attack on a monday and demand that it be delivered on saturday .
less than a month ago i flew in a big army transport plane over the little town of bethlehem , in palestine .
tonight , on christmas eve , all men and women everywhere who love christmas are thinking of that ancient town and of the star of faith that shone there more than nineteen centuries ago .
american boys are fighting today in snow - covered mountains , in malarial jungles , ( and ) on blazing deserts , they are fighting on the far stretches of the sea and above the clouds , and fighting for the thing for which they struggle . ( , )
i think it is best symbolized by the message that came out of bethlehem .
on behalf of the american people -- your own people - i send this christmas message to you , to you who are in our armed forces : 
 in our hearts are prayers for you and for all your comrades in arms who fight to rid the world of evil .
we ask god 's blessing upon you -- upon your fathers , ( and ) mothers , and wives and children -- all your loved ones at home .
we ask that the comfort of god 's grace shall be granted to those who are sick and wounded , and to those who are prisoners of war in the hands of the enemy , waiting for the day when they will again be free .
and we ask that god receive and cherish those who have given their lives , and that he keep them in honor and in the grateful memory of their countrymen forever .
god bless all of you who fight our battles on this christmas eve .
god bless us all . (
god ) keep us strong in our faith that we fight for a better day for human kind -- here and everywhere .

declaration of the three powers : 
 we , the president of the united states , the prime minister of great britain , and the premier of the soviet union , have met these four days past , in this , the capital of our ally , iran , and have shaped and confirmed our common policy .
we express our determination that our nations shall work together in war and in the peace that will follow .
as to war -- our military staffs have joined in our round - table discussions , and we have concerted our plans for the destruction of the german forces .
we have reached complete agreement as to the scope and timing of the operations to be undertaken from the east , west , and south .
the common understanding which we have here reached guarantees that victory will be ours .
and as to peace -- we are sure that our concord will win an enduring peace .
we recognize fully the supreme responsibility resting upon us and all the united nations to make a peace which will command the good will of the overwhelming mass of the peoples of the world and banish the scourge and terror of war for many generations .
with our diplomatic advisers we have surveyed the problems of the future .
we shall seek the cooperation and active participation of all nations , large and small , whose peoples in heart and mind are dedicated , as are our own peoples , to the elimination of tyranny and slavery , oppression and intolerance .
we will welcome them , as they may choose to come , into a world family of democratic nations .
no power on earth can prevent our destroying the german armies by land , their u - boats by sea , and their war plants from the air .
our attack will be relentless and increasing .
emerging from these cordial conferences we look with confidence to the day when all peoples of the world may live free lives , untouched by tyranny , and according to their varying desires and their own consciences .
we came here with hope and determination .
we leave here , friends in fact , in spirit , and in purpose .
signed : roosevelt , churchill , and stalin .
signed at tehran , december l , 1943 .

i think the american public and the american newspapers are certainly creatures of habit .
this is one of the warmest evenings that i have ever felt in washington , d. c. , and yet this talk tonight will be referred to as a fireside talk .
our government , happily , is a democracy .
as part of the democratic process , your president is again taking an opportunity to report on the progress of national affairs , to report to the real rulers of this country --the voting public .
the seventy - fifth congress , elected in november , 1936 , on a platform uncompromisingly liberal , has adjourned .
barring unforeseen events , there will be no session until the new congress , to be elected in november , assembles next january .
on the one hand , the seventy - fifth congress has left many things undone .
for example , it refused to provide more businesslike machinery for running the executive branch of the government .
the congress also failed to meet my suggestion that it take the far - reaching steps necessary to put the railroads of the country back on their feet .
but , on the other hand , the congress , striving to carry out the platform on which most of them were elected , achieved more for the future good of the country than any congress did between the end of the world war and the spring of 1933 .
i mention tonight only the more important of these achievements .
( 1 ) the congress improved still further our agricultural laws to give the farmer a fairer share of the national income , to preserve our soil , to provide an all - weather granary , to help the farm tenant towards independence , to find new uses for farm products , and to begin crop insurance .
( 2 ) after many requests on my part the congress passed a fair labor standards act , what we call the wages and hours bill .
that act --applying to products in interstate commerce -- ends child labor , sets a floor below wages and a ceiling over hours of labor .
except perhaps for the social security act , it is the most far - reaching , the most far - sighted program for the benefit of workers ever adopted here or in any other country .
without question it starts us toward a better standard of living and increases purchasing power to buy the products of farm and factory .
do not let any calamity - howling executive with an income of $ 1,000.00 a day , who has been turning his employees over to the government relief rolls in order to preserve his company 's undistributed reserves , tell you -- using his stockholders ' money to pay the postage for his personal opinions -- tell you that a wage of $ 11.00 a week is going to have a disastrous effect on all american industry .
fortunately for business as a whole , and therefore for the nation , that type of executive is a rarity with whom most business executives most heartily disagree .
( 3 ) the congress has provided a fact - finding commission to find a path through the jungle of contradictory theories about the wise business practices -- to find the necessary facts for any intelligent legislation on monopoly , on price - fixing and on the relationship between big business and medium - sized business and little business .
different from a great part of the world , we in america persist in our belief in individual enterprise and in the profit motive ; but we realize we must continually seek improved practices to insure the continuance of reasonable profits , together with scientific progress , individual initiative , opportunities for the little fellow , fair prices , decent wages and continuing employment .
( 4 ) the congress has coordinated the supervision of commercial aviation and air mail by establishing a new civil aeronautics authority ; and it has placed all postmasters under the civil service for the first time in our national history .
( 5 ) the congress has set up the united states housing ( administration ) authority to help finance large - scale slum clearance and provide low rent housing for the low income groups in our cities .
and by improving the federal housing act , the congress has made it easier for private capital to build modest homes and low rental dwellings .
( 6 ) the congress has properly reduced taxes on small corporate enterprises , and has made it easier for the reconstruction finance corporation to make credit available to all business .
i think the bankers of the country can fairly be expected to participate in loans where the government , through the ( reconstruction finance corporation ) r. f. c. , offers to take a fair portion of the risk .
( 7 ) so , too , the congress has provided additional funds for the works progress administration , the public works administration , the rural electrification administration , the civilian conservation corps and other agencies , in order to take care of what we hope is a temporary additional number of unemployed at this time and to encourage production of every kind by private enterprise .
all these things together i call our program for the national defense of our economic system .
it is a program of balanced action -- of moving on all fronts at once in intelligent recognition that all of our economic problems , of every group , and of every section of the country are essentially one problem .
( 8) finally , because of increasing armaments in other nations and an international situation which is definitely disturbing to all of us , the congress has authorized important additions to the national armed defense of our shores and our people .
on ( another ) one other important subject the net result of a struggle in the congress has been an important victory for the people of the united states -- what might well be called a lost battle which won a war .
you will remember that a year and a half ago , nearly , on february 5 , 1937 , i sent a message to the congress dealing with the real need of federal court reforms of several kinds .
in one way or another , during the sessions of this congress , the ends -- i spoke of , the real objectives -- sought in ( the ) that message , have been substantially attained .
the attitude of the supreme court towards constitutional questions is entirely changed .
its recent decisions are eloquent testimony of a willingness to collaborate with the two other branches of government to make democracy work .
the government has been granted the right to protect its interests in litigation between private parties ( involving the constitutionality of federal statutes ) when the constitutionality of federal statutes is involved , and to appeal directly to the supreme court in all cases involving the constitutionality of federal statutes ; and no single judge is any longer empowered to suspend a federal statute on his sole judgment as to its constitutionality .
a justice(s ) of the supreme court may now retire at the age of seventy after ten years of service , and a substantial number of additional judgeships have been created in order to expedite the trial of cases , and finally greater flexibility has been added to the federal judicial system by allowing judges to be assigned to congested districts .
another indirect accomplishment of this congress has been , i think , its response to the devotion of the american people to a course of sane and consistent liberalism .
the congress has understood that under modern conditions government has a continuing responsibility to meet continuing problems , and that government can not take a holiday of a year , or a month , or even a day just because a few people are tired or frightened by the inescapable pace , fast pace , of this modern world in which we live .
some of my opponents and some of my associates have considered that i have a mistakenly sentimental judgment as to the tenacity of purpose and the general level of intelligence of the american people .
i am still convinced that the american people , since 1932 , continue to insist on two requisites of private enterprise , and the relationship of government to it .
the first is a complete honesty , a complete honesty at the top in looking after the use of other people 's money , and in apportioning and paying individual and corporate taxes ( according to ) in accordance with ability to pay .
and the second is sincere respect for the need of all people who are at the bottom , all people at the bottom who need to get work -- and through work to get a ( really ) fair share of the good things of life , and a chance to save and a chance to rise .
after the election of 1936 i was told , and the congress was told , by an increasing number of politically -- and worldly-- wise people that i should coast along , enjoy an easy presidency for four years , and not take the democratic platform too seriously .
they told me that people were getting weary of reform through political effort and would no longer oppose that small minority which , in spite of its own disastrous leadership in 1929 , is always eager to resume its control over the government of the united states .
never in our lifetime has such a concerted campaign of defeatism been thrown at the heads of the president and the senators and congressmen as in the case of this seventy - fifth congress .
never before have we had so many copperheads among us -- and you will remember that it was the copperheads who , in the days of the civil war , the war between the states , tried their best to make president lincoln and his congress give up the fight in the middle of the fight , to let the nation remain split in two and return to peace -- yes , peace at any price .
this congress has ended on the side of the people .
my faith in the american people -- and their faith in themselves -- have been justified .
i congratulate the congress and the leadership thereof and i congratulate the american people on their own staying power .
one word about our economic situation .
it makes no difference to me whether you call it a recession or a depression .
in 1932 the total national income of all the people in the country had reached the low point of thirty - eight billion dollars in that year .
with each succeeding year it rose .
last year , 1937 , it had risen to seventy billion dollars -- despite definitely worse business and agricultural prices in the last four months of last year .
this year , 1938 , while it is too early to do more than give ( an ) a mere estimate , we hope that the national income will not fall below sixty billion dollars , and that is a lot better than thirty- eight billion dollars .
we remember also that banking and business and farming are not falling apart like the one - hoss shay , as they did in the terrible winter of 1932 ( - ) to 1933 .
last year mistakes were made by the leaders of private enterprise , by the leaders of labor and by the leaders of government --all three .
last year the leaders of private enterprise pleaded for a sudden curtailment of public spending , and said they would take up the slack .
but they made the mistake of increasing their inventories too fast and setting many of their prices too high for their goods to sell .
some labor leaders goaded by decades of oppression of labor made the mistake of going too far .
they were not wise in using methods which frightened many well - wishing people .
they asked employers not only to bargain with them but to put up with jurisdictional disputes at the same time .
government too made mistakes -- mistakes of optimism in assuming that industry and labor would themselves make no mistakes -- and government made a mistake of timing in not passing a farm bill or a wage and hour bill last year .
as a result of the lessons of all these mistakes we hope that in the future private enterprise -- capital and labor alike -- will operate more intelligently together , ( and ) operate in greater cooperation with their own government than they have in the past .
such cooperation on the part of both of them will be very welcome to me .
certainly at this stage there should be a united stand on the part of both of them to resist wage cuts which would further reduce purchasing power .
this afternoon , only a few hours ago , i am told that a great steel company announced a reduction in prices with a view to stimulating business recovery .
and i was told , and i am gratified to know , that this reduction in prices has involved no wage cut .
every encouragement ought to be given to industry which accepts the large volume and high wage policy .
if this is done throughout the nation , it ought to result in conditions which will replace a great part of the government spending which the failure of cooperation has made necessary this year .
you will remember that from march 4 , 1933 down to date , not a single week has passed without a cry from the opposition , a small opposition , a cry " to do something , to say something , to restore confidence . "
there is a very articulate group of people in this country , with plenty of ability to procure publicity for their views , who have consistently refused to cooperate with the mass of the people , whether things were going well or going badly , on the ground that they required more concessions to their point of view before they would admit having what they called " confidence . "
these people demanded " restoration of confidence " when the banks were closed -- and demanded it again when the banks were reopened .
they demanded " restoration of confidence " when hungry people were thronging ( the ) our streets -- and demanded it again now when the hungry people were fed and put to work .
they demanded " restoration of confidence " when droughts hit the country -- and demanded it again now when our fields are laden with bounteous yields and excessive crops .
they demanded " restoration of confidence " last year when the automobile industry was running three shifts day and night , turning out more cars than the country could buy -- and they are demanding it again this year when the industry is trying to get rid of an automobile surplus and has shut down its factories as a result .
but , my friends , it is my belief that many of these people who have been crying aloud for " confidence " are beginning today to realize that that hand has been overplayed , and that they are now willing to talk cooperation instead .
it is my belief that the mass of the american people do have confidence in themselves -- have confidence in their ability , with the aid of government , to solve their own problems .
it is because you are not satisfied , and i am not satisfied , with the progress that we have made in finally solving our business and agricultural and social problems that i believe the great majority of you want your own government to keep on trying to solve them .
in simple frankness and in simple honesty , i need all the help i can get -- and i see signs of getting more help in the future from many who have fought against progress with tooth and nail in the past .
and now following out this line of thought , i want to say a few words about the coming political primaries .
fifty years ago party nominations were generally made in conventions -- a system typified in the public imagination by a little group in a smoke - filled room who made out the party slates .
the direct primary was invented to make the nominating process a more democratic one -- to give the party voters themselves a chance to pick their party candidates .
what i am going to say to you tonight does not relate to the primaries of any particular political party , but to matters of principle in all parties -- democratic , republican , farmer - labor , progressive , socialist or any other .
let that be clearly understood .
it is my hope that everybody affiliated with any party will vote in the primaries , and that every such voter will consider the fundamental principles for which his or her party is on record .
that makes for a healthy choice between the candidates of the opposing parties on election day in november .
an election can not give the country a firm sense of direction if it has two or more national parties which merely have different names but are as alike in their principles and aims as peas in the same pod .
in the coming primaries in all parties , there will be many clashes between two schools of thought , generally classified as liberal and conservative .
roughly speaking , the liberal school of thought recognizes that the new conditions throughout the world call for new remedies .
those of us in america who hold to this school of thought , insist that these new remedies can be adopted and successfully maintained in this country under our present form of government if we use government as an instrument of cooperation to provide these remedies .
we believe that we can solve our problems through continuing effort , through democratic processes instead of fascism or communism .
we are opposed to the kind of moratorium on reform which , in effect , ( is ) means reaction itself .
be it clearly understood , however , that when i use the word " liberal , " i mean the believer in progressive principles of democratic , representative government and not the wild man who , in effect , leans in the direction of communism , for that is just as dangerous to us as fascism itself .
the opposing or conservative school of thought , as a general proposition , does not recognize the need for government itself to step in and take action to meet these new problems .
it believes that individual initiative and private philanthropy will solve them -- that we ought to repeal many of the things we have done and go back , for ( instance ) example , to the old gold standard , or stop all this business of old age pensions and unemployment insurance , or repeal the securities and exchange act , or let monopolies thrive unchecked --return , in effect , to the kind of government that we had in the nineteen twenties .
assuming the mental capacity of all the candidates , the important question which it seems to me the primary voter must ask is this : " to which of these general schools of thought does the candidate belong ? "
as president of the united states , i am not asking the voters of the country to vote for democrats next november as opposed to republicans or members of any other party .
nor am i , as president , taking part in democratic primaries .
as the head of the democratic party , however , charged with the responsibility of carrying out the definitely liberal declaration of principles set forth in the 1936 democratic platform , i feel that i have every right to speak in those few instances where there may be a clear - cut issue between candidates for a democratic nomination involving these principles , or involving a clear misuse of my own name .
do not misunderstand me .
i certainly would not indicate a preference in a state primary merely because a candidate , otherwise liberal in outlook , had conscientiously differed with me on any single issue .
i should be far more concerned about the general attitude of a candidate towards present day problems and his own inward desire to get practical needs attended to in a practical way . (
we ) you and i all know that progress may be blocked by outspoken reactionaries , ( and also ) but we also know that progress can be blocked by those who say " yes " to a progressive objective , but who always find some reason to oppose any special specific proposal to gain that objective .
i call that type of candidate a " yes , but " fellow .
and i am concerned about the attitude of a candidate or his sponsors with respect to the rights of american citizens to assemble peaceably and to express publicly their views and opinions on important social and economic issues .
there can be no constitutional democracy in any community which denies to the individual his freedom to speak and worship as he wishes .
the american people will not be deceived by anyone who attempts to suppress individual liberty under the pretense of patriotism .
this being a free country with freedom of expression --especially with freedom of the press , as is entirely proper -- there will be a lot of mean blows struck between now and election day .
by " blows " i mean misrepresentation and personal attack and appeals to prejudice .
it would be a lot better , of course , if campaigns everywhere could be waged with arguments instead of with blows .
i hope the liberal candidates will confine themselves to argument and not resort to blows .
for in nine cases out of ten the speaker or the writer who , seeking to influence public opinion , descends from calm argument to unfair blows hurts himself more than his opponent .
the chinese have a story on this -- a story based on three or four thousand years of civilization : two chinese coolies were arguing heatedly in the ( midst ) middle of a crowd in the street .
a stranger expressed surprise that no blows were being struck by them .
his chinese friend replied : " the man who strikes first admits that his ideas have given out . "
i know that neither in the summer primaries nor in the november elections will the american voters fail to spot the candidate whose ideas have given out .

three months have passed since i talked with you shortly after the adjournment of the congress .
tonight i continue that report , though , because of the shortness of time , i must defer a number of subjects to a later date .
recently the most notable public questions that have concerned us all have had to do with industry and labor and with respect to these , certain developments have taken place which i consider of importance .
i am happy to report that after years of uncertainty , culminating in the collapse of the spring of 1933 , we are bringing order out of the old chaos with a greater certainty of the employment of labor at a reasonable wage and of more business at a fair profit .
these governmental and industrial developments hold promise of new achievements for the nation .
men may differ as to the particular form of governmental activity with respect to industry and business , but nearly all are agreed that private enterprise in times such as these can not be left without assistance and without reasonable safeguards lest it destroy not only itself but also our processes of civilization .
the underlying necessity for such activity is indeed as strong now as it was years ago when elihu root said the following very significant words : 
 " instead of the give and take of free individual contract , the tremendous power of organization has combined great aggregations of capital in enormous industrial establishments working through vast agencies of commerce and employing great masses of men in movements of production and transportation and trade , so great in the mass that each individual concerned in them is quite helpless by himself .
the relations between the employer and the employed , between the owners of aggregated capital and the units of organized labor , between the small producer , the small trader , the consumer , and the great transporting and manufacturing and distributing agencies , all present new questions for the solution of which the old reliance upon the free action of individual wills appear quite inadequate .
and in many directions , the intervention of that organized control which we call government seems necessary to produce the same result of justice and right conduct which obtained through the attrition of individuals before the new conditions arose . "
it was in this spirit thus described by secretary root that we approached our task of reviving private enterprise in march , 1933 .
our first problem was , of course , the banking situation because , as you know , the banks had collapsed .
some banks could not be saved but the great majority of them , either through their own resources or with government aid , have been restored to complete public confidence .
this has given safety to millions of depositors in these banks .
closely following this great constructive effort we have , through various federal agencies , saved debtors and creditors alike in many other fields of enterprise , such as loans on farm mortgages and home mortgages ; loans to the railroads and insurance companies and , finally , help for home owners and industry itself .
in all of these efforts the government has come to the assistance of business and with the full expectation that the money used to assist these enterprises will eventually be repaid .
i believe it will be .
the second step we have taken in the restoration of normal business enterprise has been to clean up thoroughly unwholesome conditions in the field of investment .
in this we have had assistance from many bankers and businessmen , most of whom recognize the past evils in the banking system , in the sale of securities , in the deliberate encouragement of stock gambling , in the sale of unsound mortgages and in many other ways in which the public lost billions of dollars .
they saw that without changes in the policies and methods of investment there could be no recovery of public confidence in the security of savings .
the country now enjoys the safety of bank savings under the new banking laws , the careful checking of new securities under the securities act and the curtailment of rank stock speculation through the securities exchange act .
i sincerely hope that as a result people will be discouraged in unhappy efforts to get rich quick by speculating in securities .
the average person almost always loses .
only a very small minority of the people of this country believe in gambling as a substitute for the old philosophy of benjamin franklin that the way to wealth is through work .
in meeting the problems of industrial recovery the chief agency of the government has been the national recovery administration .
under its guidance , trades and industries covering over ninety percent of all industrial employees have adopted codes of fair competition , which have been approved by the president .
under these codes , in the industries covered , child labor has been eliminated .
the work day and the work week have been shortened .
minimum wages have been established and other wages adjusted toward a rising standard of living .
the emergency purpose of the n. r. a. was to put men to work and since its creation more than four million persons have been re - employed , in great part through the cooperation of american business brought about under the codes .
benefits of the industrial recovery program have come , not only to labor in the form of new jobs , in relief from over - work and in relief from under - pay , but also to the owners and managers of industry because , together with a great increase in the payrolls , there has come a substantial rise in the total of industrial profits - a rise from a deficit figure in the first quarter of 1933 to a level of sustained profits within one year from the inauguration of n. r. a. 
 now it should not be expected that even employed labor and capital would be completely satisfied with present conditions .
employed workers have not by any means all enjoyed a return to the earnings of prosperous times ; although millions of hitherto under- privileged workers are today far better paid than ever before .
also , billions of dollars of invested capital have today a greater security of present and future earning power than before .
this is because of the establishment of fair , competitive standards and because of relief from unfair competition in wage cutting which depresses markets and destroys purchasing power .
but it is an undeniable fact that the restoration of other billions of sound investments to a reasonable earning power could not be brought about in one year .
there is no magic formula , no economic panacea , which could simply revive over - night the heavy industries and the trades dependent upon them .
nevertheless the gains of trade and industry , as a whole , have been substantial .
in these gains and in the policies of the administration there are assurances that hearten all forward - looking men and women with the confidence that we are definitely rebuilding our political and economic system on the lines laid down by the new deal - lines which as i have so often made clear , are in complete accord with the underlying principles of orderly popular government which americans have demanded since the white man first came to these shores .
we count , in the future as in the past , on the driving power of individual initiative and the incentive of fair private profit , strengthened with the acceptance of those obligations to the public interest which rest upon us all .
we have the right to expect that this driving power will be given patriotically and whole - heartedly to our nation .
we have passed through the formative period of code making in the national recovery administration and have effected a reorganization of the n. r. a. suited to the needs of the next phase , which is , in turn , a period of preparation for legislation which will determine its permanent form .
in this recent reorganization we have recognized three distinct functions .
first , the legislative or policy making function .
second , the administrative function of code making and revision and , third , the judicial function , which includes enforcement , consumer complaints and the settlement of disputes between employers and employees and between one employer and another .
we are now prepared to move into this second phase , on the basis of our experience in the first phase under the able and energetic leadership of general johnson .
we shall watch carefully the working of this new machinery for the second phase of n. r. a. , modifying it where it needs modification and finally making recommendations to the congress , in order that the functions of n. r. a. which have proved their worth may be made a part of the permanent machinery of government .
let me call your attention to the fact that the national industrial recovery act gave businessmen the opportunity they had sought for years to improve business conditions through what has been called self - government in industry .
if the codes which have been written have been too complicated , if they have gone too far in such matters as price fixing and limitation of production , let it be remembered that so far as possible , consistent with the immediate public interest of this past year and the vital necessity of improving labor conditions , the representatives of trade and industry were permitted to write their ideas into the codes .
it is now time to review these actions as a whole to determine through deliberative means in the light of experience , from the standpoint of the good of the industries themselves , as well as the general public interest , whether the methods and policies adopted in the emergency have been best calculated to promote industrial recovery and a permanent improvement of business and labor conditions .
there may be a serious question as to the wisdom of many of those devices to control production , or to prevent destructive price cutting which many business organizations have insisted were necessary , or whether their effect may have been to prevent that volume of production which would make possible lower prices and increased employment .
another question arises as to whether in fixing minimum wages on the basis of an hourly or weekly wage we have reached into the heart of the problem which is to provide such annual earnings for the lowest paid worker as will meet his minimum needs .
we also question the wisdom of extending code requirements suited to the great industrial centers and to large employers , to the great number of small employers in the smaller communities .
during the last twelve months our industrial recovery has been to some extent retarded by strikes , including a few of major importance .
i would not minimize the inevitable losses to employers and employees and to the general public through such conflicts .
but i would point out that the extent and severity of labor disputes during this period has been far less than in any previous , comparable period .
when the businessmen of the country were demanding the right to organize themselves adequately to promote their legitimate interests ; when the farmers were demanding legislation which would give them opportunities and incentives to organize themselves for a common advance , it was natural that the workers should seek and obtain a statutory declaration of their constitutional right to organize themselves for collective bargaining as embodied in section 7 ( a ) of the national industrial recovery act .
machinery set up by the federal government has provided some new methods of adjustment .
both employers and employees mast share the blame of not using them as fully as they should .
the employer who turns away from impartial agencies of peace , who denies freedom of organization to his employees , or fails to make every reasonable effort at a peaceful solution of their differences , is not fully supporting the recovery effort of his government .
the workers who turn away from these same impartial agencies and decline to use their good offices to gain their ends are likewise not fully cooperating with their government .
it is time that we made a clean - cut effort to bring about that united action of management and labor , which is one of the high purposes of the recovery act .
we have passed through more than a year of education .
step by step we have created all the government agencies necessary to insure , as a general rule , industrial peace , with justice for all those willing to use these agencies whenever their voluntary bargaining fails to produce a necessary agreement .
there should be at least a full and fair trial given to these means of ending industrial warfare ; and in such an effort we should be able to secure for employers and employees and consumers the benefits that all derive from the continuous , peaceful operation of our essential enterprises .
accordingly , i propose to confer within the coming month with small groups of those truly representative of large employers of labor and of large groups of organized labor , in order to seek their cooperation in establishing what i may describe as a specific trial period of industrial peace .
from those willing to join in establishing this hoped - for period of peace , i shall seek assurances of the making and maintenance of agreements , which can be mutually relied upon , under which wages , hours and working conditions may be determined and any later adjustments shall be made either by agreement or , in case of disagreement , through the mediation or arbitration of state or federal agencies .
i shall not ask either employers or employees permanently to lay aside the weapons common to industrial war .
but i shall ask both groups to give a fair trial to peaceful methods of adjusting their conflicts of opinion and interest , and to experiment for a reasonable time with measures suitable to civilize our industrial civilization .
closely allied to the n. r. a. is the program of public works provided for in the same act and designed to put more men back to work , both directly on the public works themselves , and indirectly in the industries supplying the materials for these public works .
to those who say that our expenditures for public works and other means for recovery are a waste that we can not afford , i answer that no country , however rich , can afford the waste of its human resources .
demoralization caused by vast unemployment is our greatest extravagance .
morally , it is the greatest menace to our social order .
some people try to tell me that we must make up our minds that for the future we shall permanently have millions of unemployed just as other countries have had them for over a decade .
what may be necessary for those countries is not my responsibility to determine .
but as for this country , i stand or fall by my refusal to accept as a necessary condition of our future a permanent army of unemployed .
on the contrary , we must make it a national principle that we will not tolerate a large army of unemployed and that we will arrange our national economy to end our present unemployment as soon as we can and then to take wise measures against its return .
i do not want to think that it is the destiny of any american to remain permanently on relief rolls .
those , fortunately few in number , who are frightened by boldness and cowed by the necessity for making decisions , complain that all we have done is unnecessary and subject to great risks .
now that these people are coming out of their storm cellars , they forget that there ever was a storm .
they point to england .
they would have you believe that england has made progress out of her depression by a do - nothing policy , by letting nature take her course .
england has her peculiarities and we have ours but i do not believe any intelligent observer can accuse england of undue orthodoxy in the present emergency .
did england let nature take her course ?
no .
did england hold to the gold standard when her reserves were threatened ?
no .
has england gone back to the gold standard today ?
no .
did england hesitate to call in ten billion dollars of her war bonds bearing 5 percent interest , to issue new bonds therefore bearing only 3 1/2 percent interest , thereby saving the british treasury one hundred and fifty million dollars a year in interest alone ?
no .
and let it be recorded that the british bankers helped .
is it not a fact that ever since the year 1909 , great britain in many ways has advanced further along lines of social security than the united states ?
is it not a fact that relations between capital and labor on the basis of collective bargaining are much further advanced in great britain than in the united states ?
it is perhaps not strange that the conservative british press has told us with pardonable irony that much of our new deal program is only an attempt to catch up with english reforms that go back ten years or more .
nearly all americans are sensible and calm people .
we do not get greatly excited nor is our peace of mind disturbed , whether we be businessmen or workers or farmers , by awesome pronouncements concerning the unconstitutionality of some of our measures of recovery and relief and reform .
we are not frightened by reactionary lawyers or political editors .
all of these cries have been heard before .
more than twenty years ago , when theodore roosevelt and woodrow wilson were attempting to correct abuses in our national life , the great chief justice white said : 
 " there is great danger it seems to me to arise from the constant habit which prevails where anything is opposed or objected to , of referring without rhyme or reason to the constitution as a means of preventing its accomplishment , thus creating the general impression that the constitution is but a barrier to progress instead of being the broad highway through which alone true progress may be enjoyed . "
in our efforts for recovery we have avoided on the one hand the theory that business should and must be taken over into an all - embracing government .
we have avoided on the other hand the equally untenable theory that it is an interference with liberty to offer reasonable help when private enterprise is in need of help .
the course we have followed fits the american practice of government - a practice of taking action step by step , of regulating only to meet concrete needs - a practice of courageous recognition of change .
i believe with abraham lincoln , that " the legitimate object of government is to do for a community of people whatever they need to have done but can not do at all or can not do so well for themselves in their separate and individual capacities . "
i still believe in ideals .
i am not for a return to that definition of liberty under which for many years a free people were being gradually regimented into the service of the privileged few .
i prefer and i am sure you prefer that broader definition of liberty under which we are moving forward to greater freedom , to greater security for the average man than he has ever known before in the history of america .

president newcomb , my friends of the university of virginia : 
 i notice by the program that i am asked to address the class of 1940 .
i avail myself of that privilege .
but i also take this very apt occasion to speak to many other classes that have graduated through all the years , classes that are still in the period of study , not alone in the schools of learning of the nation , but classes that have come up through the great schools of experience ; in other words a cross section of the country , just as you who graduate today are a cross section of the nation as a whole .
every generation of young men and women in america has questions to ask the world .
most of the time they are the simple but nevertheless difficult questions , questions of work to do , opportunities to find , ambitions to satisfy .
but every now and again in the history of the republic a different kind of question presents itself - a question that asks , not about the future of an individual or even of a generation , but about the future of the country , the future of the american people .
there was such a time at the beginning of our history as a nation .
young people asked themselves in those days what lay ahead , not for themselves , but for the new united states .
there was such a time again in the seemingly endless years of the war between the states .
young men and young women on both sides of the line asked themselves , not what trades or professions they would enter , what lives they would make , but what was to become of the country they had known .
there is such a time again today .
again today the young men and the young women of america ask themselves with earnestness and with deep concern this same question : " what is to become of the country we know ? "
now they ask it with even greater anxiety than before .
they ask , not only what the future holds for this republic , but what the future holds for all peoples and all nations that have been living under democratic forms of government - under the free institutions of a free people .
it is understandable to all of us that they should ask this question .
they read the words of those who are telling them that the ideal of individual liberty , the ideal of free franchise , the ideal of peace through justice , are decadent ideals .
they read the word and hear the boast of those who say that a belief in force - force directed by self - chosen leaders - is the new and vigorous system which will overrun the earth .
they have seen the ascendancy of this philosophy of force in nation after nation where free institutions and individual liberties were once maintained .
it is natural and understandable that the younger generation should first ask itself what the extension of the philosophy of force to all the world would lead to ultimately .
we see today in stark reality some of the consequences of what we call the machine age .
where control of machines has been retained in the hands of mankind as a whole , untold benefits have accrued to mankind .
for mankind was then the master ; and the machine was the servant .
but in this new system of force the mastery of the machine is not in the hands of mankind .
it is in the control of infinitely small groups of individuals who rule without a single one of the democratic sanctions that we have known .
the machine in hands of irresponsible conquerors becomes the master ; mankind is not only the servant ; it is the victim , too .
such mastery abandons with deliberate contempt all the moral values to which even this young country for more than three hundred years has been accustomed and dedicated .
surely the new philosophy proves from month to month that it could have no possible conception of the way of life or the way of thought of a nation whose origins go back to jamestown and plymouth rock .
conversely , neither those who spring from that ancient stock nor those who have come hither in later years can be indifferent to the destruction of freedom in their ancestral lands across the sea .
perception of danger to our institutions may come slowly or it may come with a rush and a shock as it has to the people of the united states in the past few months .
this perception of danger has come to us clearly and overwhelmingly ; and we perceive the peril in a world - wide arena - an arena that may become so narrowed that only the americas will retain the ancient faiths .
some indeed still hold to the now somewhat obvious delusion that we of the united states can safely permit the united states to become a lone island , a lone island in a world dominated by the philosophy of force .
such an island may be the dream of those who still talk and vote as isolationists .
such an island represents to me and to the overwhelming majority of americans today a helpless nightmare of a people without freedom - the nightmare of a people lodged in prison , handcuffed , hungry , and fed through the bars from day to day by the contemptuous , unpitying masters of other continents .
it is natural also that we should ask ourselves how now we can prevent the building of that prison and the placing of ourselves in the midst of it .
let us not hesitate - all of us - to proclaim certain truths .
overwhelmingly we , as a nation - and this applies to all the other american nations - are convinced that military and naval victory for the gods of force and hate would endanger the institutions of democracy in the western world , and that equally , therefore , the whole of our sympathies lies with those nations that are giving their life blood in combat against these forces .
the people and the government of the united states have seen with the utmost regret and with grave disquiet the decision of the italian government to engage in the hostilities now raging in europe .
more than three months ago the chief of the italian government sent me word that because of the determination of italy to limit , so far as might be possible , the spread of the european conflict , more than two hundred millions of people in the region of the mediterranean had been enabled to escape the suffering and the ' devastation of war .
i informed the chief of the italian government that this desire on the part of italy to prevent the war from spreading met with full sympathy and response on the part of the government and the people of the united states , and i expressed the earnest hope of this government and of this people that this policy on the part of italy might be continued .
i made it clear that in the opinion of the government of the united states any extension of hostilities in the region of the mediterranean might result in a still greater enlargement of the scene of the conflict , the conflict in the near east and in africa and that if this came to pass no one could foretell how much greater the theater of the war eventually might become .
again on a subsequent occasion , not so long ago , recognizing that certain aspirations of italy might form the basis of discussions among the powers most specifically concerned , i offered , in a message addressed to the chief of the italian government , to send to the governments of france and of great britain such specific indications of the desires of italy to obtain readjustments with regard to her position as the chief of the italian government might desire to transmit through me .
while making it clear that the government of the united states in such an event could not and would not assume responsibility for the nature of the proposals submitted nor for agreements which might thereafter be reached , i proposed that if italy would refrain from entering the war i would be willing to ask assurances from the other powers concerned that they would faithfully execute any agreement so reached and that italy 's voice in any future peace conference would have the same authority as if italy had actually taken part in the war , as a belligerent .
unfortunately to the regret of all of us and the regret of humanity , the chief of the italian government was unwilling to accept the procedure suggested and he has made no counter proposal .
this government directed its efforts to doing what it could to work for the preservation of peace in the mediterranean area , and it likewise expressed its willingness to endeavor to cooperate with the government of italy when the appropriate occasion arose for the creation of a more stable world order , through the reduction of armaments , and through the construction of a more liberal international economic system which would assure to all powers equality of opportunity in the world 's markets and in the securing of raw materials on equal terms .
i have likewise , of course , felt it necessary in my communications to signor mussolini to express the concern of the government of the united states because of the fact that any extension of the war in the region of the mediterranean would inevitably result in great prejudice to the ways of life and government and to the trade and commerce of all the american republics .
the government of italy has now chosen to preserve what it terms its " freedom of action " and to fulfill what it states are its promises to germany .
in so doing it has manifested disregard for the rights and security of other nations , disregard for the lives of the peoples of those nations which are directly threatened by this spread of the war ; and has evidenced its unwillingness to find the means through pacific negotiations for the satisfaction of what it believes are its legitimate aspirations .
on this tenth day of june , nineteen hundred and forty , the hand that held the dagger has struck it into the back of its neighbor .
on this tenth day of june , nineteen hundred and forty , in this university founded by the first great american teacher of democracy , we send forth our prayers and our hopes to those beyond the seas who are maintaining with magnificent valor their battle for freedom .
in our american unity , we will pursue two obvious and simultaneous courses ; we will extend to the opponents of force the material resources of this nation ; and , at the same time , we will harness and speed up the use of those resources in order that we ourselves in the americas may have equipment and training equal to the task of any emergency and every defense .
all roads leading to the accomplishment of these objectives must be kept clear of obstructions .
we will not slow down or detour .
signs and signals call for speed - full speed ahead .
it is right that each new generation should ask questions .
but in recent months the principal question has been somewhat simplified .
once more the future of the nation and of the american people is at stake .
we need not and we will not , in any way , abandon our continuing effort to make democracy work within our borders .
we still insist on the need for vast improvements in our own social and economic life .
but that is a component part of national defense itself .
the program unfolds swiftly and into that program will fit the responsibility and the opportunity of every man and woman in the land to preserve his and her heritage in days of peril .
i call for effort , courage , sacrifice , devotion .
granting the love of freedom , all of these are possible .
and the love of freedom is still fierce and steady in the nation today .

president hoover , mr. chief justice , my friends : 
 this is a day of national consecration .
and i am certain that on this day my fellow americans expect that on my induction into the presidency i will address them with a candor and a decision which the present situation of our people impels .
this is preeminently the time to speak the truth , the whole truth , frankly and boldly .
nor need we shrink from honestly facing conditions in our country today .
this great nation will endure as it has endured , will revive and will prosper .
so , first of all , let me assert my firm belief that the only thing we have to fear is fear itself -- nameless , unreasoning , unjustified terror which paralyzes needed efforts to convert retreat into advance .
in every dark hour of our national life a leadership of frankness and vigor has met with that understanding and support of the people themselves which is essential to victory .
i am convinced that you will again give that support to leadership in these critical days .
in such a spirit on my part and on yours we face our common difficulties .
they concern , thank god , only material things .
values have shrunken to fantastic levels ; taxes have risen ; our ability to pay has fallen ; government of all kinds is faced by serious curtailment of income ; the means of exchange are frozen in the currents of trade ; the withered leaves of industrial enterprise lie on every side ; farmers find no markets for their produce ; the savings of many years in thousands of families are gone .
more important , a host of unemployed citizens face the grim problem of existence , and an equally great number toil with little return .
only a foolish optimist can deny the dark realities of the moment .
yet our distress comes from no failure of substance .
we are stricken by no plague of locusts .
compared with the perils which our forefathers conquered because they believed and were not afraid , we have still much to be thankful for .
nature still offers her bounty and human efforts have multiplied it .
plenty is at our doorstep , but a generous use of it languishes in the very sight of the supply .
primarily this is because rulers of the exchange of mankind 's goods have failed through their own stubbornness and their own incompetence , have admitted their failure , and have abdicated .
practices of the unscrupulous money changers stand indicted in the court of public opinion , rejected by the hearts and minds of men .
true they have tried , but their efforts have been cast in the pattern of an outworn tradition .
faced by failure of credit they have proposed only the lending of more money .
stripped of the lure of profit by which to induce our people to follow their false leadership , they have resorted to exhortations , pleading tearfully for restored confidence .
they know only the rules of a generation of self - seekers .
they have no vision , and when there is no vision the people perish .
the money changers have fled from their high seats in the temple of our civilization .
we may now restore that temple to the ancient truths .
the measure of the restoration lies in the extent to which we apply social values more noble than mere monetary profit .
happiness lies not in the mere possession of money ; it lies in the joy of achievement , in the thrill of creative effort .
the joy and moral stimulation of work no longer must be forgotten in the mad chase of evanescent profits .
these dark days will be worth all they cost us if they teach us that our true destiny is not to be ministered unto but to minister to ourselves and to our fellow men .
recognition of the falsity of material wealth as the standard of success goes hand in hand with the abandonment of the false belief that public office and high political position are to be valued only by the standards of pride of place and personal profit ; and there must be an end to a conduct in banking and in business which too often has given to a sacred trust the likeness of callous and selfish wrongdoing .
small wonder that confidence languishes , for it thrives only on honesty , on honor , on the sacredness of obligations , on faithful protection , on unselfish performance ; without them it can not live .
restoration calls , however , not for changes in ethics alone .
this nation asks for action , and action now .
our greatest primary task is to put people to work .
this is no unsolvable problem if we face it wisely and courageously .
it can be accomplished in part by direct recruiting by the government itself , treating the task as we would treat the emergency of a war , but at the same time , through this employment , accomplishing greatly needed projects to stimulate and reorganize the use of our natural resources .
hand in hand with this we must frankly recognize the overbalance of population in our industrial centers and , by engaging on a national scale in a redistribution , endeavor to provide a better use of the land for those best fitted for the land .
the task can be helped by definite efforts to raise the values of agricultural products and with this the power to purchase the output of our cities .
it can be helped by preventing realistically the tragedy of the growing loss through foreclosure of our small homes and our farms .
it can be helped by insistence that the federal , state , and local governments act forthwith on the demand that their cost be drastically reduced .
it can be helped by the unifying of relief activities which today are often scattered , uneconomical , and unequal .
it can be helped by national planning for and supervision of all forms of transportation and of communications and other utilities which have a definitely public character .
there are many ways in which it can be helped , but it can never be helped merely by talking about it .
we must act and act quickly .
finally , in our progress toward a resumption of work we require two safeguards against a return of the evils of the old order : there must be a strict supervision of all banking and credits and investments , so that there will be an end to speculation with other people 's money ; and there must be provision for an adequate but sound currency .
these are the lines of attack .
i shall presently urge upon a new congress , in special session , detailed measures for their fulfillment , and i shall seek the immediate assistance of the several states .
through this program of action we address ourselves to putting our own national house in order and making income balance outgo .
our international trade relations , though vastly important , are in point of time and necessity secondary to the establishment of a sound national economy .
i favor as a practical policy the putting of first things first .
i shall spare no effort to restore world trade by international economic readjustment , but the emergency at home can not wait on that accomplishment .
the basic thought that guides these specific means of national recovery is not narrowly nationalistic .
it is the insistence , as a first considerations , upon the interdependence of the various elements in and parts of the united states - a recognition of the old and permanently important manifestation of the american spirit of the pioneer .
it is the way to recovery .
it is the immediate way .
it is the strongest assurance that the recovery will endure .
in the field of world policy i would dedicate this nation to the policy of the good neighbor -- the neighbor who resolutely respects himself and , because he does so , respects the rights of others -- the neighbor who respects his obligations and respects the sanctity of his agreements in and with a world of neighbors .
if i read the temper of our people correctly , we now realize as we have never realized before our interdependence on each other ; that we can not merely take but we must give as well ; that if we are to go forward , we must move as a trained and loyal army willing to sacrifice for the good of a common discipline , because without such discipline no progress is made , no leadership becomes effective .
we are , i know , ready and willing to submit our lives and property to such discipline , because it makes possible a leadership which aims at a larger good .
this i propose to offer , pledging that the larger purposes will bind upon us all as a sacred obligation with a unity of duty hitherto evoked only in time of armed strife .
with this pledge taken , i assume unhesitatingly the leadership of this great army of our people dedicated to a disciplined attack upon our common problems .
action in this image and to this end is feasible under the form of government which we have inherited from our ancestors .
our constitution is so simple and practical that it is possible always to meet extraordinary needs by changes in emphasis and arrangement without loss of essential form .
that is why our constitutional system has proved itself the most superbly enduring political mechanism the modern world has produced .
it has met every stress of vast expansion of territory , of foreign wars , of bitter internal strife , of world relations .
it is to be hoped that the normal balance of executive and legislative authority may be wholly adequate to meet the unprecedented task before us .
but it may be that an unprecedented demand and need for undelayed action may call for temporary departure from that normal balance of public procedure .
i am prepared under my constitutional duty to recommend the measures that a stricken nation in the midst of a stricken world may require .
these measures , or such other measures as the congress may build out of its experience and wisdom , i shall seek , within my constitutional authority , to bring to speedy adoption .
but in the event that the congress shall fail to take one of these two courses , and in the event that the national emergency is still critical , i shall not evade the clear course of duty that will then confront me .
i shall ask the congress for the one remaining instrument to meet the crisis -- broad executive power to wage a war against the emergency , as great as the power that would be given to me if we were in fact invaded by a foreign foe .
for the trust reposed in me i will return the courage and the devotion that befit the time .
i can do no less .
we face the arduous days that lie before us in the warm courage of national unity ; with the clear consciousness of seeking old and precious moral values ; with the clean satisfaction that comes from the stern performance of duty by old and young alike .
we aim at the assurance of a rounded and permanent national life .
we do not distrust the future of essential democracy .
the people of the united states have not failed .
in their need they have registered a mandate that they want direct , vigorous action .
they have asked for discipline and direction under leadership .
they have made me the present instrument of their wishes .
in the spirit of the gift i take it .
in this dedication of a nation we humbly ask the blessing of god .
may he protect each and every one of us .
may he guide me in the days to come .

we have considered and determined the military plans of the three allied powers for the final defeat of the common enemy .
the military staffs of the three allied nations have met in daily meetings throughout the conference .
these meetings have been most satisfactory from every point of view and have resulted in closer coordination of the military effort of the three allies than ever before .
the fullest information has been interchanged .
the timing , scope , and coordination of new and even more powerful blows to be launched by our armies and air forces into the heart of germany from the east , west , north , and south have been fully agreed and planned in detail .
our combined military plans will be made known only as we execute them , but we believe that the very close working partnership among the three staffs attained at this conference will result in shortening the war .
meetings of the three staffs will be continued in the future whenever the need arises .
nazi germany is doomed .
the german people will only make the cost of their defeat heavier to themselves by attempting to continue a hopeless resistance .
we have agreed on common policies and plans for enforcing the unconditional surrender terms which we shall impose together on nazi germany after german armed resistance has been finally crushed .
these terms will not be made known until the final defeat of germany has been accomplished .
under the agreed plan , the forces of the three powers will each occupy a separate zone of germany .
coordinated administration and control has been provided for under the plan through a central control commission consisting of the supreme commanders of the three powers with headquarters in berlin .
it has been agreed that france should be invited by the three powers , if she should so desire , to take over a zone of occupation , and to participate as a fourth member of the control commission .
the limits of the french zone will be agreed by the four governments concerned through their representatives on the european advisory commission .
it is our inflexible purpose to destroy german militarism and nazism and to ensure that germany will never again be able to disturb the peace of the world .
we are determined to disarm and disband all german armed forces ; break up for all time the german general staff that has repeatedly contrived the resurgence of german militarism ; remove or destroy all german military equipment ; eliminate or control all german industry that could be used for military production ; bring all war criminals to just and swift punishment and exact reparation in kind for the destruction wrought by the germans ; wipe out the nazi party , nazi laws , organizations and institutions , remove all nazi and militarist influences from public office and from the cultural and economic life of the german people ; and take in harmony such other measures in germany as may be necessary to the future peace and safety of the world .
it is not our purpose to destroy the people of germany , but only when nazism and militarism have been extirpated will there be hope for a decent life for germans , and a place for them in the comity of nations .
we have considered the question of the damage caused by germany to the allied nations in this war and recognized it as just that germany be obliged to make compensation for this damage in kind to the greatest extent possible .
a commission for the compensation of damage will be established .
the commission will work in moscow .
we are resolved upon the earliest possible establishment with our allies of a general international organization to maintain peace and security .
we believe that this is essential , both to prevent aggression and to remove the political , economic , and social causes of war through the close and continuing collaboration of all peace - loving peoples .
the foundations were laid at dumbarton oaks .
on the important question of voting procedure , however , agreement was not there reached .
the present conference has been able to resolve this difficulty .
we have agreed that a conference of united nations should be called to meet at san francisco in the united states on april 25 , 1945 , to prepare the charter of such an organization , along the lines proposed in the informal conversations at dumbarton oaks .
the government of china and the provisional government of france will be immediately consulted and invited to sponsor invitations to the conference jointly with the governments of the united states , great britain , and the union of soviet socialist republics .
as soon as the consultation with china and france has been completed , the text of the proposals on voting procedure will be made public .
the premier of the union of soviet socialist republics , the prime minister of the united kingdom , and the president of the united states of america have consulted with each other in the common interests of the peoples of their countries and those of liberated europe .
they jointly declare their mutual agreement to concert during the temporary period of instability in liberated europe the policies of their three governments in assisting the peoples liberated from the domination of nazi germany and the peoples of the former axis satellite states of europe to solve by democratic means their pressing political and economic problems .
the establishment of order in europe and the rebuilding of national economic life must be achieved by processes which will enable the liberated peoples to destroy the last vestiges of nazism and fascism and to create democratic institutions of their own choice .
this is a principle of the atlantic charter- the right of all peoples to choose the form of government under which they will live- the restoration of sovereign rights and self - government to those peoples who have been forcibly deprived of them by the aggressor nations .
to foster the conditions in which the liberated peoples may exercise these rights , the three governments will jointly assist the people in any european liberated state or former axis satellite state in europe where in their judgment conditions require ( a ) to establish conditions of internal peace ; ( b ) to carry out emergency measures for the relief of distressed peoples ; ( c ) to form interim governmental authorities broadly representative of all democratic elements in the population and pledged to the earliest possible establishment through free elections of governments responsive to the will of the people ; and ( d ) to facilitate where necessary the holding of such elections .
the three governments will consult the other united nations and provisional authorities or other governments in europe when matters of direct interest to them are under consideration .
when , in the opinion of the three governments , conditions in any european liberated state or any former axis satellite state in europe make such action necessary , they will immediately consult together on the measures necessary to discharge the joint responsibilities set forth in this declaration .
by this declaration we reaffirm our faith in the principles of the atlantic charter , our pledge in the declaration by the united nations , and our determination to build in cooperation with other peace - loving nations world order under law , dedicated to peace , security , freedom , and general well - being of all mankind .
in issuing this declaration , the three powers express the hope that the provisional government of the french republic may be associated with them in the procedure suggested .
a new situation has been created in poland as a result of her complete liberation by the red army .
this calls for the establishment of a polish provisional government which can be more broadly based than was possible before the recent liberation of western poland .
the provisional government which is now functioning in poland should therefore be reorganized on a broader democratic basis with the inclusion of democratic leaders from poland itself and from poles abroad .
this new government should then be called the polish provisional government of national unity .
m. molotov , mr. harriman , and sir a. clark kerr are authorized as a commission to consult in the first instance in moscow with members of the present provisional government and with other polish democratic leaders from within poland and from abroad , with a view to the reorganization of the present government along the above lines .
this polish provisional government of national unity shall be pledged to the holding of free and unfettered elections as soon as possible on the basis of universal suffrage and secret ballot .
in these elections all democratic and anti - nazi parties shall have the right to take part and to put forward candidates .
when a polish provisional government of national unity has been properly formed in conformity with the above , the government of the u. s. s. r. , which now maintains diplomatic relations with the present provisional government of poland , and the government of the united kingdom and the government of the u. s. a. will establish diplomatic relations with the new polish provisional government of national unity , and will exchange ambassadors by whose reports the respective governments will be kept informed about the situation in poland .
the three heads of government consider that the eastern frontier of poland should follow the curzon line with digressions from it in some regions of five to eight kilometers in favor of poland .
they recognized that poland must receive substantial accessions of territory in the north and west .
they feel that the opinion of the new polish provisional government of national unity should be sought in due course on the extent of these accessions and that the final delimitation of the western frontier of poland should thereafter await the peace conference .
we have agreed to recommend to marshal tito and dr. subasic that the agreement between them should be put into effect immediately , and that a new government should be formed on the basis of that agreement .
we also recommend that as soon as the new government has been formed it should declare that : 
 1 .
the anti - fascist assembly of national liberation ( avnoj ) should be extended to include members of the last yugoslav parliament ( skupschina ) who have not compromised themselves by collaboration with the enemy , thus forming a body to be known as a temporary parliament ; and , 
 2 .
legislative acts passed by the anti - fascist assembly of national liberation will be subject to subsequent ratification by a constituent assembly .
there was also a general review of other balkan questions .
throughout the conference , besides the daily meetings of the heads of governments and the foreign secretaries , separate meetings of the three foreign secretaries , and their advisers have also been held daily .
these meetings have proved of the utmost value and the conference agreed that permanent machinery should be set up for regular consultation between the three foreign secretaries .
they will , therefore , meet as often as may be necessary , probably about every three or four months .
these meetings will be held in rotation in the three capitals , the first meeting being held in london , after the united nations conference on world organization .
our meeting here in the crimea has reaffirmed our common determination to maintain and strengthen in the peace to come that unity of purpose and of action which has made victory possible and certain for the united nations in this war .
we believe that this is a sacred obligation which our governments owe to our peoples and to all the peoples of the world .
only with the continuing and growing cooperation and understanding among our three countries and among all the peace - loving nations can the highest aspiration of humanity be realized -- a secure and lasting peace which will , in the words of the atlantic charter , " afford assurance that all the men in all the lands may live out their lives in freedom from fear and want . "
victory in this war and establishment of the proposed international organization will provide the greatest opportunity in all history to create in the years to come the essential conditions of such a peace .
j. stalin
my fellow americans : 
 it is nearly five months since we were attacked at pearl harbor .
for the two years prior to that attack this country had been gearing itself up to a high level of production of munitions .
and yet our war efforts had done little to dislocate the normal lives of most of us .
since then we have dispatched strong forces of our army and navy , several hundred thousand of them , to bases and battlefronts thousands of miles from home .
we have stepped up our war production on a scale that is testing our industrial power , ( and ) our engineering genius and our economic structure to the utmost .
we have had no illusions about the fact that this ( would be ) is a tough job -- and a long one .
american warships are now in combat in the north and south atlantic , in the arctic , in the mediterranean , in the indian ocean , and in the north and south pacific .
american troops have taken stations in south america , greenland , iceland , the british isles , the near east , the middle east and the far east , the continent of australia , and many islands of the pacific .
american war planes , manned by americans , are flying in actual combat over all the continents and all the oceans .
on the european front the most important development of the past year has been without question the crushing counter - offensive on the part of the great armies of russia against the powerful german army .
these russian forces have destroyed and are destroying more armed power of our enemies -- troops , planes , tanks and guns -- than all the other united nations put together .
in the mediterranean area , matters remain on the surface much as they were .
but the situation there is receiving very careful attention .
recently we ( have ) received news of a change in government in what we used to know as the republic of france -a name dear to the hearts of all lovers of liberty -- a name and an institution which we hope will soon be restored to full dignity .
throughout the nazi occupation of france , we have hoped for the maintenance of a french government which would strive to regain independence , to reestablish the principles of " liberty , equality and fraternity , " and to restore the historic culture of france .
our policy has been consistent from the very beginning .
however , we are now greatly concerned lest those who have recently come to power may seek to force the brave french people into submission to nazi despotism .
the united nations will take measures , if necessary , to prevent the use of french territory in any part of the world for military purposes by the axis powers .
the good people of france will readily understand that such action is essential for the united nations to prevent assistance to the armies or navies or air forces of germany , or italy ( and ) or japan .
the overwhelming majority of the french people understand that the fight of the united nations is fundamentally their fight , that our victory means the restoration of a free and independent france -- and the saving of france from the slavery which would be imposed upon her by her external enemies and by her internal traitors .
we know how the french people really feel .
we know that a deep - seated determination to obstruct every step in the axis plan extends from occupied france through vichy france all the way to the people of their colonies in every ocean and on every continent .
our planes are helping in the defense of french colonies today , and soon american flying fortresses will be fighting for the liberation of the darkened continent of europe itself .
in all the occupied countries there are men and women , and even little children who have never stopped fighting , never stopped resisting , never stopped proving to the nazis that their so - called " new order " ( can ) will never be enforced upon free peoples .
in the german and italian peoples themselves there is a growing conviction that the cause of nazi - ism and fascism is hopeless -- that their political and military leaders have led them along the bitter road which leads not to world conquest but to final defeat .
they can not fail to contrast the present frantic speeches of these leaders with their arrogant boastings of a year ago , and two years ago .
and , on the other side of the world , in the far east , we have passed through a phase of serious losses .
we have inevitably lost control of a large portion of the philippine islands .
but this whole nation pays tribute to the filipino and american officers and men who held out so long on bataan peninsula , to those grim and gallant fighters who still hold corregidor , where the flag flies , and to the forces ( which ) that are still striking effectively at the enemy on mindanao and other islands .
the malayan peninsula and singapore are in the hands of the enemy ; the netherlands east indies are almost entirely occupied , though resistance there continues .
many other islands are in the possession of the japanese .
but there is good reason to believe that their southward advance has been checked .
australia , new zealand , and much other territory will be bases for offensive action -- and we are determined that the territory ( which ) that has been lost will be regained .
the japanese are pressing their northward advance ( in ) against burma with considerable power , driving toward india and china .
they have been opposed with great bravery by small british and chinese forces aided by american fliers .
the news in burma tonight is not good .
the japanese may cut the burma road ; but i want to say to the gallant people of china that no matter what advances the japanese may make , ways will be found to deliver airplanes and munitions of war to the armies of generalissimo chiang kai - shek .
we remember that the chinese people were the first to stand up and fight against the aggressors in this war ; and in the future ( an ) a still unconquerable china will play its proper role in maintaining peace and prosperity , not only in eastern asia but in the whole world .
for every advance that the japanese have made since they started their frenzied career of conquest , they have had to pay a very heavy toll in warships , in transports , in planes , and in men .
they are feeling the effects of those losses .
it is even reported from japan that somebody has dropped bombs on tokyo , and on other principal centers of japanese war industries .
if this be true , it is the first time in history that japan has suffered such indignities .
although the treacherous attack on pearl harbor was the immediate cause of our entry into the war , that event found the american people spiritually prepared for war on a world - wide scale .
we went into this war fighting .
we know what we are fighting for .
we realize that the war has become what hitler originally proclaimed it to be -- a total war .
not all of us can have the privilege of fighting our enemies in distant parts of the world .
not all of us can have the privilege of working in a munitions factory or a shipyard , or on the farms or in oil fields or mines , producing the weapons or the raw materials ( which ) that are needed by our armed forces .
but there is one front and one battle where everyone in the united states -- every man , woman , and child -- is in action , and will be privileged to remain in action throughout this war .
that front is right here at home , in our daily lives , ( and ) in our daily tasks .
here at home everyone will have the privilege of making whatever self - denial is necessary , not only to supply our fighting men , but to keep the economic structure of our country fortified and secure during the war and after the war .
this will require , of course , the abandonment not only of luxuries but of many other creature comforts .
every loyal american is aware of his individual responsibility .
whenever i hear anyone saying " the american people are complacent -- they need to be aroused , " i feel like asking him to come to washington ( and ) to read the mail that floods into the white house and into all departments of this government .
the one question that recurs through all these thousands of letters and messages is " what more can i do to help my country in winning this war " ?
to build the factories , ( and ) to buy the materials , ( and ) to pay the labor , ( and ) to provide the transportation , ( and ) to equip and feed and house the soldiers , sailors and marines , ( and ) to do all the thousands of things necessary in a war -- all cost a lot of money , more money than has ever been spent by any nation at any time in the long history of the world .
we are now spending , solely for war purposes , the sum of about one hundred million dollars every day in the week .
but , before this year is over , that almost unbelievable rate of expenditure will be doubled .
all of this money has to be spent -- and spent quickly -- if we are to produce within the time now available the enormous quantities of weapons of war which we need .
but the spending of these tremendous sums presents grave danger of disaster to our national economy .
when your government continues to spend these unprecedented sums for munitions month by month and year by year , that money goes into the pocketbooks and bank accounts of the people of the united states .
at the same time raw materials and many manufactured goods are necessarily taken away from civilian use , and machinery and factories are being converted to war production .
you do not have to be a professor of mathematics or economics to see that if people with plenty of cash start bidding against each other for scarce goods , the price of those goods ( them ) goes up .
yesterday i submitted to the congress of the united states a seven - point program , a program of general principles which taken together could be called the national economic policy for attaining the great objective of keeping the cost of living down .
i repeat them now to you in substance : 
 first , we must , through heavier taxes , keep personal and corporate profits at a low reasonable rate .
second , we must fix ceilings on prices and rents .
third , we must stabilize wages .
fourth , we must stabilize farm prices .
fifth , we must put more billions into war bonds .
sixth , we must ration all essential commodities , which are scarce .
seventh , we must discourage installment buying , and encourage paying off debts and mortgages .
i do not think it is necessary to repeat what i said yesterday to the congress in discussing these general principles .
the important thing to remember is that earn one of these points is dependent on the others if the whole program is to work .
some people are already taking the position that every one of the seven points is correct except the one point which steps on their own individual toes .
a few seem very willing to approve self - denial -- on the part of their neighbors .
the only effective course of action is a simultaneous attack on all of the factors which increase the cost of living , in one comprehensive , all - embracing program covering prices , and profits , and wages , and taxes and debts .
the blunt fact is that every single person in the united states is going to be affected by this program .
some of you will be affected more directly by one or two of these restrictive measures , but all of you will be affected indirectly by all of them .
are you a business man , or do you own stock in a business corporation ?
well , your profits are going to be cut down to a reasonably low level by taxation .
your income will be subject to higher taxes .
indeed in these days , when every available dollar should go to the war effort , i do not think that any american citizen should have a net income in excess of $ 25,000 per year after payment of taxes .
are you a retailer or a wholesaler or a manufacturer or a farmer or a landlord ?
ceilings are being placed on the prices at which you can sell your goods or rent your property .
do you work for wages ?
you will have to forego higher wages for your particular job for the duration of the war .
all of us are used to spending money for things that we want , things , however , which are not absolutely essential .
we will all have to forego that kind of spending .
because we must put every dime and every dollar we can possibly spare out of our earnings into war bonds and stamps .
because the demands of the war effort require the rationing of goods of which there is not enough to go around .
because the stopping of purchases of non - essentials will release thousands of workers who are needed in the war effort .
as i told the congress yesterday , " sacrifice " is not exactly the proper word with which to describe this program of self - denial .
when , at the end of this great struggle we shall have saved our free way of life , we shall have made no " sacrifice . "
the price for civilization must be paid in hard work and sorrow and blood .
the price is not too high .
if you doubt it , ask those millions who live today under the tyranny of hitlerism .
ask the workers of france and norway and the netherlands , whipped to labor by the lash , whether the stabilization of wages is too great a " sacrifice . "
ask the farmers of poland and denmark , of czechoslovakia and france , looted of their livestock , starving while their own crops are stolen from their land , ask them whether " parity " prices are too great a " sacrifice . "
ask the businessmen of europe , whose enterprises have been stolen from their owners , whether the limitation of profits and personal incomes is too great a " sacrifice . "
ask the women and children whom hitler is starving whether the rationing of tires and gasoline and sugar is too great a " sacrifice . "
we do not have to ask them .
they have already given us their agonized answers .
this great war effort must be carried through to its victorious conclusion by the indomitable will and determination of the people as one great whole .
it must not be impeded by the faint of heart .
it must not be impeded by those who put their own selfish interests above the interests of the nation .
it must not be impeded by those who pervert honest criticism into falsification of fact .
it must not be impeded by self - styled experts either in economics or military problems who know neither true figures nor geography itself .
it must not be impeded by a few bogus patriots who use the sacred freedom of the press to echo the sentiments of the propagandists in tokyo and berlin .
and , above all , it shall not be imperiled by the handful of noisy traitors --betrayers of america , ( and ) betrayers of christianity itself -- would - be dictators who in their hearts and souls have yielded to hitlerism and would have this republic do likewise .
i shall use all of the executive power that i have to carry out the policy laid down .
if it becomes necessary to ask for any additional legislation in order to attain our objective of preventing a spiral in the cost of living , i shall do so .
i know the american farmer , the american workman , and the american businessman .
i know that they will gladly embrace this economy and equality of sacrifice , satisfied that it is necessary for the most vital and compelling motive in all their lives -- winning through to victory .
never in the memory of man has there been a war in which the courage , the endurance and the loyalt(y)ies of civilians played so vital a part .
many thousands of civilians all over the world have been and are being killed or maimed by enemy action .
indeed , it was the fortitude of the common people of britain under fire which enabled that island to stand and prevented hitler from winning the war in 1940 .
the ruins of london and coventry and other cities are today the proudest monuments to british heroism .
our own american civilian population is now relatively safe from such disasters .
and , to an ever - increasing extent , our soldiers , sailors and marines are fighting with great bravery and great skill on far distant fronts to make sure that we shall remain safe .
i should like to tell you one or two stories about the men we have in our armed forces : 
 there is , for ( instance ) example , dr. corydon m. wassell .
he was a missionary , well known for his good works in china .
he is a simple , modest , retiring man , nearly sixty years old , but he entered the service of his country and was commissioned a lieutenant commander in the navy .
dr. wassell was assigned to duty in java caring for wounded officers and men of the cruisers houston and marblehead which had been in heavy action in the java seas .
when the japanese advanced across the island , it was decided to evacuate as many as possible of the wounded to australia .
but about twelve of the men were so badly wounded that they could n't ( not ) be moved .
dr. wassell remained with them , ( these men ) knowing that he would be captured by the enemy .
but he decided to make a last desperate attempt to get the men out of java .
he asked each of them if he wished to take the chance , and every one agreed .
he first had to get the twelve men to the sea coast -- fifty miles away .
to do this , he had to improvise stretchers for the hazardous journey .
the men were suffering severely , but dr. wassell kept them alive by his skill , and inspired them by his own courage .
and as the official report said , dr. wassell was " almost like a christ - like shepherd devoted to his flock . "
on the sea coast , he embarked the men on a little dutch ship .
they were bombed , ( and ) they were machine - gunned by waves of japanese planes .
dr. wassell took virtual command of the ship , and by great skill avoided destruction , hiding in ( small ) little bays and little inlets .
a few days later , dr. wassell and his ( little ) small flock of wounded men reached australia safely .
and today dr. wassell ( now ) wears the navy cross .
another story concerns a ship , a ship rather than an individual man .
you may remember the tragic sinking of the submarine , the u. s.s. squalus off the new england coast in the summer of 1939 .
some of the crew were lost , but others were saved by the speed and the efficiency of the surface rescue crews .
the squalus itself was tediously raised from the bottom of the ( ocean ) sea .
she was repaired and put back into commission , and eventually she sailed again under a new name , the u. s.s. sailfish .
today , she is a potent and effective unit of our submarine fleet in the southwest pacific .
the sailfish has covered many thousands of miles in operations in ( the ) those ( western pacific ) waters .
she has sunk a japanese destroyer .
she has torpedoed a japanese cruiser .
she has made ( two ) torpedo hits -- two of them -- on a japanese aircraft carrier .
three of the enlisted men of our navy who went down with the squalus in 1939 and were rescued , are today serving on the same ship , the u. s.s. sailfish , in this war .
it seems to me that it is heartening to know that the squalus , once given up as lost , rose from the depths to fight for our country in time of peril .
one more story , ( which ) that i heard only this morning : 
 this is a story of one of our army flying fortresses operating in the western pacific .
the pilot of this plane is a modest young man , proud of his crew for one of the toughest fights a bomber has yet experienced .
the bomber departed from its base , as part or a flight of five bombers , to attack japanese transports ( which ) that were landing troops against us in the philippines .
when they had gone about halfway to their destination , one of the motors of this bomber went out of commission .
the young pilot lost contact with the other bombers .
the crew , however , got the motor working , got it going again and the plane proceeded on its mission alone .
by the time it arrived at its target the other four flying fortresses had already passed over , had dropped their bombs , and had stirred up the hornets ' nest of japanese " zero " planes .
eighteen of ( them ) these " zero " fighters attacked our one flying fortress .
despite this mass attack , our plane proceeded on its mission , and dropped all of its bombs on six japanese transports which were lined up along the docks .
as it turned back on its homeward journey a running fight between the bomber and the eighteen japanese pursuit planes continued for seventy - five miles .
four pursuit ( ships ) planes of the japs attacked simultaneously at each side . (
and ) four were shot down with the side guns .
during this fight , the bomber 's radio operator was killed , the engineer 's right hand was shot off , and one gunner was crippled , leaving only one man available to operate both side guns .
although wounded in one hand , ( this ) the gunner alternately manned both side guns , bringing down three more japanese " zero " planes .
while this was going on , one engine on the american bomber was shot out , one gas tank was hit , the radio was shot off , and the oxygen system was entirely destroyed .
out of eleven control cables all but four were shot away .
the rear landing wheel was blown off entirely , and the two front wheels were both shot flat .
the fight continued until the remaining japanese pursuit ships exhausted their ammunition and turned back .
with two engines gone and the plane practically out of control , the american bomber returned to its base after dark and made an emergency landing .
the mission had been accomplished .
the name of that pilot is captain hewitt t. wheless , of the united states army .
he comes from a place called menard , texas -- with a population 2,375 .
he has been awarded the distinguished service cross .
and i hope that he is listening .
these stories i have told you are not exceptional .
they are typical examples of individual heroism and skill .
as we here at home contemplate our own duties , our own responsibilities , let us think and think hard of the example which is being set for us by our fighting men .
our soldiers and sailors are members of well disciplined units .
but they are still and forever individuals -- free individuals .
they are farmers , and workers , businessmen , professional men , artists , clerks .
they are the united states of america .
that is why they fight .
we too are the united states of america .
that is why we must work and sacrifice .
it is for them .
it is for us .
it is for victory .

i hope that you will pardon me for this unusual posture of sitting down during the presentation of what i want to say , but i know that you will realize that it makes it a lot easier for me not to have to carry about ten pounds of steel around on the bottom of my legs ; and also because of the fact that i have just completed a fourteen - thousand - mile trip .
first of all , i want to say , it is good to be home .
it has been a long journey .
i hope you will also agree that it has been , so far , a fruitful one .
speaking in all frankness , the question of whether it is entirely fruitful or not lies to a great extent in your hands .
for unless you here in the halls of the american congress- with the support of the american people -- concur in the general conclusions reached at yalta , and give them your active support , the meeting will not have produced lasting results .
that is why i have come before you at the earliest hour i could after my return .
i want to make a personal report to you -- and , at the same time , to the people of the country .
many months of earnest work are ahead of us all , and i should like to feel that when the last stone is laid on the structure of international peace , it will be an achievement for which all of us in america have worked steadfastly and unselfishly -- together .
i am returning from this trip -- that took me so far -- refreshed and inspired .
i was well the entire time .
i was not ill for a second , until i arrived back in washington , and there i heard all of the rumors which had occurred in my absence .
i returned from the trip refreshed and inspired .
the roosevelts are not , as you may suspect , averse to travel .
we seem to thrive on it !
far away as i was , i was kept constantly informed of affairs in the united states .
the modern miracles of rapid communication have made this world very small .
we must always bear in mind that fact , when we speak or think of international relations .
i received a steady stream of messages from washington -- i might say from not only the executive branch with all its departments , but also from the legislative branch -- and except where radio silence was necessary for security purposes , i could continuously send messages any place in the world .
and of course , in a grave emergency , we could have even risked the breaking of the security rule .
i come from the crimea conference with a firm belief that we have made a good start on the road to a world of peace .
there were two main purposes in this crimea conference .
the first was to bring defeat to germany with the greatest possible speed , and the smallest possible loss of allied men .
that purpose is now being carried out in great force .
the german army , and the german people , are feeling the ever - increasing might of our fighting men and of the allied armies .
every hour gives us added pride in the heroic advance of our troops in germany -- on german soil -- toward a meeting with the gallant red army .
the second purpose was to continue to build the foundation for an international accord that would bring order and security after the chaos of the war , that would give some assurance of lasting peace among the nations of the world .
toward that goal also , a tremendous stride was made .
at teheran , a little over a year ago , there were long - range military plans laid by the chiefs of staff of the three most powerful nations .
among the civilian leaders at teheran , however , at that time , there were only exchanges of views and expressions of opinion .
no political arrangements were made -- and none was attempted .
at the crimea conference , however , the time had come for getting down to specific cases in the political field .
there was on all sides at this conference an enthusiastic effort to reach an agreement .
since the time of teheran , a year ago , there had developed among all of us a -- what shall i call it ? --
a greater facility in negotiating with each other , that augurs well for the peace of the world .
we know each other better .
i have never for an instant wavered in my belief that an agreement to insure world peace and security can be reached .
there were a number of things that we did that were concrete -- that were definite .
for instance , the lapse of time between teheran and yalta without conferences of civilian representatives of the three major powers has proved to be too long - fourteen months .
during that long period , local problems were permitted to become acute in places like poland and greece and italy and yugoslavia .
therefore , we decided at yalta that , even if circumstances made it impossible for the heads of the three governments to meet more often in the future , we would make sure that there would be more frequent personal contacts for the exchange of views , between the secretaries of state and the foreign ministers of these three powers .
we arranged for periodic meetings at intervals of three or four months .
i feel very confident that under this arrangement there will be no recurrences of the incidents which this winter disturbed the friends of world - wide cooperation and collaboration .
when we met at yalta , in addition to laying our strategic and tactical plans for the complete and final military victory over germany , there were other problems of vital political consequence .
for instance , first , there were the problems of the occupation and control of germany -- after victory -- the complete destruction of her military power , and the assurance that neither the nazis nor prussian militarism could again be revived to threaten the peace and the civilization of the world .
second -- again for example -- there was the settlement of the few differences that remained among us with respect to the international security organization after the dumbarton oaks conference .
as you remember , at that time , i said that we had agreed ninety percent .
well , that 's a pretty good percentage .
i think the other ten percent was ironed out at yalta .
third , there were the general political and economic problems common to all of the areas which had been or would be liberated from the nazi yoke .
this is a very special problem .
we over here find it difficult to understand the ramifications of many of these problems in foreign lands , but we are trying to .
fourth , there were the special problems created by a few instances such as poland and yugoslavia .
days were spent in discussing these momentous matters and we argued freely and frankly across the table .
but at the end , on every point , unanimous agreement was reached .
and more important even than the agreement of words , i may say we achieved a unity of thought and a way of getting along together .
of course , we know that it was hitler 's hope -- and the german war lords ' -- that we would not agree -- that some slight crack might appear in the solid wall of allied unity , a crack that would give him and his fellow gangsters one last hope of escaping their just doom .
that is the objective for which his propaganda ma- chine has been working for many months .
but hitler has failed .
never before have the major allies been more closely united -- not only in their war aims but also in their peace aims .
and they are determined to continue to be united with each other - and with all peace - loving nations -- so that the ideal of lasting peace will become a reality .
the soviet , british , and united states chiefs of staff held daily meetings with each other .
they conferred frequently with marshal stalin , and with prime minister churchill and with me , on the problem of coordinating the strategic and tactical efforts of the allied powers .
they completed their plans for the final knock - out blows to germany .
at the time of the teheran conference , the russian front was removed so far from the american and british fronts that , while certain long - range strategic cooperation was possible , there could be no tactical , day - by - day coordination .
they were too far apart .
but russian troops have now crossed poland .
they are fighting on the eastern soil of germany herself ; british and american troops are now on german soil close to the rhine river in the west .
it is a different situation today from what it was fourteen months ago ; a closer tactical liaison has become possible for the first time in europe -- and , in the crimea conference , that was something else that was accomplished .
provision was made for daily exchange of information between the armies under the command of general eisenhower on the western front , and those armies under the command of the soviet marshals on that long eastern front , and also with our armies in italy -- without the necessity of going through the chiefs of staff in washington or london as in the past .
you have seen one result of this exchange of information in the recent bombings by american and english aircraft of points which are directly related to the russian advance on berlin .
from now on , american and british heavy bombers will be used -- in the day - by - day tactics of the war -- and we have begun to realize , i think , that there is all the difference in the world between tactics on the one side , and strategy on the other -- day - by - day tactics of the war in direct support of the soviet armies , as well as in the support of our own on the western front .
they are now engaged in bombing and strafing in order to hamper the movement of german reserves and materials to the eastern and western fronts from other parts of germany or from italy .
arrangements have been made for the most effective distribution of all available material and transportation to the places where they can best be used in the combined war effort -- american , british , and russian .
details of these plans and arrangements are military secrets , of course ; but this tying of things in together is going to hasten the day of the final collapse of germany .
the nazis are learning about some of them already , to their sorrow .
and i think all three of us at the conference felt that they will learn more about them tomorrow and the next day -- and the day after that !
there will be no respite for them .
we will not desist for one moment until unconditional surrender .
you know , i 've always felt that common sense prevails in the long run -- quiet , overnight thinking .
i think that is true in germany , just as much as it is here .
the german people , as well as the german soldiers must realize that the sooner they give up and surrender by groups or as individuals , the sooner their present agony will be over .
they must realize that only with complete surrender can they begin to reestablish themselves as people whom the world might accept as decent neighbors .
we made it clear again at yalta , and i now repeat that unconditional surrender does not mean the destruction or enslavement of the german people .
the nazi leaders have deliberately withheld that part of the yalta declaration from the german press and radio .
they seek to convince the people of germany that the yalta declaration does mean slavery and destruction for them -- they are working at it day and night for that is how the nazis hope to save their own skins , and deceive their people into continued and useless resistance .
we did , however , make it clear at the conference just what unconditional surrender does mean for germany .
it means the temporary control of germany by great britain , russia , france , and the united states .
each of these nations will occupy and control a separate zone of germany -- and the administration of the four zones will be coordinated in berlin by a control council composed of representatives of the four nations .
unconditional surrender means something else .
it means the end of nazism .
it means the end of the nazi party -- and of all its barbaric laws and institutions .
it means the termination of all militaristic influence in the public , private , and cultural life of germany .
it means for the nazi war criminals a punishment that is speedy and just -- and severe .
it means the complete disarmament of germany ; the destruction of its militarism and its military equipment ; the end of its production of armament ; the dispersal of all its armed forces ; the permanent dismemberment of the german general staff which has so often shattered the peace of the world .
it means that germany will have to make reparations in kind for the damage which has been done to the innocent victims of its aggression .
by compelling reparations in kind -- in plants , in machinery , in rolling stock , and in raw materials -- we shall avoid the mistake that we and other nations made after the last war , the demanding of reparations in the form of money which germany could never pay .
we do not want the german people to starve , or to become a burden on the rest of the world .
our objective in handling germany is simple -- it is to secure the peace of the rest of the world now and in the future .
too much experience has shown that that objective is impossible if germany is allowed to retain any ability to wage aggressive warfare .
these objectives will not hurt the german people .
on the contrary , they will protect them from a repetition of the fate which the general staff and kaiserism imposed on them before , and which hitlerism is now imposing upon them again a hundredfold .
it will be removing a cancer from the german body politic which for generations has produced only misery and only pain to the whole world .
during my stay in yalta , i saw the kind of reckless , senseless fury , the terrible destruction that comes out of german militarism .
yalta , on the black sea , had no military significance of any kind .
it had no defenses .
before the last war , it had been a resort for people like the czars and princes and for the aristocracy of russia -- and the hangers - on .
however , after the red revolution , and until the attack on the soviet union by hitler , the palaces and the villas of yalta had been used as a rest and recreation center by the russian people .
the nazi officers took these former palaces and villas -- took them over for their own use .
the only reason that the so - called former palace of the czar was still habitable , when we got there , was that it had been given -- or he thought it had been given -- to a german general for his own property and his own use .
and when yalta was so destroyed , he kept soldiers there to protect what he thought would become his own , nice villa .
it was a useful rest and recreation center for hundreds of thousands of russian workers , farmers , and their families , up to the time that it was taken again by the germans .
the nazi officers took these places for their own use , and when the red army forced the nazis out of the crimea -- almost just a year ago -- all of these villas were looted by the nazis , and then nearly all of them were destroyed by bombs placed on the inside .
and even the humblest of the homes of yalta were not spared .
there was little left of it except blank walls , ruins , destruction and desolation .
sevastopol -- that was a fortified port , about forty or fifty miles away -- there again was a scene of utter destruction -- a large city with great navy yards and fortifications -- i think less than a dozen buildings were left intact in the entire city .
i had read about warsaw and lidice and rotterdam and coventry -- but i saw sevastopol and yalta !
and i know that there is not room enough on earth for both german militarism and christian decency .
of equal importance with the military arrangements at the crimea conference were the agreements reached with respect to a general international organization for lasting world peace .
the foundations were laid at dumbarton oaks .
there was one point , however , on which agreement was not reached at dumbarton oaks .
it involved the procedure of voting in the security council .
i want to try to make it clear by making it simple .
it took me hours and hours to get the thing straight in my own mind -- and many conferences .
at the crimea conference , the americans made a proposal on this subject which , after full discussion was , i am glad to say , unanimously adopted by the other two nations .
it is not yet possible to announce the terms of that agreement publicly , but it will be in a very short time .
when the conclusions reached with respect to voting in the security council are made known , i think and i hope that you will find them a fair solution of this complicated and difficult problem .
they are founded in justice , and will go far to assure international cooperation in the maintenance of peace .
a conference of all the united nations of the world will meet in san francisco on april 25 , 1945 .
there , we all hope , and confidently expect , to execute a definite charter of organization under which the peace of the world will be preserved and the forces of aggression permanently outlawed .
this time we are not making the mistake of waiting until the end of the war to set up the machinery of peace .
this time , as we fight together to win the war finally , we work together to keep it from happening again .
i -- as you know -- have always been a believer in the document called the constitution of the united states .
and i spent a good deal of time in educating two other nations of the world in regard to the constitution of the united states .
the charter has to be -- and should be -- approved by the senate of the united states , under the constitution .
i think the other nations all know it now .
i am aware of that fact , and now all the other nations are .
and we hope that the senate will approve of what is set forth as the charter of the united nations when they all come together in san francisco next month .
the senate of the united states , through its appropriate representatives , has been kept continuously advised of the program of this government in the creation of the international security organization .
the senate and the house of representatives will both be represented at the san francisco conference .
the congressional delegates to the san francisco conference will consist of an equal number of republican and democratic members .
the american delegation is -- in every sense of the word -- bipartisan .
world peace is not a party question .
i think that republicans want peace just as much as democrats .
it is not a party question -- any more than is military victory -- the winning of the war .
when the republic was threatened , first by the nazi clutch for world conquest back in 1940 and then by the japanese treachery in 1941 , partisanship and politics were laid aside by nearly every american ; and every resource was dedicated to our common safety .
the same consecration to the cause of peace will be expected , i think , by every patriotic american , and by every human soul overseas .
the structure of world peace can not be the work of one man , or one party , or one nation .
it can not be just an american peace , or a british peace , or a russian , a french , or a chinese peace .
it can not be a peace of large nations- or of small nations .
it must be a peace which rests on the cooperative effort of the whole world .
it can not be a structure of complete perfection at first .
but it can be a peace -- and it will be a peace -- based on the sound and just principles of the atlantic charter -- on the concept of the dignity of the human being -- and on the guarantees of tolerance and freedom of religious worship .
as the allied armies have marched to military victory , they have liberated people whose liberties had been crushed by the nazis for four long years , whose economy has been reduced to ruin by nazi despoilers .
there have been instances of political confusion and unrest in these liberated areas -- that is not unexpected -- as in greece or in poland or in yugoslavia , and there may be more .
worse than that , there actually began to grow up in some of these places queer ideas of , for instance , " spheres of influence " that were incompatible with the basic principles of international collaboration .
if allowed to go on unchecked , these developments might have had tragic results in time .
it is fruitless to try to place the blame for this situation on one particular nation or on another .
it is the kind of development that is almost inevitable unless the major powers of the world continue without interruption to work together and to assume joint responsibility for the solution of problems that may arise to endanger the peace of the world .
we met in the crimea , determined to settle this matter of liberated areas .
things that might happen that we can not foresee at this moment might happen suddenly , unexpectedly , next week or next month .
and i am happy to confirm to the congress that we did arrive at a settlement -- and , incidentally , a unanimous settlement .
the three most powerful nations have agreed that the political and economic problems of any area liberated from nazi conquest , or of any former axis satellite , are a joint responsibility of all three governments .
they will join together , during the temporary period of instability -- after hostilities -- to help the people of any liberated area , or of any former satellite state , to solve their own problems through firmly established democratic processes .
they will endeavor to see to it that the people who carry on the interim government between occupation of germany and true independence , will be as representative as possible of all democratic elements in the population , and that free elections are held as soon as possible thereafter .
responsibility for political conditions thousands of miles away can no longer be avoided by this great nation .
certainly , i do not want to live to see another war .
as i have said , the world is smaller -- smaller every year .
the united states now exerts a tremendous influence in the cause of peace throughout all the world .
what we people over here are thinking and talking about is in the interest of peace , because it is known all over the world .
the slightest remark in either house of the congress is known all over the world the following day .
we will continue to exert that influence , only if we are willing to continue to share in the responsibility for keeping the peace .
it will be our own tragic loss , i think , if we were to shirk that responsibility .
the final decisions in these areas are going to be made jointly ; and therefore they will often be a result of give - and - take compromise .
the united states will not always have its way a hundred percent -- nor will russia nor great britain .
we shall not always have ideal answers -- solutions to complicated international problems , even though we are determined continuously to strive toward that ideal .
but i am sure that under the agreements reached at yalta , there will be a more stable political europe than ever before .
of course , once there has been a free expression of the people 's will in any country , our immediate responsibility ends- with the exception only of such action as may be agreed on in the international security organization that we hope to set up .
the united nations must also soon begin to help these liberated areas adequately to reconstruct their economy so that they are ready to resume their places in the world .
the nazi war machine has stripped them of raw materials and machine tools and trucks and locomotives .
they have left the industry of these places stagnant and much of the agricultural areas are unproductive .
the nazis have left a ruin in their wake .
to start the wheels running again is not a mere matter of relief .
it is to the national interest that all of us see to it that these liberated areas are again made self - supporting and productive so that they do not need continuous relief from us .
i should say that was an argument based on plain common sense .
one outstanding example of joint action by the three major allied powers in the liberated areas was the solution reached on poland .
the whole polish question was a potential source of trouble in postwar europe -- is it has been sometimes before and we came to the conference determined to find a common ground for its solution .
and we did -- even though everybody does not agree with us , obviously .
our objective was to help to create a strong , independent , and prosperous nation .
that is the thing we must always remember , those words , agreed to by russia , by britain , and by the united states : the objective of making poland a strong , independent , and prosperous nation , with a government ultimately to be selected by the polish people themselves .
to achieve that objective , it was necessary to provide for the formation of a new government much more representative than had been possible while poland was enslaved .
there were , as you know , two governments -- one in london , one in lublin -- practically in russia .
accordingly , steps were taken at yalta to reorganize the existing provisional government in poland on a broader democratic basis , so as to include democratic leaders now in poland and those abroad .
this new , reorganized government will be recognized by all of us as the temporary government of poland .
poland needs a temporary government in the worst way -- an ad interim government , i think is another way of putting it .
however , the new polish provisional government of national unity will be pledged to holding a free election as soon as possible on the basis of universal suffrage and a secret ballot .
throughout history , poland has been the corridor through which attacks on russia have been made .
twice in this generation , germany has struck at russia through this corridor .
to insure european security and world peace , a strong and independent poland is necessary to prevent that from happening again .
the decision with respect to the boundaries of poland was , frankly , a compromise .
i did not agree with all of it , by any means , but we did not go as far as britain wanted , in certain areas ; we did not go so far as russia wanted , in certain areas ; and we did not go so far as i wanted , in certain areas .
it was a compromise .
the decision is one , however , under which the poles will receive compensation in territory in the north and west in exchange for what they lose by the curzon line in the east .
the limits of the western border will be permanently fixed in the final peace conference .
we know , roughly , that it will include , in the new , strong poland , quite a large slice of what now is called germany .
and it was agreed , also , that the new poland will have a large and long coast line , and many new harbors .
also , that most of east prussia will go to poland .
a corner of it will go to russia .
also , that the anomaly of the free state of danzig will come to an end ; i think danzig would be a lot better if it were polish .
it is well known that the people east of the curzon line -- just for example , here is why i compromised -- are predominantly white russian and ukrainian , they are not polish ; and a very great majority of the people west of the line are predominantly polish , except in that part of east prussia and eastern germany , which will go to the new poland .
as far back as 1919 , representatives of the allies agreed that the curzon line represented a fair boundary between the two peoples .
and you must remember , also , that there had not been any polish government before 1919 for a great many generations .
i am convinced that the agreement on poland , under the circumstances , is the most hopeful agreement possible for a free , independent , and prosperous polish state .
the crimea conference was a meeting of the three major military powers on whose shoulders rested chief responsibility and burden of the war .
although , for this reason , france was not a participant in the conference , no one should detract from the recognition that was accorded there of her role in the future of europe and the future of the world .
france has been invited to accept a zone of control in germany , and to participate as a fourth member of the allied control council of germany .
she has been invited to join as a sponsor of the international conference at san francisco next month .
she will be a permanent member of the international security council together with the other four major powers .
and , finally , we have asked that france be associated with us in our joint responsibility over all the liberated areas of europe .
agreement was reached on yugoslavia , as announced in the communique ; and we hope that it is in process of fulfillment .
but , not only there but in some other places , we have to remember that there are a great many prima donnas in the world .
all of them wish to be heard before anything becomes final , so we may have a little delay while we listen to more prima donnas .
quite naturally , this conference concerned itself only with the european war and with the political problems of europe and not with the pacific war .
in malta , however , our combined british and american staffs made their plans to increase the attack against japan .
the japanese war lords know that they are not being over looked .
they have felt the force of our b-29 's , and our carrier planes ; they have felt the naval might of the united states , and do not appear very anxious to come out and try it again .
the japs now know what it means to hear that " the united states marines have landed . "
and i think i can add that , having iwo jima in mind , " the situation is well in hand . "
they also know what is in store for the homeland of japan now that general macarthur has completed his magnificent march back to manila and now that admiral nimitz is establishing air bases right in the back yard of japan itself -- in iwo jima .
but , lest somebody else start to stop work in the united states , i repeat what i have so often said , in one short sentence , even in my sleep : " we have n't won the wars yet " -- with an s on " wars . "
it is still a long , tough road to tokyo .
it is longer to go to tokyo than it is to berlin , in every sense of the word .
the defeat of germany will not mean the end of the war against japan .
on the contrary , we must be prepared for a long and costly struggle in the pacific .
but the unconditional surrender of japan is as essential as the defeat of germany .
i say that advisedly , with the thought in mind that that is especially true if our plans for world peace are to succeed .
for japanese militarism must be wiped out as thoroughly as german militarism .
on the way back from the crimea , i made arrangements to meet personally king farouk of egypt , halle selassie , the emperor of ethiopia , and king ibn saud of saudi arabia .
our conversations had to do with matters of common interest .
they will be of great mutual advantage because they gave me , and a good many of us , an opportunity of meeting and talking face to face , and of exchanging views in personal conversation instead of formal correspondence .
for instance , on the problem of arabia , i learned more about that whole problem -- the moslem problem , the jewish problem -- by talking with ibn saud for five minutes , than i could have learned in the exchange of two or three dozen letters .
on my voyage , i had the benefit of seeing the army and navy and the air force at work .
all americans , i think , would feel as proud of our armed forces as i am , if they could see and hear what i saw and heard .
against the most efficient professional soldiers and sailors and airmen of all history , our men stood and fought -- and won .
this is our chance to see to it that the sons and the grandsons of these gallant fighting men do not have to do it all over again in a few years .
the conference in the crimea was a turning point -- i hope in our history and therefore in the history of the world .
there will soon be presented to the senate of the united states and to the american people a great decision that will determine the fate of the united states -- and of the world -- for generations to come .
there can be no middle ground here .
we shall have to take the responsibility for world collaboration , or we shall have to bear the responsibility for another world conflict .
i know that the word " planning " is not looked upon with favor in some circles .
in domestic affairs , tragic mistakes have been made by reason of lack of planning ; and , on the other hand , many great improvements in living .
and many benefits to the human race , have been accomplished as a result of adequate , intelligent planning -- reclamation of desert areas , developments of whole river valleys , and provision for adequate housing .
the same will be true in relations between nations .
for the second time in the lives of most of us this generation is face to face with the objective of preventing wars .
to meet that objective , the nations of the world will either have a plan or they will not .
the groundwork of a plan has now been furnished , and has been submitted to humanity for discussion and decision .
no plan is perfect .
whatever is adopted at san francisco will doubtless have to be amended time and again over the years , just as our own constitution has been .
no one can say exactly how long any plan will last .
peace can endure only so long as humanity really insists upon it , and is willing to work for it -- and sacrifice for it .
twenty - five years ago , american fighting men looked to the statesmen of the world to finish the work of peace for which they fought and suffered .
we failed them then .
we can not fail them again , and expect the world again to survive .
the crimea conference was a successful effort by the three leading nations to find a common ground for peace .
it ought to spell the end of the system of unilateral action , the exclusive alliances , the spheres of influence , the balances of power , and all the other expedients that have been tried for centuries -- and have always failed .
we propose to substitute for all these , a universal organization in which all peace - loving nations will finally have a chance to join .
i am confident that the congress and the american people will accept the results of this conference as the beginnings of a permanent structure of peace upon which we can begin to build , under god , that better world in which our children and grandchildren -- yours and mine , the children and grandchildren of the whole world- must live , and can live .
and that , my friends , is the principal message i can give you .
but i feel it very deeply , as i know that all of you are feeling it today , and are going to feel it in the future .

senator robinson , members of the democratic convention , my friends : 
 here , and in every community throughout the land , we are met at a time of great moment to the future of the nation .
it is an occasion to be dedicated to the simple and sincere expression of an attitude toward problems , the determination of which will profoundly affect america .
i come not only as a leader of a party , not only as a candidate for high office , but as one upon whom many critical hours have imposed and still impose a grave responsibility .
for the sympathy , help and confidence with which americans have sustained me in my task i am grateful .
for their loyalty i salute the members of our great party , in and out of political life in every part of the union .
i salute those of other parties , especially those in the congress of the united states who on so many occasions have put partisanship aside .
i thank the governors of the several states , their legislatures , their state and local officials who participated unselfishly and regardless of party in our efforts to achieve recovery and destroy abuses .
above all i thank the millions of americans who have borne disaster bravely and have dared to smile through the storm .
america will not forget these recent years , will not forget that the rescue was not a mere party task .
it was the concern of all of us .
in our strength we rose together , rallied our energies together , applied the old rules of common sense , and together survived .
in those days we feared fear .
that was why we fought fear .
and today , my friends , we have won against the most dangerous of our foes .
we have conquered fear .
but i can not , with candor , tell you that all is well with the world .
clouds of suspicion , tides of ill - will and intolerance gather darkly in many places .
in our own land we enjoy indeed a fullness of life greater than that of most nations .
but the rush of modern civilization itself has raised for us new difficulties , new problems which must be solved if we are to preserve to the united states the political and economic freedom for which washington and jefferson planned and fought .
philadelphia is a good city in which to write american history .
this is fitting ground on which to reaffirm the faith of our fathers ; to pledge ourselves to restore to the people a wider freedom ; to give to 1936 as the founders gave to 1776 -- an american way of life .
that very word freedom , in itself and of necessity , suggests freedom from some restraining power .
in 1776 we sought freedom from the tyranny of a political autocracy -- from the eighteenth century royalists who held special privileges from the crown .
it was to perpetuate their privilege that they governed without the consent of the governed ; that they denied the right of free assembly and free speech ; that they restricted the worship of god ; that they put the average man 's property and the average man 's life in pawn to the mercenaries of dynastic power ; that they regimented the people .
and so it was to win freedom from the tyranny of political autocracy that the american revolution was fought .
that victory gave the business of governing into the hands of the average man , who won the right with his neighbors to make and order his own destiny through his own government .
political tyranny was wiped out at philadelphia on july 4 , 1776 .
since that struggle , however , man 's inventive genius released new forces in our land which reordered the lives of our people .
the age of machinery , of railroads ; of steam and electricity ; the telegraph and the radio ; mass production , mass distribution -- all of these combined to bring forward a new civilization and with it a new problem for those who sought to remain free .
for out of this modern civilization economic royalists carved new dynasties .
new kingdoms were built upon concentration of control over material things .
through new uses of corporations , banks and securities , new machinery of industry and agriculture , of labor and capital - all undreamed of by the fathers -- the whole structure of modern life was impressed into this royalservice .
there was no place among this royalty for our many thousands of small business men and merchants who sought to make a worthy use of the american system of initiative and profit .
they were no more free than the worker or the farmer .
even honest and progressive - minded men of wealth , aware of their obligation to their generation , could never know just where they fitted into this dynastic scheme of things .
it was natural and perhaps human that the privileged princes of these new economic dynasties , thirsting for power , reached out for control over government itself .
they created a new despotism and wrapped it in the robes of legal sanction .
in its service new mercenaries sought to regiment the people , their labor , and their property .
and as a result the average man once more confronts the problem that faced the minute man .
the hours men and women worked , the wages they received , the conditions of their labor -- these had passed beyond the control of the people , and were imposed by this new industrial dictatorship .
the savings of the average family , the capital of the small business man , the investments set aside for old age -- other people 's money -- these were tools which the new economic royalty used to dig itself in .
those who tilled the soil no longer reaped the rewards which were their right .
the small measure of their gains was decreed by men in distant cities .
throughout the nation , opportunity was limited by monopoly .
individual initiative was crushed in the cogs of a great machine .
the field open for free business was more and more restricted .
private enterprise , indeed , became too private .
it became privileged enterprise , not free enterprise .
an old english judge once said : " necessitous men are not free men . "
liberty requires opportunity to make a living - a living decent according to the standard of the time , a living which gives man not only enough to live by , but something to live for .
for too many of us the political equality we once had won was meaningless in the face of economic inequality .
a small group had concentrated into their own hands an almost complete control over other people 's property , other people 's money , other people 's labor , other people 's lives .
for too many of us life was no longer free ; liberty no longer real ; men could no longer follow the pursuit of happiness .
against economic tyranny such as this , the american citizen could appeal only to the organized power of government .
the collapse of 1929 showed up the despotism for what it was .
the election of 1932 was the people 's mandate to end it .
under that mandate it is being ended .
the royalists of the economic order have conceded that political freedom was the business of the government , but they have maintained that economic slavery was nobody 's business .
they granted that the government could protect the citizen in his right to vote , but they denied that the government could do anything to protect the citizen in his right to work and his right to live .
today we stand committed to the proposition that freedom is no half - and - half affair .
if the average citizen is guaranteed equal opportunity in the polling place , he must have equal opportunity in the market place .
these economic royalists complain that we seek to overthrow the institutions of america .
what they really complain of is that we seek to take away their power .
our allegiance to american institutions requires the overthrow of this kind of power .
in vain they seek to hide behind the flag and the constitution .
in their blindness they forget what the flag and the constitution stand for .
now , as always , they stand for democracy , not tyranny ; for freedom , not subjection ; and against a dictatorship by mob rule and the over - privileged alike .
the brave and clear platform adopted by this convention , to which i heartily subscribe , sets forth that government in a modern civilization has certain inescapable obligations to its citizens , among which are protection of the family and the home , the establishment of a democracy of opportunity , and aid to those overtaken by disaster .
but the resolute enemy within our gates is ever ready to beat down our words unless in greater courage we will fight for them .
for more than three years we have fought for them .
this convention , in every word and deed , has pledged that that fight will go on .
the defeats and victories of these years have given to us as a people a new understanding of our government and of ourselves .
never since the early days of the new england town meeting have the affairs of government been so widely discussed and so clearly appreciated .
it has been brought home to us that the only effective guide for the safety of this most worldly of worlds , the greatest guide of all , is moral principle .
we do not see faith , hope and charity as unattainable ideals , but we use them as stout supports of a nation fighting the fight for freedom in a modern civilization .
faith -- in the soundness of democracy in the midst of dictatorships .
hope - renewed because we know so well the progress we have made .
charity -- in the true spirit of that grand old word .
for charity literally translated from the original means love , the love that understands , that does not merely share the wealth of the giver , but in true sympathy and wisdom helps men to help themselves .
we seek not merely to make government a mechanical implement , but to give it the vibrant personal character that is the very embodiment of human charity .
we are poor indeed if this nation can not afford to lift from every recess of american life the dread fear of the unemployed that they are not needed in the world .
we can not afford to accumulate a deficit in the books of human fortitude .
in the place of the palace of privilege we seek to build a temple out of faith and hope and charity .
it is a sobering thing , my friends , to be a servant of this great cause .
we try in our daily work to remember that the cause belongs not to us , but to the people .
the standard is not in the hands of you and me alone .
it is carried by america .
we seek daily to profit from experience , to learn to do better as our task proceeds .
governments can err , presidents do make mistakes , but the immortal dante tells us that divine justice weighs the sins of the cold - blooded and the sins of the warm - hearted in different scales .
better the occasional faults of a government that lives in a spirit of charity than the consistent omissions of a government frozen in the ice of its own indifference .
there is a mysterious cycle in human events .
to some generations much is given .
of other generations much is expected .
this generation of americans has a rendezvous with destiny .
in this world of ours in other lands , there are some people , who , in times past , have lived and fought for freedom , and seem to have grown too weary to carry on the fight .
they have sold their heritage of freedom for the illusion of a living .
they have yielded their democracy .
i believe in my heart that only our success can stir their ancient hope .
they begin to know that here in america we are waging a great and successful war .
it is not alone a war against want and destitution and economic demoralization .
it is more than that ; it is a war for the survival of democracy .
we are fighting to save a great and precious form of government forourselves and for the world .
i accept the commission you have tendered me .
i join with you .
i am enlisted for the duration of the war .

governor davey , senator bulkley , chairman white and you the people of the northwest territory : 
 long before 1788 there were white men here , " spying out this land of canaan . "
an intrepid outpost breed they were -- the scouts and the skirmishers of the great american migration .
the sight of smoke from neighbors ' chimneys might have worried them .
but indians and redcoats did not .
long before 1788 , at kaskaskia and vincennes , with scant help from the seaboard , they had held their beloved wilderness for themselves -- and for us -- with their own bare hands and their own long rifles .
but their symbol is vincennes , not marietta .
here , with all honor to the scouts and the skirmishers , we celebrate the coming of a different type of men and women -- the first battalions of that organized army of occupation which transplanted from over the alleghenies whole little civilizations that took root and grew .
they were giving expression to a genius for organized colonization , carefully planned and ordered under law .
the men who came here before 1788 came as leif ericson 's men to vineland , in a spirit all of adventure .
but the men and women of the ohio company who came to marietta came rather like the men and women of the massachusetts bay company to boston , an organized society , unafraid to meet temporary adventure , but serious in seeking permanent security for men and women and children and homes .
many of them were destined to push on ; but most came intending to stay .
such people may not be the first to conquer the earth , but they will always be the last to possess it .
right behind the men and women who established marietta one hundred and fifty years ago moved that instrument of law and order and cooperation - government .
a representative of the national government entered marietta to administer the northwest territory under the famous northwest ordinance .
and what we are celebrating today is this establishment of the first civil government west of the original thirteen states .
three provisions of the northwest ordinance i always like to remember .
it provided that " no person demeaning himself in a peaceable and orderly manner shall ever be molested on account of his mode of worship or for religious sentiment in the said territory . "
it provided that " religion , morality and knowledge being necessary to good government and the happiness of mankind , schools and means of education shall forever be encouraged . "
and it provided for the perpetual prohibition of slavery in the territory .
free , educated , god - fearing men and women -- that is what the thirteen states hoped the new west would exemplify .
it has well fulfilled that hope .
every generation meets substantially the same problems under its own different set of circumstances .
anyone speculating on our great migration westward is struck with the human parallel between the driving force behind that migration and the driving force behind the great social exploration we are carrying on today .
most of the people who went out to ohio in 1788 and who followed wave on wave for another hundred years went to improve their economic lot .
in other words , they were following the same yearning for security which is driving us forward today .
at the end of the wagon ruts there was something worth the physical risks .
the standard of life in a log cabin amid fields still blackened with half - burned stumps was not high , but it was certain .
a family , or at most a township , could be a whole self - sufficing economic system -- plenty of food to eat if a man would but reach out and shoot or cultivate it ; plenty of warm clothes if the women of the family were willing to spin ; always a tight roof over the family 's head if the little community would respond to the call for a roof - raising .
whatever he used was a man 's own ; he had the solid joy of possession -- of owning his home and his means of livelihood .
and if things did not pan out there was always an infinite self - sufficiency beckoning further westward -- to new land , new game , new opportunity .
under such conditions there was so much to get done which men could not get done alone , that the frontiersmen naturally reached out to government as their greatest single instrument of cooperative self - help with the aid of which they could get things done .
to them the use of government was but another form of the cooperation of good neighbors .
government was an indispensable instrument of their daily lives , of the security of their women and their children and their homes and their opportunities .
they looked on government not as a thing apart -- as a power over our people .
they regarded it as a power of the people , as a democratic expression of organized self - help like a frontier husking bee .
there were worried legalists back in the seaboard towns who were sure it was unconstitutional for the federal government to help to put roads and railroads and canals through these new territories -- who were sure that the nation would never get back the money it was plowing into development of the natural and human resources of the northwest .
but abraham lincoln , who incarnated the spirit of the people who were actually living in the northwest territory , summed up their attitude when he said : " the legitimate object of government is to do for a community of people whatever they need to have done , but can not do at all , or can not do so well , for themselves , in their separate and individual capacities . "
today , under new conditions , a whole nation , the critical thirteen states and all the west and south that has grown out of them , is on a mental migration , dissatisfied with old conditions , seeking like the little band that came to marietta to create new conditions of security .
and again the people see an ally in their own government .
many a man does not own his cabin any more ; his possessions are a bank deposit .
scarcely any man can call his neighbors to raise his roof any more -- he pays a contractor cash and has to have mortgage financing to find the cash .
and if that financing is of the wrong kind or goes bad , he may need help to save his home from foreclosure .
once old age was safe because there was always something useful which men and women , no matter how old , could do to earn an honorable maintenance .
that time is gone ; and some new kind of organized old - age insurance has to be provided .
in these perplexities the individual turns , as he has always turned , to the collective security of the willingness of his fellows to cooperate through the use of government to help him and each other .
the spirit of the frontier husking bee is found today in carefully - drafted statutes -- statutes insuring bank deposits ; statutes providing mortgage money for homes through f. h.a. ; statutes providing help through h. o.l. c. for those in danger of foreclosure .
the cavalry captain who protected the log cabins of the northwest is now supplanted by legislators , like senator bulkley , toiling over the drafting of such statutes and over the efficiency of government machinery to administer them so that such protection and help of government can be extended to the full .
on a thousand fronts , government -- state and municipal as well as federal -- is playing the same role of the insurer of security for the average man , woman and child that the army detachments played in the early days of the old northwest territory .
when you think it through , at the bottom most of the great protective statutes of today are in essence mutual insurance companies , and our recent legislation is not a departure from but a return to the healthy practices of mutual self - help of the early settlers of the northwest .
let us not be afraid to help each other -- let us never forget that government is ourselves and not an alien power over us .
the ultimate rulers of our democracy are not a president and senators and congressmen and government officials but the voters of this country .
i believe that the american people , not afraid of their own capacity to choose forward - looking representatives to run their government , want the same cooperative security and have the same courage to achieve it , in 1938 , as in 1788 .
i am sure they know that we shall always have a frontier -- of social and economic problems -- and that we must always move in to bring law and order to it .
in that confidence i am pushing on .
i am sure that the people of the nation will push on with me .

when four years ago we met to inaugurate president , the republic , single - minded in anxiety , stood in spirit here .
we dedicated ourselves to the fulfillment of a vision -- to speed the time when there would be for all the people that security and peace essential to the pursuit of happiness .
we of the republic pledged ourselves to drive from the temple of our ancient faith those who had profaned it ; to end by action , tireless and unafraid , the stagnation and despair of that day .
we did those first things first .
our covenant with ourselves did not stop there .
instinctively we recognized a deeper need -- the need to find through government the instrument of our united purpose to solve for the individual the ever - rising problems of a complex civilization .
repeated attempts at their solution without the aid of government had left us baffled and bewildered .
for , without that aid , we had been unable to create those moral controls over the services of science which are necessary to make science a useful servant instead of a ruthless master of mankind .
to do this we knew that we must find practical controls over blind economic forces and blindly selfish men .
we of the republic sensed the truth that democratic government has innate capacity to protect its people against disasters once considered inevitable , to solve problems once considered unsolvable .
we would not admit that we could not find a way to master economic epidemics just as , after centuries of fatalistic suffering , we had found a way to master epidemics of disease .
we refused to leave the problems of our common welfare to be solved by the winds of chance and the hurricanes of disaster .
in this we americans were discovering no wholly new truth ; we were writing a new chapter in our book of self - government .
this year marks the one hundred and fiftieth anniversary of the constitutional convention which made us a nation .
at that convention our forefathers found the way out of the chaos which followed the revolutionary war ; they created a strong government with powers of united action sufficient then and now to solve problems utterly beyond individual or local solution .
a century and a half ago they established the federal government in order to promote the general welfare and secure the blessings of liberty to the american people .
today we invoke those same powers of government to achieve the same objectives .
four years of new experience have not belied our historic instinct .
they hold out the clear hope that government within communities , government within the separate states , and government of the united states can do the things the times require , without yielding its democracy .
our tasks in the last four years did not force democracy to take a holiday .
nearly all of us recognize that as intricacies of human relationships increase , so power to govern them also must increase power to stop evil ; power to do good .
the essential democracy of our nation and the safety of our people depend not upon the absence of power , but upon lodging it with those whom the people can change or continue at stated intervals through an honest and free system of elections .
the constitution of 1787 did not make our democracy impotent .
in fact , in these last four years , we have made the exercise of all power more democratic ; for we have begun to bring private autocratic powers into their proper subordination to the public 's government .
the legend that they were invincible above and beyond the processes of a democracy has been shattered .
they have been challenged and beaten .
our progress out of the depression is obvious .
but that is not all that you and i mean by the new order of things .
our pledge was not merely to do a patchwork job with second - hand materials .
by using the new materials of social justice we have undertaken to erect on the old foundations a more enduring structure for the better use of future generations .
in that purpose we have been helped by achievements of mind and spirit .
old truths have been relearned ; untruths have been unlearned .
we have always known that heedless self - interest was bad morals ; we know now that it is bad economics .
out of the collapse of a prosperity whose builders boasted their practicality has come the conviction that in the long run economic morality pays .
we are beginning to wipe out the line that divides the practical from the ideal ; and in so doing we are fashioning an instrument of unimagined power for the establishment of a morally better world .
this new understanding undermines the old admiration of worldly success as such .
we are beginning to abandon our tolerance of the abuse of power by those who betray for profit the elementary decencies of life .
in this process evil things formerly accepted will not be so easily condoned .
hard - headedness will not so easily excuse hardheartedness .
we are moving toward an era of good feeling .
but we realize that there can be no era of good feeling save among men of good will .
for these reasons i am justified in believing that the greatest change we have witnessed has been the change in the moral climate of america .
among men of good will , science and democracy together offer an ever - richer life and ever - larger satisfaction to the individual .
with this change in our moral climate and our rediscovered ability to improve our economic order , we have set our feet upon the road of enduring progress .
shall we pause now and turn our back upon the road that lies ahead ?
shall we call this the promised land ?
or , shall we continue on our way ?
for " each age is a dream that is dying , or one that is coming to birth . "
many voices are heard as we face a great decision .
comfort says , " tarry a while . "
opportunism says , " this is a good spot . "
timidity asks , " how difficult is the road ahead ? "
true , we have come far from the days of stagnation and despair .
vitality has been preserved .
courage and confidence have been restored .
mental and moral horizons have been extended .
but our present gains were won under the pressure of more than ordinary circumstance .
advance became imperative under the goad of fear and suffering .
the times were on the side of progress .
to hold to progress today , however , is more difficult .
dulled conscience , irresponsibility , and ruthless self - interest already reappear .
such symptoms of prosperity may become portents of disaster !
prosperity already tests the persistence of our progressive purpose .
let us ask again : have we reached the goal of our vision of that fourth day of march , 1933 ?
have we found our happy valley ?
i see a great nation , upon a great continent , blessed with a great wealth of natural resources .
its hundred and thirty million people are at peace among themselves ; they are making their country a good neighbor among the nations .
i see a united states which can demonstrate that , under democratic methods of government , national wealth can be translated into a spreading volume of human comforts hitherto unknown , and the lowest standard of living can be raised far above the level of mere subsistence .
but here is the challenge to our democracy : in this nation i see tens of millions of its citizens -- a substantial part of its whole population -- who at this very moment are denied the greater part of what the very lowest standards of today call the necessities of life .
i see millions of families trying to live on incomes so meager that the pall of family disaster hangs over them day by day .
i see millions whose daily lives in city and on farm continue under conditions labeled indecent by a so - called polite society half a century ago .
i see millions denied education , recreation , and the opportunity to better their lot and the lot of their children .
i see millions lacking the means to buy the products of farm and factory and by their poverty denying work and productiveness to many other millions .
i see one - third of a nation ill - housed , ill - clad , ill - nourished .
it is not in despair that i paint you that picture .
i paint it for you in hope -- because the nation , seeing and understanding the injustice in it , proposes to paint it out .
we are determined to make every american citizen the subject of his country 's interest and concern ; and we will never regard any faithful , law - abiding group within our borders as superfluous .
the test of our progress is not whether we add more to the abundance of those who have much ; it is whether we provide enough for those who have too little .
if i know aught of the spirit and purpose of our nation , we will not listen to comfort , opportunism , and timidity .
we will carry on .
overwhelmingly , we of the republic are men and women of good will ; men and women who have more than warm hearts of dedication ; men and women who have cool heads and willing hands of practical purpose as well .
they will insist that every agency of popular government use effective instruments to carry out their will .
government is competent when all who compose it work as trustees for the whole people .
it can make constant progress when it keeps abreast of all the facts .
it can obtain justified support and legitimate criticism when the people receive true information of all that government does .
if i know aught of the will of our people , they will demand that these conditions of effective government shall be created and maintained .
they will demand a nation uncorrupted by cancers of injustice and , therefore , strong among the nations in its example of the will to peace .
today we reconsecrate our country to long - cherished ideals in a suddenly changed civilization .
in every land there are always at work forces that drive men apart and forces that draw men together .
in our personal ambitions we are individualists .
but in our seeking for economic and political progress as a nation , we all go up , or else we all go down , as one people .
to maintain a democracy of effort requires a vast amount of patience in dealing with differing methods , a vast amount of humility .
but out of the confusion of many voices rises an understanding of dominant public need .
then political leadership can voice common ideals , and aid in their realization .
in taking again the oath of office as president of the united states , i assume the solemn obligation of leading the american people forward along the road over which they have chosen to advance .
while this duty rests upon me i shall do my utmost to speak their purpose and to do their will , seeking divine guidance to help us each and every one to give light to them that sit in darkness and to guide our feet into the way of peace .

( january 6 , 1941 ) 
 mr. president , mr. speaker , members of the 77th congress : 
 i address you , the members of the 77th congress , at a moment unprecedented in the history of the union .
i use the word " unprecedented , " because at no previous time has american security been as seriously threatened from without as it is today .
since the permanent formation of our government under the constitution , in 1789 , most of the periods of crisis in our history have related to our domestic affairs .
fortunately , only one of these -- the four - year war between the states -- ever threatened our national unity .
today , thank god , 130 million americans , in 48 states , have forgotten points of the compass in our national unity .
it is true that prior to 1914 the united states often had been disturbed by events in other continents .
we had even engaged in two wars with european nations and in a number of undeclared wars in the west indies , in the mediterranean and in the pacific for the maintenance of american rights and for the principles of peaceful commerce .
but in no case had a serious threat been raised against our national safety or our continued independence .
what i seek to convey is the historic truth that the united states as a nation has at all times maintained clear , definite opposition , to any attempt to lock us in behind an ancient chinese wall while the procession of civilization went past .
today , thinking of our children and of their children , we oppose enforced isolation for ourselves or for any other part of 
 the americas .
that determination of ours , extending over all these years , was proved , for example , during the quarter century of wars following the french revolution .
while the napoleonic struggles did threaten interests of the united states because of the french foothold in the west indies and in louisiana , and while we engaged in the war of 1812 to vindicate our right to peaceful trade , it is nevertheless clear that neither france nor great britain , nor any other nation , was aiming at domination of the whole world .
in like fashion from 1815 to 1914 -- 99 years -- no single war in europe or in asia constituted a real threat against our future or against the future of any other american nation .
except in the maximilian interlude in mexico , no foreign power sought to establish itself in this hemisphere ; and the strength of the british fleet in the atlantic has been a friendly strength .
it is still a friendly strength .
even when the world war broke out in 1914 , it seemed to contain only small threat of danger to our own american future .
but , as time went on , the american people began to visualize what the downfall of democratic nations might mean to our own democracy .
we need not overemphasize imperfections in the peace of versailles .
we need not harp on failure of the democracies to deal with problems of world reconstruction .
we should remember that the peace of 1919 was far less unjust than the kind of " pacification " which began even before munich , and which is being carried on under the new order of tyranny that seeks to spread over every continent today .
the american people have unalterably set their faces against that tyranny .
every realist knows that the democratic way of life is at this moment being directly assailed in every part of the world -- assailed either by arms , or by secret spreading of poisonous propaganda by those who seek to destroy unity and promote discord in nations that are still at peace .
during 16 long months this assault has blotted out the whole pattern of democratic life in an appalling number of independent nations , great and small .
the assailants are still on the march , threatening other nations , great and small .
therefore , as your president , performing my constitutional duty to " give to the congress information of the state of the union , " i find it , unhappily , necessary to report that the future and the safety of our country and of our democracy are overwhelmingly involved in events far beyond our borders .
armed defense of democratic existence is now being gallantly waged in four continents .
if that defense fails , all the population and all the resources of europe , asia , africa , and australasia will be dominated by the conquerors .
let us remember that the total of those populations and their resources in those four continents greatly exceeds the sum total of the population and the resources of the whole of the western hemisphere -- many times over .
in times like these it is immature -- and incidentally , untrue -- for anybody to brag that an unprepared america , single - handed , and with one hand tied behind its back , can hold off the whole world .
no realistic american can expect from a dictator 's peace international generosity , or return of true independence , or world disarmament , or freedom of expression , or freedom of religion , or even good business .
such a peace would bring no security for us or for our neighbors . "
those , who would give up essential liberty to purchase a little temporary safety , deserve neither liberty nor safety . "
as a nation , we may take pride in the fact that we are softhearted ; but we can not afford to be soft - headed .
we must always be wary of those who with sounding brass and a tinkling cymbal preach the " ism " of appeasement .
we must especially beware of that small group of selfish men who would clip the wings of the american eagle in order to feather their own nests .
i have recently pointed out how quickly the tempo of modern warfare could bring into our very midst the physical attack which we must eventually expect if the dictator nations win this war .
there is much loose talk of our immunity from immediate and direct invasion from across the seas .
obviously , as long as the british navy retains its power , no such danger exists .
even if there were no british navy , it is not probable that any enemy would be stupid enough to attack us by landing troops in the united states from across thousands of miles of ocean , until it had acquired strategic bases from which to operate .
but we learn much from the lessons of the past years in europe -- particularly the lesson of norway , whose essential seaports were captured by treachery and surprise built up over a series of years .
the first phase of the invasion of this hemisphere would not be the landing of regular troops .
the necessary strategic points would be occupied by secret agents and their dupes -- and great numbers of them are already here , and in latin america .
as long as the aggressor nations maintain the offensive , they -- not we -- will choose the time and the place and the method of their attack .
that is why the future of all the american republics is today in serious danger .
that is why this annual message to the congress is unique in our history .
that is why every member of the executive branch of the government and every member of the congress faces great responsibility and great accountability .
the need of the moment is that our actions and our policy should be devoted primarily -- almost exclusively -- to meeting this foreign peril .
for all our domestic problems are now a part of the great emergency .
just as our national policy in internal affairs has been based upon a decent respect for the rights and the dignity of all our fellow men within our gates , so our national policy in foreign affairs has been based on a decent respect for the rights and dignity of all nations , large and small .
and the justice of morality must and will win in the end .
our national policy is this : 
 first , by an impressive expression of the public will and without regard to partisanship , we are committed to all - inclusive national defense .
second , by an impressive expression of the public will and without regard to partisanship , we are committed to full support of all those resolute peoples , everywhere , who are resisting aggression and are thereby keeping war away from our hemisphere .
by this support , we express our determination that the democratic cause shall prevail ; and we strengthen the defense and the security of our own nation .
third , by an impressive expression of the public will and without regard to partisanship , we are committed to the proposition that principles of morality and considerations for our own security will never permit us to acquiesce in a peace dictated by aggressors and sponsored by appeasers .
we know that enduring peace can not be bought at the cost of other people 's freedom .
in the recent national election there was no substantial difference between the two great parties in respect to that national policy .
no issue was fought out on this line before the american electorate .
today it is abundantly evident that american citizens everywhere are demanding and supporting speedy and complete action in recognition of obvious danger .
therefore , the immediate need is a swift and driving increase in our armament production .
leaders of industry and labor have responded to our summons .
goals of speed have been set .
in some cases these goals are being reached ahead of time ; in some cases we are on schedule ; in other cases there are slight but not serious delays ; and in some cases -- and i am sorry to say very important cases -- we are all concerned by the slowness of the accomplishment of our plans .
the army and navy , however , have made substantial progress during the past year .
actual experience is improving and speeding up our methods of production with every passing day .
and today 's best is not good enough for tomorrow .
i am not satisfied with the progress thus far made .
the men in charge of the program represent the best in training , in ability , and in patriotism .
they are not satisfied with the progress thus far made .
none of us will be satisfied until the job is done .
no matter whether the original goal was set too high or too low , our objective is quicker and better results .
to give you two illustrations : 
 we are behind schedule in turning out finished airplanes ; we are working day and night to solve the innumerable problems and to catch up .
we are ahead of schedule in building warships but we are working to get even further ahead of that schedule .
to change a whole nation from a basis of peacetime production of implements of peace to a basis of wartime production of implements of war is no small task .
and the greatest difficulty comes at the beginning of the program , when new tools , new plant facilities , new assembly lines , and new ship ways must first be constructed before the actual materiel begins to flow steadily and speedily from them .
the congress , of course , must rightly keep itself informed at all times of the progress of the program .
however , there is certain information , as the congress itself will readily recognize , which , in the interests of our own security and those of the nations that we are supporting , must of needs be kept in confidence .
new circumstances are constantly begetting new needs for our safety .
i shall ask this congress for greatly increased new appropriations and authorizations to carry on what we have begun .
i also ask this congress for authority and for funds sufficient to manufacture additional munitions and war supplies of many kinds , to be turned over to those nations which are now in actual war with aggressor nations .
our most useful and immediate role is to act as an arsenal for them as well as for ourselves .
they do not need man power , but they do need billions of dollars worth of the weapons of defense .
the time is near when they will not be able to pay for them all in ready cash .
we can not , and we will not , tell them that they must surrender , merely because of present inability to pay for the weapons which we know they must have .
i do not recommend that we make them a loan of dollars with which to pay for these weapons -- a loan to be repaid in dollars .
i recommend that we make it possible for those nations to continue to obtain war materials in the united states , fitting their orders into our own program .
nearly all their materiel would , if the time ever came , be useful for our own defense .
taking counsel of expert military and naval authorities , considering what is best for our own security , we are free to decide how much should be kept here and how much should be sent abroad to our friends who by their determined and heroic resistance are giving us time in which to make ready our own defense .
for what we send abroad , we shall be repaid within a reasonable time following the close of hostilities , in similar materials , or , at our option , in other goods of many kinds , which they can produce and which we need .
let us say to the democracies : " we americans are vitally concerned in your defense of freedom .
we are putting forth our energies , our resources and our organizing powers to give you the strength to regain and maintain a free world .
we shall send you , in ever - increasing numbers , ships , planes , tanks , guns .
this is our purpose and our pledge . "
in fulfillment of this purpose we will not be intimidated by the threats of dictators that they will regard as a breach of international law or as an act of war our aid to the democracies which dare to resist their aggression .
such aid is not an act of war , even if a dictator should unilaterally proclaim it so to be .
when the dictators , if the dictators , are ready to make war upon us , they will not wait for an act of war on our part .
they did not wait for norway or belgium or the netherlands to commit an act of war .
their only interest is in a new one - way international law , which lacks mutuality in its observance , and , therefore , becomes an instrument of oppression .
the happiness of future generations of americans may well depend upon how effective and how immediate we can make our aid felt .
no one can tell the exact character of the emergency situations that we may be called upon to meet .
the nation 's hands must not be tied when the nation 's life is in danger .
we must all prepare to make the sacrifices that the emergency -- almost as serious as war itself -- demands .
whatever stands in the way of speed and efficiency in defense preparations must give way to the national need .
a free nation has the right to expect full cooperation from all groups .
a free nation has the right to look to the leaders of business , of labor , and of agriculture to take the lead in stimulating effort , not among other groups but within their own groups .
the best way of dealing with the few slackers or trouble makers in our midst is , first , to shame them by patriotic example , and , if that fails , to use the sovereignty of government to save government .
as men do not live by bread alone , they do not fight by armaments alone .
those who man our defenses , and those behind them who build our defenses , must have the stamina and the courage which come from unshakable belief in the manner of life which they are defending .
the mighty action that we are calling for can not be based on a disregard of all things worth fighting for .
the nation takes great satisfaction and much strength from the things which have been done to make its people conscious of their individual stake in the preservation of democratic life in america .
those things have toughened the fibre of our people , have renewed their faith and strengthened their devotion to the institutions we make ready to protect .
certainly this is no time for any of us to stop thinking about the social and economic problems which are the root cause of the social revolution which is today a supreme factor in the world .
for there is nothing mysterious about the foundations of a healthy and strong democracy .
the basic things expected by our people of their political and economic systems are simple .
they are : 
 equality of opportunity for youth and for others .
jobs for those who can work .
security for those who need it .
the ending of special privilege for the few .
the preservation of civil liberties for all .
the enjoyment of the fruits of scientific progress in a wider and constantly rising standard of living .
these are the simple , basic things that must never be lost sight of in the turmoil and unbelievable complexity of our modern world .
the inner and abiding strength of our economic and political systems is dependent upon the degree to which they fulfill these expectations .
many subjects connected with our social economy call for immediate improvement .
as examples : 
 we should bring more citizens under the coverage of old - age pensions and unemployment insurance .
we should widen the opportunities for adequate medical care .
we should plan a better system by which persons deserving or needing gainful employment may obtain it .
i have called for personal sacrifice .
i am assured of the willingness of almost all americans to respond to that call .
a part of the sacrifice means the payment of more money in taxes .
in my budget message i shall recommend that a greater portion of this great defense program be paid for from taxation than we are paying today .
no person should try , or be allowed , to get rich out of this program ; and the principle of tax payments in accordance with ability to pay should be constantly before our eyes to guide our legislation .
if the congress maintains these principles , the voters , putting patriotism ahead of pocketbooks , will give you their applause .
in the future days , which we seek to make secure , we look forward to a world founded upon four essential human freedoms .
the first is freedom of speech and expression -- everywhere in the world .
the second is freedom of every person to worship god in his own way -- everywhere in the world .
the third is freedom from want -- which , translated into world terms , means economic understandings which will secure to every nation a healthy peacetime life for its inhabitants -- everywhere in the world .
the fourth is freedom from fear -- which , translated into world terms , means a world - wide reduction of armaments to such a point and in such a thorough fashion that no nation will be in a position to commit an act of physical aggression against any neighbor -- anywhere in the world .
that is no vision of a distant millennium .
it is a definite basis for a kind of world attainable in our own time and generation .
that kind of world is the very antithesis of the so - called new order of tyranny which the dictators seek to create with the crash of a bomb .
to that new order we oppose the greater conception -- the moral order .
a good society is able to face schemes of world domination and foreign revolutions alike without fear .
since the beginning of our american history , we have been engaged in change -- in a perpetual peaceful revolution -- a revolution which goes on steadily , quietly adjusting itself to changing conditions -- without the concentration camp or the quick - lime in the ditch .
the world order which we seek is the cooperation of free countries , working together in a friendly , civilized society .
this nation has placed its destiny in the hands and heads and hearts of its millions of free men and women ; and its faith in freedom under the guidance of god .
freedom means the supremacy of human rights everywhere .
our support goes to those who struggle to gain those rights or keep them .
our strength is our unity of purpose .
to that high concept there can be no end save victory .

i want to talk for a few minutes with the people of the united states about banking -- with the comparatively few who understand the mechanics of banking but more particularly with the overwhelming majority who use banks for the making of deposits and the drawing of checks .
i want to tell you what has been done in the last few days , why it was done , and what the next steps are going to be .
i recognize that the many proclamations from state capitols and from washington , the legislation , the treasury regulations , etc . ,
couched for the most part in banking and legal terms should be explained for the benefit of the average citizen .
i owe this in particular because of the fortitude and good temper with which everybody has accepted the inconvenience and hardships of the banking holiday .
i know that when you understand what we in washington have been about i shall continue to have your cooperation as fully as i have had your sympathy and help during the past week .
first of all let me state the simple fact that when you deposit money in a bank the bank does not put the money into a safe deposit vault .
it invests your money in many different forms of credit - bonds , commercial paper , mortgages and many other kinds of loans .
in other words , the bank puts your money to work to keep the wheels of industry and of agriculture turning around .
a comparatively small part of the money you put into the bank is kept in currency -- an amount which in normal times is wholly sufficient to cover the cash needs of the average citizen .
in other words the total amount of all the currency in the country is only a small fraction of the total deposits in all of the banks .
what , then , happened during the last few days of february and the first few days of march ?
because of undermined confidence on the part of the public , there was a general rush by a large portion of our population to turn bank deposits into currency or gold .
a rush so great that the soundest banks could not get enough currency to meet the demand .
the reason for this was that on the spur of the moment it was , of course , impossible to sell perfectly sound assets of a bank and convert them into cash except at panic prices far below their real value .
by the afternoon of march 3 scarcely a bank in the country was open to do business .
proclamations temporarily closing them in whole or in part had been issued by the governors in almost all the states .
it was then that i issued the proclamation providing for the nation - wide bank holiday , and this was the first step in the government 's reconstruction of our financial and economic fabric .
the second step was the legislation promptly and patriotically passed by the congress confirming my proclamation and broadening my powers so that it became possible in view of the requirement of time to entend ( sic ) the holiday and lift the ban of that holiday gradually .
this law also gave authority to develop a program of rehabilitation of our banking facilities .
i want to tell our citizens in every part of the nation that the national congress -- republicans and democrats alike -- showed by this action a devotion to public welfare and a realization of the emergency and the necessity for speed that it is difficult to match in our history .
the third stage has been the series of regulations permitting the banks to continue their functions to take care of the distribution of food and household necessities and the payment of payrolls .
this bank holiday while resulting in many cases in great inconvenience is affording us the opportunity to supply the currency necessary to meet the situation .
no sound bank is a dollar worse off than it was when it closed its doors last monday .
neither is any bank which may turn out not to be in a position for immediate opening .
the new law allows the twelve federal reserve banks to issue additional currency on good assets and thus the banks that reopen will be able to meet every legitimate call .
the new currency is being sent out by the bureau of engraving and printing in large volume to every part of the country .
it is sound currency because it is backed by actual , good assets .
a question you will ask is this -- why are all the banks not to be reopened at the same time ?
the answer is simple .
your government does not intend that the history of the past few years shall be repeated .
we do not want and will not have another epidemic of bank failures .
as a result we start tomorrow , monday , with the opening of banks in the twelve federal reserve bank cities -- those banks which on first examination by the treasury have already been found to be all right .
this will be followed on tuesday by the resumption of all their functions by banks already found to be sound in cities where there are recognized clearinghouses .
that means about 250 cities of the united states .
on wednesday and succeeding days banks in smaller places all through the country will resume business , subject , of course , to the government 's physical ability to complete its survey .
it is necessary that the reopening of banks be extended over a period in order to permit the banks to make applications for necessary loans , to obtain currency needed to meet their requirements and to enable the government to make common sense checkups .
let me make it clear to you that if your bank does not open the first day you are by no means justified in believing that it will not open .
a bank that opens on one of the subsequent days is in exactly the same status as the bank that opens tomorrow .
i know that many people are worrying about state banks not members of the federal reserve system .
these banks can and will receive assistance from member banks and from the reconstruction finance corporation .
these state banks are following the same course as the national banks except that they get their licenses to resume business from the state authorities , and these authorities have been asked by the secretary of the treasury to permit their good banks to open up on the same schedule as the national banks .
i am confident that the state banking departments will be as careful as the national government in the policy relating to the opening of banks and will follow the same broad policy .
it is possible that when the banks resume a very few people who have not recovered from their fear may again begin withdrawals .
let me make it clear that the banks will take care of all needs -- and it is my belief that hoarding during the past week has become an exceedingly unfashionable pastime .
it needs no prophet to tell you that when the people find that they can get their money -- that they can get it when they want it for all legitimate purposes -- the phantom of fear will soon be laid .
people will again be glad to have their money where it will be safely taken care of and where they can use it conveniently at any time .
i can assure you that it is safer to keep your money in a reopened bank than under the mattress .
the success of our whole great national program depends , of course , upon the cooperation of the public -- on its intelligent support and use of a reliable system .
remember that the essential accomplishment of the new legislation is that it makes it possible for banks more readily to convert their assets into cash than was the case before .
more liberal provision has been made for banks to borrow on these assets at the reserve banks and more liberal provision has also been made for issuing currency on the security of those good assets .
this currency is not fiat currency .
it is issued only on adequate security -- and every good bank has an abundance of such security .
one more point before i close .
there will be , of course , some banks unable to reopen without being reorganized .
the new law allows the government to assist in making these reorganizations quickly and effectively and even allows the government to subscribe to at least a part of new capital which may be required .
i hope you can see from this elemental recital of what your government is doing that there is nothing complex , or radical in the process .
we had a bad banking situation .
some of our bankers had shown themselves either incompetent or dishonest in their handling of the people 's funds .
they had used the money entrusted to them in speculations and unwise loans .
this was of course not true in the vast majority of our banks but it was true in enough of them to shock the people for a time into a sense of insecurity and to put them into a frame of mind where they did not differentiate , but seemed to assume that the acts of a comparative few had tainted them all .
it was the government 's job to straighten out this situation and do it as quickly as possible -- and the job is being performed .
i do not promise you that every bank will be reopened or that individual losses will not be suffered , but there will be no losses that possibly could be avoided ; and there would have been more and greater losses had we continued to drift .
i can even promise you salvation for some at least of the sorely pressed banks .
we shall be engaged not merely in reopening sound banks but in the creation of sound banks through reorganization .
it has been wonderful to me to catch the note of confidence from all over the country .
i can never be sufficiently grateful to the people for the loyal support they have given me in their acceptance of the judgment that has dictated our course , even though all of our processes may not have seemed clear to them .
after all there is an element in the readjustment of our financial system more important than currency , more important than gold , and that is the confidence of the people .
confidence and courage are the essentials of success in carrying out our plan .
you people must have faith ; you must not be stampeded by rumors or guesses .
let us unite in banishing fear .
we have provided the machinery to restore our financial system ; it is up to you to support and make it work .
it is your problem no less than it is mine .
together we can not fail .

mr. vice president , mr. speaker , members of the 78th congress : 
 this 78th congress assembles in one of the great moments in the history of the nation .
the past year was perhaps the most crucial for modern civilization ; the coming year will be filled with violent conflicts -- yet with high promise of better things .
we must appraise the events of 1942 according to their relative importance ; we must exercise a sense of proportion .
first in importance in the american scene has been the inspiring proof of the great qualities of our fighting men .
they have demonstrated these qualities in adversity as well as in victory .
as long as our flag flies over this capitol , americans will honor the soldiers , sailors , and marines who fought our first battles of this war against overwhelming odds the heroes , living and dead , of wake and bataan and guadalcanal , of the java sea and midway and the north atlantic convoys .
their unconquerable spirit will live forever .
by far the largest and most important developments in the whole worldwide strategic picture of 1942 were the events of the long fronts in russia : first , the implacable defense of stalingrad ; and , second , the offensives by the russian armies at various points that started in the latter part of november and which still roll on with great force and effectiveness .
the other major events of the year were : the series of japanese advances in the philippines , the east indies , malaya , and burma ; the stopping of that japanese advance in the mid - pacific , the south pacific , and the indian oceans ; the successful defense of the near east by the british counterattack through egypt and libya ; the american - british occupation of north africa .
of continuing importance in the year 1942 were the unending and bitterly contested battles of the convoy routes , and the gradual passing of air superiority from the axis to the united nations .
the axis powers knew that they must win the war in 1942 -- or eventually lose everything .
i do not need to tell you that our enemies did not win the war in 1942 .
in the pacific area , our most important victory in 1942 was the air and naval battle off midway island .
that action is historically important because it secured for our use communication lines stretching thousands of miles in every direction .
in placing this emphasis on the battle of midway , i am not unmindful of other successful actions in the pacific , in the air and on land and afloat , especially those on the coral sea and new guinea and in the solomon islands .
but these actions were essentially defensive .
they were part of the delaying strategy that characterized this phase of the war .
during this period we inflicted steady losses upon the enemy -- great losses of japanese planes and naval vessels , transports and cargo ships .
as early as one year ago , we set as a primary task in the war of the pacific a day - by - day and week - by - week and month - by - month destruction of more japanese war materials than japanese industry could replace .
most certainly , that task has been and is being performed by our fighting ships and planes .
and a large part of this task has been accomplished by the gallant crews of our american submarines who strike on the other side of the pacific at japanese ships -- right up at the very mouth of the harbor of yokohama .
we know that as each day goes by , japanese strength in ships and planes is going down and down , and american strength in ships and planes is going up and up .
and so i sometimes feel that the eventual outcome can now be put on a mathematical basis .
that will become evident to the japanese people themselves when we strike at their own home islands , and bomb them constantly from the air .
and in the attacks against japan , we shall be joined with the heroic people of china -- that great people whose ideals of peace are so closely akin to our own .
even today we are flying as much lend - lease material into china as ever traversed the burma road , flying it over mountains 17,000 feet high , flying blind through sleet and snow .
we shall overcome all the formidable obstacles , and get the battle equipment into china to shatter the power of our common enemy .
from this war , china will realize the security , the prosperity and the dignity , which japan has sought so ruthlessly to destroy .
the period of our defensive attrition in the pacific is drawing to a close .
now our aim is to force the japanese to fight .
last year , we stopped them .
this year , we intend to advance .
turning now to the european theater of war , during this past year it was clear that our first task was to lessen the concentrated pressure on the russian front by compelling germany to divert part of her manpower and equipment to another theater of war .
after months of secret planning and preparation in the utmost detail , an enormous amphibious expedition was embarked for french north africa from the united states and the united kingdom in literally hundreds of ships .
it reached its objectives with very small losses , and has already produced an important effect upon the whole situation of the war .
it has opened to attack what mr. churchill well described as " the underbelly of the axis , " and it has removed the always dangerous threat of an axis attack through west africa against the south atlantic ocean and the continent of south america itself .
the well - timed and splendidly executed offensive from egypt by the british 8th army was a part of the same major strategy of the united nations .
great rains and appalling mud and very limited communications have delayed the final battles of tunisia .
the axis is reinforcing its strong positions .
but i am confident that though the fighting will be tough , when the final allied assault is made , the last vestige of axis power will be driven from the whole of the south shores of the mediterranean .
any review of the year 1942 must emphasize the magnitude and the diversity of the military activities in which this nation has become engaged .
as i speak to you , approximately one and a half million of our soldiers , sailors , marines , and fliers are in service outside of our continental limits , all through the world .
our merchant seamen , in addition , are carrying supplies to them and to our allies over every sea lane .
few americans realize the amazing growth of our air strength , though i am sure our enemy does .
day in and day out our forces are bombing the enemy and meeting him in combat on many different fronts in every part of the world .
and for those who question the quality of our aircraft and the ability of our fliers , i point to the fact that , in africa , we are shooting down two enemy planes to every one we lose , and in the pacific and the southwest pacific we are shooting them down four to one .
we pay great tribute -- the tribute of the united states of america -- to the fighting men of russia and china and britain and the various members of the british commonwealth -- the millions of men who through the years of this war have fought our common enemies , and have denied to them the world conquest which they sought .
we pay tribute to the soldiers and fliers and seamen of others of the united nations whose countries have been overrun by axis hordes .
as a result of the allied occupation of north africa , powerful units of the french army and navy are going into action .
they are in action with the united nations forces .
we welcome them as allies and as friends .
they join with those frenchmen who , since the dark days of june , 1940 , have been fighting valiantly for the liberation of their stricken country .
we pay tribute to the fighting leaders of our allies , to winston churchill , to joseph stalin , and to the generalissimo chiang kai - shek .
yes , there is a very great unanimity between the leaders of the united nations .
this unity is effective in planning and carrying out the major strategy of this war and in building up and in maintaining the lines of supplies .
i can not prophesy .
i can not tell you when or where the united nations are going to strike next in europe .
but we are going to strike -- and strike hard .
i can not tell you whether we are going to hit them in norway , or through the low countries , or in france , or through sardinia or sicily , or through the balkans , or through poland -- or at several points simultaneously .
but i can tell you that no matter where and when we strike by land , we and the british and the russians will hit them from the air heavily and relentlessly .
day in and day out we shall heap tons upon tons of high explosives on their war factories and utilities and seaports .
hitler and mussolini will understand now the enormity of their miscalculations -- that the nazis would always have the advantage of superior air power as they did when they bombed warsaw , and rotterdam , and london and coventry .
that superiority has gone forever .
yes , the nazis and the fascists have asked for it -- and they are going to get it .
our forward progress in this war has depended upon our progress on the production front .
there has been criticism of the management and conduct of our war production .
much of this self - criticism has had a healthy effect .
it has spurred us on .
it has reflected a normal american impatience to get on with the job .
we are the kind of people who are never quite satisfied with anything short of miracles .
but there has been some criticism based on guesswork and even on malicious falsification of fact .
such criticism creates doubts and creates fears , and weakens our total effort .
i do not wish to suggest that we should be completely satisfied with our production progress today , or next month , or ever .
but i can report to you with genuine pride on what has been accomplished in 1942 .
a year ago we set certain production goals for 1942 and for 1943 .
some people , including some experts , thought that we had pulled some big figures out of a hat just to frighten the axis .
but we had confidence in the ability of our people to establish new records .
and that confidence has been justified .
of course , we realized that some production objectives would have to be changed -- some of them adjusted upward , and others downward ; some items would be taken out of the program altogether , and others added .
this was inevitable as we gained battle experience , and as technological improvements were made .
our 1942 airplane production and tank production fell short , numerically -- stress the word numerically of the goals set a year ago .
nevertheless , we have plenty of reason to be proud of our record for 1942 .
we produced 48,000 military planes -- more than the airplane production of germany , italy , and japan put together .
last month , in december , we produced 5,500 military planes and the rate is rapidly rising .
furthermore , we must remember that as each month passes by , the averages of our types weigh more , take more man - hours to make , and have more striking power .
in tank production , we revised our schedule -- and for good and sufficient reasons .
as a result of hard experience in battle , we have diverted a portion of our tank - producing capacity to a stepped - up production of new , deadly field weapons , especially self - propelled artillery .
here are some other production figures : 
 in 1942 , we produced 56,000 combat vehicles , such as tanks and self - propelled artillery .
in 1942 , we produced 670,000 machine guns , six times greater than our production in 1941 and three times greater than our total production during the year and a half of our participation in the first world war .
we produced 21,000 anti - tank guns , six times greater than our 1941 production .
we produced ten and a quarter billion rounds of small - arms ammunition , five times greater than our 1941 production and three times greater than our total production in the first world war .
we produced 181 million rounds of artillery ammunition , 12 times greater than our 1941 production and 10 times greater than our total production in the first world war .
i think the arsenal of democracy is making good .
these facts and figures that i have given will give no great aid and comfort to the enemy .
on the contrary , i can imagine that they will give him considerable discomfort .
i suspect that hitler and tojo will find it difficult to explain to the german and japanese people just why it is that " decadent , inefficient democracy " can produce such phenomenal quantities of weapons and munitions -- and fighting men .
we have given the lie to certain misconceptions , which is an extremely polite word , especially the one which holds that the various blocs or groups within a free country can not forego their political and economic differences in time of crisis and work together toward a common goal .
while we have been achieving this miracle of production , during the past year our armed forces have grown from a little over 2,000,000 to 7,000,000 .
in other words , we have withdrawn from the labor force and the farms some 5,000,000 of our younger workers .
and in spite of this , our farmers have contributed their share to the common effort by producing the greatest quantity of food ever made available during a single year in all our history .
i wonder is there any person among us so simple as to believe that all this could have been done without creating some dislocations in our normal national life , some inconveniences , and even some hardships ?
who can have hoped to have done this without burdensome government regulations which are a nuisance to everyone -- including those who have the thankless task of administering them ?
we all know that there have been mistakes -- mistakes due to the inevitable process of trial and error inherent in doing big things for the first time .
we all know that there have been too many complicated forms and questionnaires .
i know about that .
i have had to fill some of them out myself .
but we are determined to see to it that our supplies of food and other essential civilian goods are distributed on a fair and just basis -- to rich and poor , management and labor , farmer and city dweller alike .
we are determined to keep the cost of living at a stable level .
all this has required much information .
these forms and questionnaires represent an honest and sincere attempt by honest and sincere officials to obtain this information .
we have learned by the mistakes that we have made .
our experience will enable us during the coming year to improve the necessary mechanisms of wartime economic controls , and to simplify administrative procedures .
but we do not intend to leave things so lax that loopholes will be left for cheaters , for chiselers , or for the manipulators of the black market .
of course , there have been disturbances and inconveniences -- and even hardships .
and there will be many , many more before we finally win .
yes , 1943 will not be an easy year for us on the home front .
we shall feel in many ways in our daily lives the sharp pinch of total war .
fortunately , there are only a few americans who place appetite above patriotism .
the overwhelming majority realize that the food we send abroad is for essential military purposes , for our own and allied fighting forces , and for necessary help in areas that we occupy .
we americans intend to do this great job together .
in our common labors we must build and fortify the very foundation of national unity -- confidence in one another .
it is often amusing , and it is sometimes politically profitable , to picture the city of washington as a madhouse , with the congress and the administration disrupted with confusion and indecision and general incompetence .
however , what matters most in war is results .
and the one pertinent fact is that after only a few years of preparation and only one year of warfare , we are able to engage , spiritually as well as physically , in the total waging of a total war .
washington may be a madhouse -- but only in the sense that it is the capital city of a nation which is fighting mad .
and i think that berlin and rome and tokyo , which had such contempt for the obsolete methods of democracy , would now gladly use all they could get of that same brand of madness .
and we must not forget that our achievements in production have been relatively no greater than those of the russians and the british and the chinese who have developed their own war industries under the incredible difficulties of battle conditions .
they have had to continue work through bombings and blackouts .
and they have never quit .
we americans are in good , brave company in this war , and we are playing our own , honorable part in the vast common effort .
as spokesmen for the united states government , you and i take off our hats to those responsible for our american production -- to the owners , managers , and supervisors , to the draftsmen and the engineers , and to the workers -- men and women -- in factories and arsenals and shipyards and mines and mills and forests -- and railroads and on highways .
we take off our hats to the farmers who have faced an unprecedented task of feeding not only a great nation but a great part of the world .
we take off our hats to all the loyal , anonymous , untiring men and women who have worked in private employment and in government and who have endured rationing and other stringencies with good humor and good will .
yes , we take off our hats to all americans who have contributed so magnificently to our common cause .
i have sought to emphasize a sense of proportion in this review of the events of the war and the needs of the war .
we should never forget the things we are fighting for .
but , at this critical period of the war , we should confine ourselves to the larger objectives and not get bogged down in argument over methods and details .
we , and all the united nations , want a decent peace and a durable peace .
in the years between the end of the first world war and the beginning of the second world war , we were not living under a decent or a durable peace .
i have reason to know that our boys at the front are concerned with two broad aims beyond the winning of the war ; and their thinking and their opinion coincide with what most americans here back home are mulling over .
they know , and we know , that it would be inconceivable -- it would , indeed , be sacrilegious -- if this nation and the world did not attain some real , lasting good out of all these efforts and sufferings and bloodshed and death .
the men in our armed forces want a lasting peace , and , equally , they want permanent employment for themselves , their families , and their neighbors when they are mustered out at the end of the war .
two years ago i spoke in my annual message of four freedoms .
the blessings of two of them -- freedom of speech and freedom of religion -- are an essential part of the very life of this nation ; and we hope that these blessings will be granted to all men everywhere .
" the people at home , and the people at the front , are wondering a little about the third freedom -- freedom from want .
to them it means that when they are mustered out , when war production is converted to the economy of peace , they will have the right to expect full employment -- full employment for themselves and for all able - bodied men and women in america who want to work .
they expect the opportunity to work , to run their farms , their stores , to earn decent wages .
they are eager to face the risks inherent in our system of free enterprise .
they do not want a postwar america which suffers from undernourishment or slums -- or the dole .
they want no get - rich - quick era of bogus " prosperity " which will end for them in selling apples on a street corner , as happened after the bursting of the boom in 1929 .
when you talk with our young men and our young women , you will find they want to work for themselves and for their families ; they consider that they have the right to work ; and they know that after the last war their fathers did not gain that right .
when you talk with our young men and women , you will find that with the opportunity for employment they want assurance against the evils of all major economic hazards -- assurance that will extend from the cradle to the grave .
and this great government can and must provide this assurance .
i have been told that this is no time to speak of a better america after the war .
i am told it is a grave error on my part .
i dissent .
and if the security of the individual citizen , or the family , should become a subject of national debate , the country knows where i stand .
i say this now to this 78th congress , because it is wholly possible that freedom from want -- the right of employment , the right of assurance against life 's hazards -- will loom very large as a task of america during the coming two years .
i trust it will not be regarded as an issue -- but rather as a task for all of us to study sympathetically , to work out with a constant regard for the attainment of the objective , with fairness to all and with injustice to none .
in this war of survival we must keep before our minds not only the evil things we fight against but the good things we are fighting for .
we fight to retain a great past -- and we fight to gain a greater future .
let us remember , too , that economic safety for the america of the future is threatened unless a greater economic stability comes to the rest of the world .
we can not make america an island in either a military or an economic sense .
hitlerism , like any other form of crime or disease , can grow from the evil seeds of economic as well as military feudalism .
victory in this war is the first and greatest goal before us .
victory in the peace is the next .
that means striving toward the enlargement of the security of man here and throughout the world -- and , finally , striving for the fourth freedom -- freedom from fear .
it is of little account for any of us to talk of essential human needs , of attaining security , if we run the risk of another world war in 10 or 20 or 50 years .
that is just plain common sense .
wars grow in size , in death and destruction , and in the inevitability of engulfing all nations , in inverse ratio to the shrinking size of the world as a result of the conquest of the air .
i shudder to think of what will happen to humanity , including ourselves , if this war ends in an inconclusive peace , and another war breaks out when the babies of today have grown to fighting age .
every normal american prays that neither he nor his sons nor his grandsons will be compelled to go through this horror again .
undoubtedly a few americans , even now , think that this nation can end this war comfortably and then climb back into an american hole and pull the hole in after them .
but we have learned that we can never dig a hole so deep that it would be safe against predatory animals .
we have also learned that if we do not pull the fangs of the predatory animals of this world , they will multiply and grow in strength -- and they will be at our throats again once more in a short generation .
most americans realize more clearly than ever before that modern war equipment in the hands of aggressor nations can bring danger overnight to our own national existence or to that of any other nation -- or island -- or continent .
it is clear to us that if germany and italy and japan -- or any one of them -- remain armed at the end of this war , or are permitted to rearm , they will again , and inevitably , embark upon an ambitious career of world conquest .
they must be disarmed and kept disarmed , and they must abandon the philosophy , and the teaching of that philosophy , which has brought so much suffering to the world .
after the first world war we tried to achieve a formula for permanent peace , based on a magnificent idealism .
we failed .
but , by our failure , we have learned that we can not maintain peace at this stage of human development by good intentions alone .
today the united nations are the mightiest military coalition in all history .
they represent an overwhelming majority of the population of the world .
bound together in solemn agreement that they themselves will not commit acts of aggression or conquest against any of their neighbors , the united nations can and must remain united for the maintenance of peace by preventing any attempt to rearm in germany , in japan , in italy , or in any other nation which seeks to violate the tenth commandment -- " thou shalt not covet . "
there are cynics , there are skeptics who say it can not be done .
the american people and all the freedom - loving peoples of this earth are now demanding that it must be done .
and the will of these people shall prevail .
the very philosophy of the axis powers is based on a profound contempt for the human race .
if , in the formation of our future policy , we were guided by the same cynical contempt , then we should be surrendering to the philosophy of our enemies , and our victory would turn to defeat .
the issue of this war is the basic issue between those who believe in mankind and those who do not -- the ancient issue between those who put their faith in the people and those who put their faith in dictators and tyrants .
there have always been those who did not believe in the people , who attempted to block their forward movement across history , to force them back to servility and suffering and silence .
the people have now gathered their strength .
they are moving forward in their might and power -- and no force , no combination of forces , no trickery , deceit , or violence , can stop them now .
they see before them the hope of the world -- a decent , secure , peaceful life for men everywhere .
i do not prophesy when this war will end .
but i do believe that this year of 1943 will give to the united nations a very substantial advance along the roads that lead to berlin and rome and tokyo .
i tell you it is within the realm of possibility that this 78th congress may have the historic privilege of helping greatly to save the world from future fear .
therefore , let us all have confidence , let us redouble our efforts .
a tremendous , costly , long - enduring task in peace as well as in war is still ahead of us .
but , as we face that continuing task , we may know that the state of this nation is good -- the heart of this nation is sound -- the spirit of this nation is strong -- the faith of this nation is eternal .

i am appealing to the people of america tonight to help in carrying out a task that is important to them and to their government .
it is a part , but an essential part , of the greater task of finding jobs for willing workers who are idle through no fault of their own ; of finding more work for those who are insufficiently employed and of surveying the needs of workers and industry to see if we can find the basis of a better long - range plan of re - employment than we have now .
enforced idleness , embracing any considerable portion of our people , in a nation of such wealth and natural opportunity , is a paradox that challenges our ingenuity .
unemployment is one of the bitter and galling problems that now afflicts man - kind .
it has been with us , in a measure , since the beginning of our industrial era .
it has been increased by the complexity of business and industry , and it has been made more acute by the depression .
it has made necessary the expenditure of billions of dollars for relief and for publicly created work ; it has delayed the balancing of our national budget , and increased the tax burden of all our people .
in addition to the problem faced by the national government our states and local governments have been sorely pressed to meet the increased load resulting from unemployment .
it is a problem of every civilized nation -- not ours alone .
it has been solved in some countries by starting huge armament programs but we americans do not want to solve it that way .
nevertheless , as a nation we adopted the policy that no unemployed man or woman can be permitted to starve for lack of aid .
that is still our policy .
but the situation calls for a permanent cure and not just a temporary one .
unemployment relief is , of course , not the permanent cure .
the permanent cure lies in finding suitable jobs in industry and agriculture for all willing workers .
it involves cooperative effort and planning which will lead to the absorption of this unused man - power in private industry .
such planning calls for facts which we do not now possess .
such planning applies not only to workers but to the employers in industry because it involves trying to get rid of what we call the peaks and valleys of employment and unemployment -- trying with the help of industry to plan against producing more goods one year than people can or will consume , and cutting production drastically the following year with the resulting lay - off of hundreds of thousands of workers .
that is a long and difficult problem to find the answer to and it may take many efforts in the coming years to find the right answer .
but in the meantime , we need more facts .
for several years varying estimates of the extent of unemployment have been made .
valuable as some of these estimates have been in providing us an approximation of the extent of unemployment , they have not provided us with sufficient factual data on which to base a comprehensive re - employment program .
during this coming week we are going to strive to get such facts .
we are going to conduct a nation - wide census of the unemployed and the partly unemployed and we are going to conduct it in the genuinely democratic american way .
this is to be a wholly voluntary census .
we are going to hold the mirror up to ourselves and try to get , not only a true and honest reflection of our present unemployment conditions , but facts which will help us to plan constructively for the future .
only in a nation whose people are alert to their own self - interest , and alive to their responsibilities of citizenship , could such a voluntary plan succeed .
i am confident that this great american undertaking will succeed .
every effort is being put forth to make all of our people understand and appreciate its significance and i am sure you will all give it your helpful aid as you have in previous efforts aimed at national improvement , and through which our people have shown their capacity for self - government .
on tuesday next , november 16 , the post office department , through its far - flung and highly efficient organization , will undertake to deliver to every abode in the united states an unemployment report card containing 14 simple questions .
the report card which the postman will leave at your door on tuesday is a double post - card , larger than the customary card .
it is addressed especially to those who are unemployed or partly unemployed , and who are able to work and are seeking work .
this card contains a message to you from me carrying the assurance that if you will give me all the facts , it will help us in planning for the benefit of those who need and want work and do not now have it .
this message calls upon the unemployed and everyone else in this land to help make this census complete , honest and accurate .
if all unemployed and partly unemployed persons , who are able to work and who are seeking work , will conscientiously fill out these cards and mail them just as they are , without stamp or envelope , by or before midnight november 20 , our nation will have real facts upon which to base a sound re - employment program .
it is important for every unemployed person to understand that this report card is not an application for relief , nor registration for a job .
this is purely and simply a fact - seeking census .
when you receive this card you will note that the 14 questions are designed to give this nation a wider basis of knowledge of its unemployment conditions than it has heretofore had .
if our unemployed and partly unemployed wholeheartedly give the information sought in these 14 questions , we will know not only the extent of unemployment and partial unemployment , but we will know the geographical location of unemployment by states and communities .
we will likewise be able to tell what age groups are most severely affected .
but most important of all , we will know the work qualifications of the unemployed ; we will know in what industries they are suited to function , and we will be equipped to determine what future industrial trends are most likely to absorb these idle workers .
i think it is necessary to emphasize that only those unemployed , or partly unemployed , who are able to work , and who are seeking work , should fill out these cards .
all others may disregard them .
but i appeal to all of you who are employed today to enlist as good neighbors to those who are unemployed in your communities and who may need help in filling out their cards properly and promptly .
they may need the stimulus of your cooperation , to recognize the importance of this national effort to help them .
i think this neighborly cooperation will be very helpful in dispelling from the minds of the unemployed all fear that the information sought in this census is to be used for any purpose other than helpfulness .
i repeat the assurance to the unemployed that the information which you give on these report cards will in no sense be used against you , but so far as lies within my power will be employed for your own good and for the welfare of the nation .
when we have ascertained the full facts of unemployment , we can extend the voluntary and neighborly character of this effort to the task of finding the solution to the perplexing problem .
its importance justifies a national approach , free from prejudice or partisanship and warrants the cooperative endeavors of business , of labor , of agriculture , and of government .
i am confident that this nation of ours has the genius to reorder its affairs , and possesses the physical resources to make it possible for everyone , young or old , to enjoy the opportunity to work and earn .
there is neither logic nor necessity for one - third of our population to have less of the needs of modern life than make for decent living .
our national purchasing power is the soil from which comes all our prosperity .
the steady flow of wages to our millions of workers is essential if the products of our industry and of our farmers are to be consumed .
our far - sighted industrial leaders now recognize that a very substantial share of corporate earnings must be paid out in wages , or the soil from which these industries grow will soon become impoverished .
our farmers recognize that their largest customers are the workers for wages , and that farm markets can not be maintained except through widespread purchasing power .
this unemployment problem is , therefore , one in which every individual and every economic group has a direct interest .
it is a problem whose discussion must be removed from the field of prejudice to the field of logic .
we shall find the solution only when we have the facts , and having the facts , accept our mutual responsibilities .
the inherent right to work is one of the elemental privileges of a free people .
continued failure to achieve that right and privilege by anyone who wants to work and needs work is a challenge to our civilization and to our security .
endowed , as our nation is , with abundant physical resources , and inspired as it should be with the high purpose to make those resources and opportunities available for the enjoyment of all , we approach this problem of reemployment with the real hope of finding a better answer than we have now .
the unemployment census , as a sensible first step to a constructive re - employment program ought to be a successful bit of national team - work from which will come again that feeling of national solidarity which is the strength and the glory of the american people .

my fellow americans and my friends : 
 tonight my single duty is to speak to the whole of america .
until four - thirty this morning i had hoped against hope that some miracle would prevent a devastating war in europe and bring to an end the invasion of poland by germany .
for four long years a succession of actual wars and constant crises have shaken the entire world and have threatened in each case to bring on the gigantic conflict which is today unhappily a fact .
it is right that i should recall to your minds the consistent and at time successful efforts of your government in these crises to throw the full weight of the united states into the cause of peace .
in spite of spreading wars i think that we have every right and every reason to maintain as a national policy the fundamental moralities , the teachings of religion ( and ) the continuation of efforts to restore peace -- ( for ) because some day , though the time may be distant , we can be of even greater help to a crippled humanity .
it is right , too , to point out that the unfortunate events of these recent years have , without question , been based on the use of force ( or ) and the threat of force .
and it seems to me clear , even at the outbreak of this great war , that the influence of america should be consistent in seeking for humanity a final peace which will eliminate , as far as it is possible to do so , the continued use of force between nations .
it is , of course , impossible to predict the future .
i have my constant stream of information from american representatives and other sources throughout the world .
you , the people of this country , are receiving news through your radios and your newspapers at every hour of the day .
you are , i believe , the most enlightened and the best informed people in all the world at this moment .
you are subjected to no censorship of news , and i want to add that your government has no information which it ( hesitates to ) withholds ( from you ) or which it has any thought of withholding from you .
at the same time , as i told my press conference on friday , it is of the highest importance that the press and the radio use the utmost caution to discriminate between actual verified fact on the one hand , and mere rumor on the other .
i can add to that by saying that i hope the people of this country will also discriminate most carefully between news and rumor .
do not believe of necessity everything you hear or read .
check up on it first .
you must master at the outset a simple but unalterable fact in modern foreign relations between nations .
when peace has been broken anywhere , the peace of all countries everywhere is in danger .
it is easy for you and for me to shrug our shoulders and to say that conflicts taking place thousands of miles from the continental united states , and , indeed , thousands of miles from the whole american hemisphere , do not seriously affect the americas -- and that all the united states has to do is to ignore them and go about ( our ) its own business .
passionately though we may desire detachment , we are forced to realize that every word that comes through the air , every ship that sails the sea , every battle that is fought does affect the american future .
let no man or woman thoughtlessly or falsely talk of america sending its armies to european fields .
at this moment there is being prepared a proclamation of american neutrality .
this would have been done even if there had been no neutrality statute on the books , for this proclamation is in accordance with international law and in accordance with american policy .
this will be followed by a proclamation required by the existing neutrality act .
and i trust that in the days to come our neutrality can be made a true neutrality .
it is of the utmost importance that the people of this country , with the best information in the world , think things through .
the most dangerous enemies of american peace are those who , without well - rounded information on the whole broad subject of the past , the present and the future , undertake to speak with assumed authority , to talk in terms of glittering generalities , to give to the nation assurances or prophecies which are of little present or future value .
i myself can not and do not prophesy the course of events abroad -- and the reason is that because i have of necessity such a complete picture of what is going on in every part of the world , that i do not dare to do so .
and the other reason is that i think it is honest for me to be honest with the people of the united states .
i can not prophesy the immediate economic effect of this new war on our nation but i do say that no american has the moral right to profiteer at the expense either of his fellow citizens or of the men , the women and the children who are living and dying in the midst of war in europe .
some things we do know .
most of us in the united states believe in spiritual values .
most of us , regardless of what church we belong to , believe in the spirit of the new testament -- a great teaching which opposes itself to the use of force , of armed force , of marching armies and falling bombs .
the overwhelming masses of our people seek peace -- peace at home , and the kind of peace in other lands which will not jeopardize our peace at home .
we have certain ideas and certain ideals of national safety and we must act to preserve that safety today and to preserve the safety of our children in future years .
that safety is and will be bound up with the safety of the western hemisphere and of the seas adjacent thereto .
we seek to keep war from our own firesides by keeping war from coming to the americas .
for that we have historic precedent that goes back to the days of the administration of president george washington .
it is serious enough and tragic enough to every american family in every state in the union to live in a world that is torn by wars on other continents .
and those wars today ( they ) affect every american home .
it is our national duty to use every effort to keep ( them ) those wars out of the americas .
and at this time let me make the simple plea that partisanship and selfishness be adjourned ; and that national unity be the thought that underlies all others .
this nation will remain a neutral nation , but i can not ask that every american remain neutral in thought as well .
even a neutral has a right to take account of facts .
even a neutral can not be asked to close his mind or close his conscience .
i have said not once but many times that i have seen war and that i hate war .
i say that again and again .
i hope the united states will keep out of this war .
i believe that it will .
and i give you assurance(s ) and reassurance that every effort of your government will be directed toward that end .
as long as it remains within my power to prevent , there will be no blackout of peace in the united states .

my fellow americans : 
 the sudden criminal attacks perpetrated by the japanese in the pacific provide the climax of a decade of international immorality .
powerful and resourceful gangsters have banded together to make war upon the whole human race .
their challenge has now been flung at the united states of america .
the japanese have treacherously violated the longstanding peace between us .
many american soldiers and sailors have been killed by enemy action .
american ships have been sunk ; american airplanes have been destroyed .
the congress and the people of the united states have accepted that challenge .
together with other free peoples , we are now fighting to maintain our right to live among our world neighbors in freedom , in common decency , without fear of assault .
i have prepared the full record of our past relations with japan , and it will be submitted to the congress .
it begins with the visit of commodore parry to japan eighty - eight years ago .
it ends with the visit of two japanese emissaries to the secretary of state last sunday , an hour after japanese forces had loosed their bombs and machine guns against our flag , our forces and our citizens .
i can say with utmost confidence that no americans today or a thousand years hence , need feel anything but pride in our patience and in our efforts through all the years toward achieving a peace in the pacific which would be fair and honorable to every nation , large or small .
and no honest person , today or a thousand years hence , will be able to suppress a sense of indignation and horror at the treachery committed by the military dictators of japan , under the very shadow of the flag of peace borne by their special envoys in our midst .
the course that japan has followed for the past ten years in asia has paralleled the course of hitler and mussolini in europe and in africa .
today , it has become far more than a parallel .
it is actual collaboration so well calculated that all the continents of the world , and all the oceans , are now considered by the axis strategists as one gigantic battlefield .
in 1931 , ten years ago , japan invaded manchukuo -- without warning .
in 1935 , italy invaded ethiopia -- without warning .
in 1938 , hitler occupied austria -- without warning .
in 1939 , hitler invaded czechoslovakia -- without warning .
later in ' 39 , hitler invaded poland -- without warning .
in 1940 , hitler invaded norway , denmark , the netherlands , belgium and luxembourg -- without warning .
in 1940 , italy attacked france and later greece -- without warning .
and this year , in 1941 , the axis powers attacked yugoslavia and greece and they dominated the balkans -- without warning .
in 1941 , also , hitler invaded russia -- without warning .
and now japan has attacked malaya and thailand -- and the united states -- without warning .
it is all of one pattern .
we are now in this war .
we are all in it -- all the way .
every single man , woman and child is a partner in the most tremendous undertaking of our american history .
we must share together the bad news and the good news , the defeats and the victories -- the changing fortunes of war .
so far , the news has been all bad .
we have suffered a serious setback in hawaii .
our forces in the philippines , which include the brave people of that commonwealth , are taking punishment , but are defending themselves vigorously .
the reports from guam and wake and midway islands are still confused , but we must be prepared for the announcement that all these three outposts have been seized .
the casualty lists of these first few days will undoubtedly be large .
i deeply feel the anxiety of all of the families of the men in our armed forces and the relatives of people in cities which have been bombed .
i can only give them my solemn promise that they will get news just as quickly as possible .
this government will put its trust in the stamina of the american people , and will give the facts to the public just as soon as two conditions have been fulfilled : first , that the information has been definitely and officially confirmed ; and , second , that the release of the information at the time it is received will not prove valuable to the enemy directly or indirectly .
most earnestly i urge my countrymen to reject all rumors .
these ugly little hints of complete disaster fly thick and fast in wartime .
they have to be examined and appraised .
as an example , i can tell you frankly that until further surveys are made , i have not sufficient information to state the exact damage which has been done to our naval vessels at pearl harbor .
admittedly the damage is serious .
but no one can say how serious , until we know how much of this damage can be repaired and how quickly the necessary repairs can be made .
i cite as another example a statement made on sunday night that a japanese carrier had been located and sunk off the canal zone .
and when you hear statements that are attributed to what they call " an authoritative source , " you can be reasonably sure from now on that under these war circumstances the " authoritative source " is not any person in authority .
many rumors and reports which we now hear originate , of course , with enemy sources .
for instance , today the japanese are claiming that as a result of their one action against hawaii they hare gained naval supremacy in the pacific .
this is an old trick of propaganda which has been used innumerable times by the nazis .
the purposes of such fantastic claims are , of course , to spread fear and confusion among us , and to goad us into revealing military information which our enemies are desperately anxious to obtain .
our government will not be caught in this obvious trap -- and neither will the people of the united states .
it must be remembered by each and every one of us that our free and rapid communication these days must be greatly restricted in wartime .
it is not possible to receive full and speedy and accurate reports front distant areas of combat .
this is particularly true where naval operations are concerned .
for in these days of the marvels of the radio it is often impossible for the commanders of various units to report their activities by radio at all , for the very simple reason that this information would become available to the enemy and would disclose their position and their plan of defense or attack .
of necessity there will be delays in officially confirming or denying reports of operations , but we will not hide facts from the country if we know the facts and if the enemy will not be aided by their disclosure .
to all newspapers and radio stations -- all those who reach the eyes and ears of the american people -- i say this : you have a most grave responsibility to the nation now and for the duration of this war .
if you feel that your government is not disclosing enough of the truth , you have every right to say so .
but in the absence of all the facts , as revealed by official sources , you have no right in the ethics of patriotism to deal out unconfirmed reports in such a way as to make people believe that they are gospel truth .
every citizen , in every walk of life , shares this same responsibility .
the lives of our soldiers and sailors -- the whole future of this nation -- depend upon the manner in which each and every one of us fulfills his obligation to our country .
now a word about the recent past and the future .
a year and a half has elapsed since the fall of france , when the whole world first realized the mechanized might which the axis nations had been building up for so many years .
america has used that year and a half to great advantage .
knowing that the attack might reach us in all too short a time , we immediately began greatly to increase our industrial strength and our capacity to meet the demands of modern warfare .
precious months were gained by sending vast quantities of our war material to the nations of the world still able to resist axis aggression .
our policy rested on the fundamental truth that the defense of any country resisting hitler or japan was in the long run the defense of our own country .
that policy has been justified .
it has given us time , invaluable time , to build our american assembly lines of production .
assembly lines are now in operation .
others are being rushed to completion .
a steady stream of tanks and planes , of guns and ships and shells and equipment -- that is what these eighteen months have given us .
but it is all only a beginning of what still has to be done .
we must be set to face a long war against crafty and powerful bandits .
the attack at pearl harbor can be repeated at any one of many points , points in both oceans and along both our coast lines and against all the rest of the hemisphere .
it will not only be a long war , it will be a hard war .
that is the basis on which we now lay all our plans .
that is the yardstick by which we measure what we shall need and demand ; money , materials , doubled and quadrupled production -- ever - increasing .
the production must be not only for our own army and navy and air forces .
it must reinforce the other armies and navies and air forces fighting the nazis and the war lords of japan throughout the americas and throughout the world .
i have been working today on the subject of production .
your government has decided on two broad policies .
the first is to speed up all existing production by working on a seven day week basis in every war industry , including the production of essential raw materials .
the second policy , now being put into form , is to rush additions to the capacity of production by building more new plants , by adding to old plants , and by using the many smaller plants for war needs .
over the hard road of the past months , we have at times met obstacles and difficulties , divisions and disputes , indifference and callousness .
that is now all past -- and , i am sure , forgotten .
the fact is that the country now has an organization in washington built around men and women who are recognized experts in their own fields .
i think the country knows that the people who are actually responsible in each and every one of these many fields are pulling together with a teamwork that has never before been excelled .
on the road ahead there lies hard work -- grueling work -- day and night , every hour and every minute .
i was about to add that ahead there lies sacrifice for all of us .
but it is not correct to use that word .
the united states does not consider it a sacrifice to do all one can , to give one 's best to our nation , when the nation is fighting for its existence and its future life .
it is not a sacrifice for any man , old or young , to be in the army or the navy of the united states .
rather it is a privilege .
it is not a sacrifice for the industrialist or the wage earner , the farmer or the shopkeeper , the trainmen or the doctor , to pay more taxes , to buy more bonds , to forego extra profits , to work longer or harder at the task for which he is best fitted .
rather it is a privilege .
it is not a sacrifice to do without many things to which we are accustomed if the national defense calls for doing without it .
a review this morning leads me to the conclusion that at present we shall not have to curtail the normal use of articles of food .
there is enough food today for all of us and enough left over to send to those who are fighting on the same side with us .
but there will be a clear and definite shortage of metals for many kinds of civilian use , for the very good reason that in our increased program we shall need for war purposes more than half of that portion of the principal metals which during the past year have gone into articles for civilian use .
yes , we shall have to give up many things entirely .
and i am sure that the people in every part of the nation are prepared in their individual living to win this war .
i am sure that they will cheerfully help to pay a large part of its financial cost while it goes on .
i am sure they will cheerfully give up those material things that they are asked to give up .
and i am sure that they will retain all those great spiritual things without which we can not win through .
i repeat that the united states can accept no result save victory , final and complete .
not only must the shame of japanese treachery be wiped out , but the sources of international brutality , wherever they exist , must be absolutely and finally broken .
in my message to the congress yesterday i said that we " will make very certain that this form of treachery shall never endanger us again . "
in order to achieve that certainty , we must begin the great task that is before us by abandoning once and for all the illusion that we can ever again isolate ourselves from the rest of humanity .
in these past few years -- and , most violently , in the past three days -- we have learned a terrible lesson .
it is our obligation to our dead -- it is our sacred obligation to their children and to our children -- that we must never forget what we have learned .
and what we have learned is this : 
 there is no such thing as security for any nation -- or any individual -- in a world ruled by the principles of gangsterism .
there is no such thing as impregnable defense against powerful aggressors who sneak up in the dark and strike without warning .
we have learned that our ocean - girt hemisphere is not immune from severe attack -- that we can not measure our safety in terms of miles on any map any more .
we may acknowledge that our enemies have performed a brilliant feat of deception , perfectly timed and executed with great skill .
it was a thoroughly dishonorable deed , but we must face the fact that modern warfare as conducted in the nazi manner is a dirty business .
we do n't like it -- we did n't want to get in it -- but we are in it and we 're going to fight it with everything we 've got .
i do not think any american has any doubt of our ability to administer proper punishment to the perpetrators of these crimes .
your government knows that for weeks germany has been telling japan that if japan did not attack the united states , japan would not share in dividing the spoils with germany when peace came .
she was promised by germany that if she came in she would receive the complete and perpetual control of the whole of the pacific area -- and that means not only the ear east , but also all of the islands in the pacific , and also a stranglehold on the west coast of north , central and south america .
we know also that germany and japan are conducting their military and naval operations in accordance with a joint plan .
that plan considers all peoples and nations which are not helping the axis powers as common enemies of each and every one of the axis powers .
that is their simple and obvious grand strategy .
and that is why the american people must realize that it can be matched only with similar grand strategy .
we must realize for example that japanese successes against the united states in the pacific are helpful to german operations in libya ; that any german success against the caucasus is inevitably an assistance to japan in her operations against the dutch east indies ; that a german attack against algiers or morocco opens the way to a german attack against south america and the canal .
on the other side of the picture , we must learn also to know that guerilla warfare against the germans in , let us say serbia or norway , helps us ; that a successful russian offensive against the germans helps us ; and that british successes on land or sea in any part of the world strengthen our hands .
remember always that germany and italy , regardless of any formal declaration of war , consider themselves at war with the united states at this moment just as much as they consider themselves at war with britain or russia .
and germany puts all the other republics of the americas into the same category of enemies .
the people of our sister republics of this hemisphere can be honored by that fact .
the true goal we seek is far above and beyond the ugly field of battle .
when we resort to force , as now we must , we are determined that this force shall be directed toward ultimate good as well as against immediate evil .
we americans are not destroyers -- we are builders .
we are now in the midst of a war , not for conquest , not for vengeance , but for a world in which this nation , and all that this nation represents , will be safe for our children .
we expect to eliminate the danger from japan , but it would serve us ill if we accomplished that and found that the rest of the world was dominated by hitler and mussolini .
so we are going to win the war and we are going to win the peace that follows .
and in the difficult hours of this day -- through dark days that may be yet to come -- we will know that the vast majority of the members of the human race are on our side .
many of them are fighting with us .
all of them are praying for us .
but , in representing our cause , we represent theirs as well -- our hope and their hope for liberty under god .

last thursday i described in detail certain economic problems which everyone admits now face the nation .
for the many messages which have come to me after that speech , and which it is physically impossible to answer individually , i take this means of saying " thank you . "
tonight , sitting at my desk in the white house , i make my first radio report to the people in my second term of office .
i am reminded of that evening in march , four years ago , when i made my first radio report to you .
we were then in the midst of the great banking crisis .
soon after , with the authority of the congress , we asked the nation to turn over all of its privately held gold , dollar for dollar , to the government of the united states .
today 's recovery proves how right that policy was .
but when , almost two years later , it came before the supreme court its constitutionality was upheld only by a five - to - four vote .
the change of one vote would have thrown all the affairs of this great nation back into hopeless chaos .
in effect , four justices ruled that the right under a private contract to exact a pound of flesh was more sacred than the main objectives of the constitution to establish an enduring nation .
in 1933 you and i knew that we must never let our economic system get completely out of joint again - that we could not afford to take the risk of another great depression .
we also became convinced that the only way to avoid a repetition of those dark days was to have a government with power to prevent and to cure the abuses and the inequalities which had thrown that system out of joint .
we then began a program of remedying those abuses and inequalities - to give balance and stability to our economic system - to make it bomb - proof against the causes of 1929 .
today we are only part - way through that program - and recovery is speeding up to a point where the dangers of 1929 are again becoming possible , not this week or month perhaps , but within a year or two .
national laws are needed to complete that program .
individual or local or state effort alone can not protect us in 1937 any better than ten years ago .
it will take time - and plenty of time - to work out our remedies administratively even after legislation is passed .
to complete our program of protection in time , therefore , we can not delay one moment in making certain that our national government has power to carry through .
four years ago action did not come until the eleventh hour .
it was almost too late .
if we learned anything from the depression we will not allow ourselves to run around in new circles of futile discussion and debate , always postponing the day of decision .
the american people have learned from the depression .
for in the last three national elections an overwhelming majority of them voted a mandate that the congress and the president begin the task of providing that protection - not after long years of debate , but now .
the courts , however , have cast doubts on the ability of the elected congress to protect us against catastrophe by meeting squarely our modern social and economic conditions .
we are at a crisis in our ability to proceed with that protection .
it is a quiet crisis .
there are no lines of depositors outside closed banks .
but to the far - sighted it is far - reaching in its possibilities of injury to america .
i want to talk with you very simply about the need for present action in this crisis - the need to meet the unanswered challenge of one - third of a nation ill - nourished , ill - clad , ill - housed .
last thursday i described the american form of government as a three horse team provided by the constitution to the american people so that their field might be plowed .
the three horses are , of course , the three branches of government - the congress , the executive and the courts .
two of the horses are pulling in unison today ; the third is not .
those who have intimated that the president of the united states is trying to drive that team , overlook the simple fact that the president , as chief executive , is himself one of the three horses .
it is the american people themselves who are in the driver 's seat .
it is the american people themselves who want the furrow plowed .
it is the american people themselves who expect the third horse to pull in unison with the other two .
i hope that you have re - read the constitution of the united states in these past few weeks .
like the bible , it ought to be read again and again .
it is an easy document to understand when you remember that it was called into being because the articles of confederation under which the original thirteen states tried to operate after the revolution showed the need of a national government with power enough to handle national problems .
in its preamble , the constitution states that it was intended to form a more perfect union and promote the general welfare ; and the powers given to the congress to carry out those purposes can be best described by saying that they were all the powers needed to meet each and every problem which then had a national character and which could not be met by merely local action .
but the framers went further .
having in mind that in succeeding generations many other problems then undreamed of would become national problems , they gave to the congress the ample broad powers " to levy taxes ... and provide for the common defense and general welfare of the united states . "
that , my friends , is what i honestly believe to have been the clear and underlying purpose of the patriots who wrote a federal constitution to create a national government with national power , intended as they said , " to form a more perfect union ... for ourselves and our posterity . "
for nearly twenty years there was no conflict between the congress and the court .
then congress passed a statute which , in 1803 , the court said violated an express provision of the constitution .
the court claimed the power to declare it unconstitutional and did so declare it .
but a little later the court itself admitted that it was an extraordinary power to exercise and through mr. justice washington laid down this limitation upon it : " it is but a decent respect due to the wisdom , the integrity and the patriotism of the legislative body , by which any law is passed , to presume in favor of its validity until its violation of the constitution is proved beyond all reasonable doubt . "
but since the rise of the modern movement for social and economic progress through legislation , the court has more and more often and more and more boldly asserted a power to veto laws passed by the congress and state legislatures in complete disregard of this original limitation .
in the last four years the sound rule of giving statutes the benefit of all reasonable doubt has been cast aside .
the court has been acting not as a judicial body , but as a policy - making body .
when the congress has sought to stabilize national agriculture , to improve the conditions of labor , to safeguard business against unfair competition , to protect our national resources , and in many other ways , to serve our clearly national needs , the majority of the court has been assuming the power to pass on the wisdom of these acts of the congress - and to approve or disapprove the public policy written into these laws .
that is not only my accusation .
it is the accusation of most distinguished justices of the present supreme court .
i have not the time to quote to you all the language used by dissenting justices in many of these cases .
but in the case holding the railroad retirement act unconstitutional , for instance , chief justice hughes said in a dissenting opinion that the majority opinion was " a departure from sound principles , " and placed " an unwarranted limitation upon the commerce clause . "
and three other justices agreed with him .
in the case of holding the aaa unconstitutional , justice stone said of the majority opinion that it was a " tortured construction of the constitution . "
and two other justices agreed with him .
in the case holding the new york minimum wage law unconstitutional , justice stone said that the majority were actually reading into the constitution their own " personal economic predilections , " and that if the legislative power is not left free to choose the methods of solving the problems of poverty , subsistence , and health of large numbers in the community , then " government is to be rendered impotent . "
and two other justices agreed with him .
in the face of these dissenting opinions , there is no basis for the claim made by some members of the court that something in the constitution has compelled them regretfully to thwart the will of the people .
in the face of such dissenting opinions , it is perfectly clear that , as chief justice hughes has said , " we are under a constitution , but the constitution is what the judges say it is . "
the court in addition to the proper use of its judicial functions has improperly set itself up as a third house of the congress - a super - legislature , as one of the justices has called it - reading into the constitution words and implications which are not there , and which were never intended to be there .
we have , therefore , reached the point as a nation where we must take action to save the constitution from the court and the court from itself .
we must find a way to take an appeal from the supreme court to the constitution itself .
we want a supreme court which will do justice under the constitution and not over it .
in our courts we want a government of laws and not of men .
i want - as all americans want - an independent judiciary as proposed by the framers of the constitution .
that means a supreme court that will enforce the constitution as written , that will refuse to amend the constitution by the arbitrary exercise of judicial power - in other words by judicial say - so .
it does not mean a judiciary so independent that it can deny the existence of facts which are universally recognized .
how then could we proceed to perform the mandate given us ?
it was said in last year 's democratic platform , " if these problems can not be effectively solved within the constitution , we shall seek such clarifying amendment as will assure the power to enact those laws , adequately to regulate commerce , protect public health and safety , and safeguard economic security . "
in other words , we said we would seek an amendment only if every other possible means by legislation were to fail .
when i commenced to review the situation with the problem squarely before me , i came by a process of elimination to the conclusion that , short of amendments , the only method which was clearly constitutional , and would at the same time carry out other much needed reforms , was to infuse new blood into all our courts .
we must have men worthy and equipped to carry out impartial justice .
but , at the same time , we must have judges who will bring to the courts a present - day sense of the constitution - judges who will retain in the courts the judicial functions of a court , and reject the legislative powers which the courts have today assumed .
in forty - five out of the forty - eight states of the union , judges are chosen not for life but for a period of years .
in many states judges must retire at the age of seventy .
congress has provided financial security by offering life pensions at full pay for federal judges on all courts who are willing to retire at seventy .
in the case of supreme court justices , that pension is $ 20,000 a year .
but all federal judges , once appointed , can , if they choose , hold office for life , no matter how old they may get to be .
what is my proposal ?
it is simply this : whenever a judge or justice of any federal court has reached the age of seventy and does not avail himself of the opportunity to retire on a pension , a new member shall be appointed by the president then in office , with the approval , as required by the constitution , of the senate of the united states .
that plan has two chief purposes .
by bringing into the judicial system a steady and continuing stream of new and younger blood , i hope , first , to make the administration of all federal justice speedier and , therefore , less costly ; secondly , to bring to the decision of social and economic problems younger men who have had personal experience and contact with modern facts and circumstances under which average men have to live and work .
this plan will save our national constitution from hardening of the judicial arteries .
the number of judges to be appointed would depend wholly on the decision of present judges now over seventy , or those who would subsequently reach the age of seventy .
if , for instance , any one of the six justices of the supreme court now over the age of seventy should retire as provided under the plan , no additional place would be created .
consequently , although there never can be more than fifteen , there may be only fourteen , or thirteen , or twelve .
and there may be only nine .
there is nothing novel or radical about this idea .
it seeks to maintain the federal bench in full vigor .
it has been discussed and approved by many persons of high authority ever since a similar proposal passed the house of representatives in 1869 .
why was the age fixed at seventy ?
because the laws of many states , the practice of the civil service , the regulations of the army and navy , and the rules of many of our universities and of almost every great private business enterprise , commonly fix the retirement age at seventy years or less .
the statute would apply to all the courts in the federal system .
there is general approval so far as the lower federal courts are concerned .
the plan has met opposition only so far as the supreme court of the united states itself is concerned .
if such a plan is good for the lower courts it certainly ought to be equally good for the highest court from which there is no appeal .
those opposing this plan have sought to arouse prejudice and fear by crying that i am seeking to " pack " the supreme court and that a baneful precedent will be established .
what do they mean by the words " packing the court " ?
let me answer this question with a bluntness that will end all honest misunderstanding of my purposes .
if by that phrase " packing the court " it is charged that i wish to place on the bench spineless puppets who would disregard the law and would decide specific cases as i wished them to be decided , i make this answer : that no president fit for his office would appoint , and no senate of honorable men fit for their office would confirm , that kind of appointees to the supreme court .
but if by that phrase the charge is made that i would appoint and the senate would confirm justices worthy to sit beside present members of the court who understand those modern conditions , that i will appoint justices who will not undertake to override the judgment of the congress on legislative policy , that i will appoint justices who will act as justices and not as legislators - if the appointment of such justices can be called " packing the courts , " then i say that i and with me the vast majority of the american people favor doing just that thing- now .
is it a dangerous precedent for the congress to change the number of the justices ?
the congress has always had , and will have , that power .
the number of justices has been changed several times before , in the administration of john adams and thomas jefferson - both signers of the declaration of independence - andrew jackson , abraham lincoln and ulysses s. grant .
i suggest only the addition of justices to the bench in accordance with a clearly defined principle relating to a clearly defined age limit .
fundamentally , if in the future , america can not trust the congress it elects to refrain from abuse of our constitutional usages , democracy will have failed far beyond the importance to it of any king of precedent concerning the judiciary .
we think it so much in the public interest to maintain a vigorous judiciary that we encourage the retirement of elderly judges by offering them a life pension at full salary .
why then should we leave the fulfillment of this public policy to chance or make independent on upon the desire or prejudice of any individual justice ?
it is the clear intention of our public policy to provide for a constant flow of new and younger blood into the judiciary .
normally every president appoints a large number of district and circuit court judges and a few members of the supreme court .
until my first term practically every president of the united states has appointed at least one member of the supreme court .
president taft appointed five members and named a chief justice ; president wilson , three ; president harding , four , including a chief justice ; president coolidge , one ; president hoover , three , including a chief justice .
such a succession of appointments should have provided a court well - balanced as to age .
but chance and the disinclination of individuals to leave the supreme bench have now given us a court in which five justices will be over seventy - five years of age before next june and one over seventy .
thus a sound public policy has been defeated .
i now propose that we establish by law an assurance against any such ill - balanced court in the future .
i propose that hereafter , when a judge reaches the age of seventy , a new and younger judge shall be added to the court automatically .
in this way i propose to enforce a sound public policy by law instead of leaving the composition of our federal courts , including the highest , to be determined by chance or the personal indecision of individuals .
if such a law as i propose is regarded as establishing a new precedent , is it not a most desirable precedent ?
like all lawyers , like all americans , i regret the necessity of this controversy .
but the welfare of the united states , and indeed of the constitution itself , is what we all must think about first .
our difficulty with the court today rises not from the court as an institution but from human beings within it .
but we can not yield our constitutional destiny to the personal judgement of a few men who , being fearful of the future , would deny us the necessary means of dealing with the present .
this plan of mine is no attack on the court ; it seeks to restore the court to its rightful and historic place in our constitutional government and to have it resume its high task of building anew on the constitution " a system of living law . "
the court itself can best undo what the court has done .
i have thus explained to you the reasons that lie behind our efforts to secure results by legislation within the constitution .
i hope that thereby the difficult process of constitutional amendment may be rendered unnecessary .
but let us examine the process .
there are many types of amendment proposed .
each one is radically different from the other .
there is no substantial groups within the congress or outside it who are agreed on any single amendment .
it would take months or years to get substantial agreement upon the type and language of the amendment .
it would take months and years thereafter to get a two - thirds majority in favor of that amendment in both houses of the congress .
then would come the long course of ratification by three - fourths of all the states .
no amendment which any powerful economic interests or the leaders of any powerful political party have had reason to oppose has ever been ratified within anything like a reasonable time .
and thirteen states which contain only five percent of the voting population can block ratification even though the thirty - five states with ninety - five percent of the population are in favor of it .
a very large percentage of newspaper publishers , chambers of commerce , bar association , manufacturers ' associations , who are trying to give the impression that they really do want a constitutional amendment would be the first to exclaim as soon as an amendment was proposed , " oh !
i was for an amendment all right , but this amendment you proposed is not the kind of amendment that i was thinking about .
i am therefore , going to spend my time , my efforts and my money to block the amendment , although i would be awfully glad to help get some other kind od amendment ratified . "
two groups oppose my plan on the ground that they favor a constitutional amendment .
the first includes those who fundamentally object to social and economic legislation along modern lines .
this is the same group who during the campaign last fall tried to block the mandate of the people .
now they are making a last stand .
and the strategy of that last stand is to suggest the time - consuming process of amendment in order to kill off by delay the legislation demanded by the mandate .
to them i say : i do not think you will be able long to fool the american people as to your purposes .
the other groups is composed of those who honestly believe the amendment process is the best and who would be willing to support a reasonable amendment if they could agree on one .
to them i say : we can not rely on an amendment as the immediate or only answer to our present difficulties .
when the time comes for action , you will find that many of those who pretend to support you will sabotage any constructive amendment which is proposed .
look at these strange bed - fellows of yours .
when before have you found them really at your side in your fights for progress ?
and remember one thing more .
even if an amendment were passed , and even if in the years to come it were to be ratified , its meaning would depend upon the kind of justices who would be sitting on the supreme court bench .
an amendment , like the rest of the constitution , is what the justices say it is rather than what its framers or you might hope it is .
this proposal of mine will not infringe in the slightest upon the civil or religious liberties so dear to every american .
my record as governor and president proves my devotion to those liberties .
you who know me can have no fear that i would tolerate the destruction by any branch of government of any part of our heritage of freedom .
the present attempt by those opposed to progress to play upon the fears of danger to personal liberty brings again to mind that crude and cruel strategy tried by the same opposition to frighten the workers of america in a pay - envelope propaganda against the social security law .
the workers were not fooled by that propaganda then .
the people of america will not be fooled by such propaganda now .
i am in favor of action through legislation : 
 first , because i believe that it can be passed at this session of the congress .
second , because it will provide a reinvigorated , liberal - minded judiciary necessary to furnish quicker and cheaper justice from bottom to top .
third , because it will provide a series of federal courts willing to enforce the constitution as written , and unwilling to assert legislative powers by writing into it their own political and economic policies .
during the past half century the balance of power between the three great branches of the federal government , has been tipped out of balance by the courts in direct contradiction of the high purposes of the framers of the constitution .
it is my purpose to restore that balance .
you who know me will accept my solemn assurance that in a world in which democracy is under attack , i seek to make american democracy succeed .
you and i will do our part .

i have been on a journey of husbandry .
i went primarily to see at first hand conditions in the drought states ; to see how effectively federal and local authorities are taking care of pressing problems of relief and also how they are to work together to defend the people of this country against the effects of future droughts .
i saw drought devastation in nine states .
i talked with families who had lost their wheat crop , lost their corn crop , lost their livestock , lost the water in their well , lost their garden and come through to the end of the summer without one dollar of cash resources , facing a winter without feed or food -- facing a planting season without seed to put in the ground .
that was the extreme case , but there are thousands and thousands of families on western farms who share the same difficulties .
i saw cattlemen who because of lack of grass or lack of winter feed have been compelled to sell all but their breeding stock and will need help to carry even these through the coming winter .
i saw livestock kept alive only because water had been brought to them long distances in tank cars .
i saw other farm families who have not lost everything but who , because they have made only partial crops , must have some form of help if they are to continue farming next spring .
i shall never forget the fields of wheat so blasted by heat that they can not be harvested .
i shall never forget field after field of corn stunted , earless and stripped of leaves , for what the sun left the grasshoppers took .
i saw brown pastures which would not keep a cow on fifty acres .
yet i would not have you think for a single minute that there is permanent disaster in these drought regions , or that the picture i saw meant depopulating these areas .
no cracked earth , no blistering sun , no burning wind , no grasshoppers , are a permanent match for the indomitable american farmers and stockmen and their wives and children who have carried on through desperate days , and inspire us with their self - reliance , their tenacity and their courage .
it was their fathers ' task to make homes ; it is their task to keep those homes ; it is our task to help them with their fight .
first let me talk for a minute about this autumn and the coming winter .
we have the option , in the case of families who need actual subsistence , of putting them on the dole or putting them to work .
they do not want to go on the dole and they are one thousand percent right .
we agree , therefore , that we must put them to work for a decent wage , and when we reach that decision we kill two birds with one stone , because these families will earn enough by working , not only to subsist themselves , but to buy food for their stock , and seed for next year 's planting .
into this scheme of things there fit of course the government lending agencies which next year , as in the past , will help with production loans .
every governor with whom i have talked is in full accord with this program of doing work for these farm families , just as every governor agrees that the individual states will take care of their unemployables but that the cost of employing those who are entirely able and willing to work must be borne by the federal government .
if then we know , as we do today , the approximate number of farm families who will require some form of work relief from now on through the winter , we face the question of what kind of work they should do .
let me make it clear that this is not a new question because it has already been answered to a greater or less extent in every one of the drought communities .
beginning in 1934 , when we also had serious drought conditions , the state and federal governments cooperated in planning a large number of projects -- many of them directly aimed at the alleviation of future drought conditions .
in accordance with that program literally thousands of ponds or small reservoirs have been built in order to supply water for stock and to lift the level of the underground water to protect wells from going dry .
thousands of wells have been drilled or deepened ; community lakes have been created and irrigation projects are being pushed .
water conservation by means such as these is being expanded as a result of this new drought all through the great plains area , the western corn belt and in the states that lie further south .
in the middle west water conservation is not so pressing a problem .
here the work projects run more to soil erosion control and the building of farm - to - market roads .
spending like this is not waste .
it would spell future waste if we did not spend for such things now .
these emergency work projects provide money to buy food and clothing for the winter ; they keep the livestock on the farm ; they provide seed for a new crop , and , best of all , they will conserve soil and water in the future in those areas most frequently hit by drought .
if , for example , in some local area the water table continues to drop and the topsoil to blow away , the land values will disappear with the water and the soil .
people on the farms will drift into the nearby cities ; the cities will have no farm trade and the workers in the city factories and stores will have no jobs .
property values in the cities will decline .
if , on the other hand , the farms within that area remain as farms with better water supply and no erosion , the farm population will stay on the land and prosper and the nearby cities will prosper too .
property values will increase instead of disappearing .
that is why it is worth our while as a nation to spend money in order to save money .
i have , however , used the argument in relation only to a small area -- it holds good in its effect on the nation as a whole .
every state in the drought area is now doing and always will do business with every state outside it .
the very existence of the men and women working in the clothing factories of new york , making clothes worn by farmers and their families ; of the workers in the steel mills in pittsburgh , in the automobile factories of detroit , and in the harvester factories of illinois , depend upon the farmers ' ability to purchase the commodities they produce .
in the same way it is the purchasing power of the workers in these factories in the cities that enables them and their wives and children to eat more beef , more pork , more wheat , more corn , more fruit and more dairy products , and to buy more clothing made from cotton , wool and leather .
in a physical and a property sense , as well as in a spiritual sense , we are members one of another .
i want to make it clear that no simple panacea can be applied to the drought problem in the whole of the drought area .
plans must depend on local conditions , for these vary with annual rainfall , soil characteristics , altitude and topography .
water and soil conservation methods may differ in one county from those in an adjoining county .
work to be done in the cattle and sheep country differs in type from work in the wheat country or work in the corn belt .
the great plains drought area committee has given me its preliminary recommendations for a long - time program for that region .
using that report as a basis we are cooperating successfully and in entire accord with the governors and state planning boards .
as we get this program into operation the people more and more will be able to maintain themselves securely on the land .
that will mean a steady decline in the relief burdens which the federal government and states have had to assume in time of drought ; but , more important , it will mean a greater contribution to general national prosperity by these regions which have been hit by drought .
it will conserve and improve not only property values , but human values .
the people in the drought area do not want to be dependent on federal , state or any other kind of charity .
they want for themselves and their families an opportunity to share fairly by their own efforts in the progress of america .
the farmers of america want a sound national agricultural policy in which a permanent land use program will have an important place .
they want assurance against another year like 1932 when they made good crops but had to sell them for prices that meant ruin just as surely as did the drought .
sound policy must maintain farm prices in good crop years as well as in bad crop years .
it must function when we have drought ; it must also function when we have bumper crops .
the maintenance of a fair equilibrium between farm prices and the prices of industrial products is an aim which we must keep ever before us , just as we must give constant thought to the sufficiency of the food supply of the nation even in bad years .
our modern civilization can and should devise a more successful means by which the excess supplies of bumper years can be conserved for use in lean years .
on my trip i have been deeply impressed with the general efficiency of those agencies of the federal , state and local governments which have moved in on the immediate task created by the drought .
in 1934 none of us had preparation ; we worked without blueprints and made the mistakes of inexperience .
hindsight shows us this .
but as time has gone on we have been making fewer and fewer mistakes .
remember that the federal and state governments have done only broad planning .
actual work on a given project originates in the local community .
local needs are listed from local information .
local projects are decided on only after obtaining the recommendations and help of those in the local community who are best able to give it .
and it is worthy of note that on my entire trip , though i asked the question dozens of times , i heard no complaint against the character of a single works relief project .
the elected heads of the states concerned , together with their state officials and their experts from agricultural colleges and state planning boards , have shown cooperation with and approval of the work which the federal government has headed up .
i am grateful also to the men and women in all these states who have accepted leadership in the work in their locality .
in the drought area people are not afraid to use new methods to meet changes in nature , and to correct mistakes of the past .
if overgrazing has injured range lands , they are willing to reduce the grazing .
if certain wheat lands should be returned to pasture they are willing to cooperate .
if trees should be planted as windbreaks or to stop erosion they will work with us .
if terracing or summer fallowing or crop rotation is called for , they will carry them out .
they stand ready to fit , and not to fight , the ways of nature .
we are helping , and shall continue to help the farmer to do those things , through local soil conservation committees and other cooperative local , state and federal agencies of government .
i have not the time tonight to deal with other and more comprehensive agricultural policies .
with this fine help we are tiding over the present emergency .
we are going to conserve soil , conserve water and conserve life .
we are going to have long - time defenses against both low prices and drought .
we are going to have a farm policy that will serve the national welfare .
that is our hope for the future .
there are two reasons why i want to end by talking about reemployment .
tomorrow is labor day .
the brave spirit with which so many millions of working people are winning their way out of depression deserves respect and admiration .
it is like the courage of the farmers in the drought areas .
that is my first reason .
the second is that healthy employment conditions stand equally with healthy agricultural conditions as a buttress of national prosperity .
dependable employment at fair wages is just as important to the people in the towns and cities as good farm income is to agriculture .
our people must have the ability to buy the goods they manufacture and the crops they produce .
thus city wages and farm buying power are the two strong legs that carry the nation forward .
re - employment in industry is proceeding rapidly .
government spending was in large part responsible for keeping industry going and putting it in a position to make this reemployment possible .
government orders were the backlog of heavy industry government wages turned over and over again to make consumer purchasing power and to sustain every merchant in the community .
businessmen with their businesses , small and large , had to be saved .
private enterprise is necessary to any nation which seeks to maintain the democratic form of government .
in their case , just as certainly as in the case of drought - stricken farmers , government spending has saved .
government having spent wisely to save it , private industry begins to take workers off the rolls of the government relief program .
until this administration we had no free employment service , except in a few states and cities .
because there was no unified employment service , the worker , forced to move as industry moved , often travelled over the country , wandering after jobs which seemed always to travel just a little faster than he did .
he was often victimized by fraudulent practices of employment clearing houses , and the facts of employment opportunities were at the disposal neither of himself nor of the employer .
in 1933 the united states employment service was created -- a cooperative state and federal enterprise , through which the federal government matches dollar for dollar the funds provided by the states for registering the occupations and skills of workers and for actually finding jobs for these registered workers in private industry .
the federal - state cooperation has been splendid .
already employment services are operating in 32 states , and the areas not covered by them are served by the federal government .
we have developed a nationwide service with seven hundred district offices , and one thousand branch offices , thus providing facilities through which labor can learn of jobs available and employers can find workers .
last spring i expressed the hope that employers would realize their deep responsibility to take men off the relief rolls and give them jobs in private enterprise .
subsequently i was told by many employers that they were not satisfied with the information available concerning the skill and experience of the workers on the relief rolls .
on august 25th i allocated a relatively small sum to the employment service for the purpose of getting better and more recent information in regard to those now actively at work on wpa projects -- information as to their skills and previous occupations -- and to keep the records of such men and women up - to - date for maximum service in making them available to industry .
tonight i am announcing the allocation of two and a half million dollars more to enable the employment service to make an even more intensive search then it has yet been equipped to make , to find opportunities in private employment for workers registered with it .
tonight i urge the workers to cooperate with and take full advantage of this intensification of the work of the employment service .
this does not mean that there will be any lessening of our efforts under our wpa and pwa and other work relief programs until all workers have decent jobs in private employment at decent wages .
we do not surrender our responsibility to the unemployed .
we have had ample proof that it is the will of the american people that those who represent them in national , state and local government should continue as long as necessary to discharge that responsibility .
but it does mean that the government wants to use resource to get private work for those now employed on government work , and thus to curtail to a minimum the government expenditures for direct employment .
tonight i ask employers , large and small , throughout the nation , to use the help of the state and federal employment service whenever in the general pick - up of business they require more workers .
tomorrow is labor day .
labor day in this country has never been a class holiday .
it has always been a national holiday .
it has never had more significance as a national holiday than it has now .
in other countries the relationship of employer and employee has more or less been accepted as a class relationship not readily to be broken through .
in this country we insist , as an essential of the american way of life , that the employer - employee relationship should be one between free men and equals .
we refuse to regard those who work with hand or brain as different from or inferior to those who live from their property .
we insist that labor is entitled to as much respect as property .
but our workers with hand and brain deserve more than respect for their labor .
they deserve practical protection in the opportunity to use their labor at a return adequate to support them at a decent and constantly rising standard of living , and to accumulate a margin of security against the inevitable vicissitudes of life .
the average man must have that twofold opportunity if we are to avoid the growth of a class conscious society in this country .
there are those who fail to read both the signs of the times and american history .
they would try to refuse the worker any effective power to bargain collectively , to earn a decent livelihood and to acquire security .
it is those short - sighted ones , not labor , who threaten this country with that class dissension which in other countries has led to dictatorship and the establishment of fear and hatred as the dominant emotions in human life .
all american workers , brain workers and manual workers alike , and all the rest of us whose well - being depends on theirs , know that our needs are one in building an orderly economic democracy in which all can profit and in which all can be secure from the kind of faulty economic direction which brought us to the brink of common ruin seven years ago .
there is no cleavage between white collar workers and manual workers , between artists and artisans , musicians and mechanics , lawyers and accountants and architects and miners .
tomorrow , labor day , belongs to all of us .
tomorrow , labor day , symbolizes the hope of all americans .
anyone who calls it a class holiday challenges the whole concept of american democracy .
the fourth of july commemorates our political freedom -- a freedom which without economic freedom is meaningless indeed .
labor day symbolizes our determination to achieve an economic freedom for the average man which will give his political freedom reality .

my fellow americans : 
 i am speaking tonight to the american people , and in particular to those of our citizens who are coal miners .
tonight this country faces a serious crisis .
we are engaged in a war on the successful outcome of which will depend the whole future of our country .
this war has reached a new critical phase .
after the years that we have spent in preparation , we have moved into active and continuing battle with our enemies .
we are pouring into the worldwide conflict everything that we have -- our young men , and the vast resources of our nation .
i have just returned from a two weeks ' tour of inspection on which i saw our men being trained and our war materials made .
my trip took me through twenty states .
i saw thousands of workers on the production line , making airplanes , and guns and ammunition .
everywhere i found great eagerness to get on with the war .
men and women are working long hours at difficult jobs and living under difficult conditions without complaint .
along thousands of miles of track i saw countless acres of newly ploughed fields .
the farmers of this country are planting the crops that are needed to feed our armed forces , our civilian population and our allies .
those crops will be harvested .
on my trip , i saw hundreds of thousands of soldiers .
young men who were green recruits last autumn have matured into self - assured and hardened fighting men .
they are in splendid physical condition .
they are mastering the superior weapons that we are pouring out of our factories .
the american people have accomplished a miracle .
however , all of our massed effort is none too great to meet the demands of this war .
we shall need everything that we have and everything that our allies have to defeat the nazis and the fascists in the coming battles on the continent of europe , and the japanese on the continent of asia and in the islands of the pacific .
this tremendous forward movement of the united states and the united nations can not be stopped by our enemies .
and equally , it must not be hampered by any one individual or by the leaders of any one group here back home .
i want to make it clear that every american coal miner who has stopped mining coal -- no matter how sincere his motives , no matter how legitimate he may believe his grievances to be -- every idle miner directly and individually is obstructing our war effort .
we have not yet won this war .
we will win this war only as we produce and deliver our total american effort on the high seas and on the battlefronts .
and that requires unrelenting , uninterrupted effort here on the home front .
a stopping of the coal supply , even for a short time , would involve a gamble with the lives of american soldiers and sailors and the future security of our whole people .
it would involve an unwarranted , unnecessary and terribly dangerous gamble with our chances for victory .
therefore , i say to all miners -- and to all americans everywhere , at home and abroad -- the production of coal will not be stopped .
tonight , i am speaking to the essential patriotism of the miners , and to the patriotism of their wives and children .
and i am going to state the true facts of this case as simply and as plainly as i know how .
after the attack at pearl harbor , the three great labor organizations -- the american federation of labor , the congress of industrial organizations , and the railroad brotherhoods -- gave the positive assurance that there would be no strikes as long as the war lasted .
and the president of the united mine workers of america was a party to that assurance .
that pledge was applauded throughout the country .
it was a forcible means of telling the world that we americans -- 135,000,000 of us -- are united in our determination to fight this total war with our total will and our total power .
at the request of employers and of organized labor - including the united mine workers -- the war labor board was set up for settling any disputes which could not be adjusted through collective bargaining .
the war labor board is a tribunal on which workers , employers and the general public are equally represented .
in the present coal crisis , conciliation and mediation were tried unsuccessfully .
in accordance with the law , the case was then certified to the war labor board , the agency created for this express purpose with the approval of organized labor .
the members of the board followed the usual practice , which has proved successful in other disputes .
acting promptly , they undertook to get all the facts of this ( the ) case from both the miners and the operators .
the national officers of the united mine workers , however , declined to have anything to do with the fact - finding of the war labor board .
the only excuse that they offer is that the war labor board is prejudiced .
the war labor board has been and is ready to give this ( the ) case a fair and impartial hearing .
and i have given my assurance that if any adjustment of wages is made by the board , it will be made retroactive to april first .
but the national officers of the united mine workers refused to participate in the hearing , when asked to do so last monday .
on wednesday of this past week , while the board was proceeding with the case , stoppages began to occur in some mines .
on thursday morning i telegraphed to the officers of the united mine workers asking that the miners continue mining coal on saturday morning .
however , a general strike throughout the industry became effective on friday night .
the responsibility for the crisis that we now face rests squarely on these national officers of the united mine workers , and not on the government of the united states .
but the consequences of this arbitrary action threaten all of us everywhere .
at ten o'clock , yesterday morning -- saturday -- the government took over the mines .
i called upon the miners to return to work for their government .
the government needs their services just as surely as it needs the services of our soldiers , and sailors , and marines -- and the services of the millions who are turning out the munitions of war .
you miners have sons in the army and navy and marine corps .
you have sons who at this very minute -- this split second -- may be fighting in new guinea , or in the aleutian islands , or guadalcanal , or tunisia , or china , or protecting troop ships and supplies against submarines on the high seas .
we have already received telegrams from some of our fighting men overseas , and i only wish they could tell you what they think of the stoppage of work in the coal mines .
some of your own sons have come back from the fighting fronts , wounded .
a number of them , for example , are now here in an army hospital in washington .
several of them have been decorated by their government .
i could tell you of one from pennsylvania .
he was a coal miner before his induction , and his father is a coal miner .
he was seriously wounded by nazi machine gun bullets while he was on a bombing mission over europe in a flying fortress .
another boy , from kentucky , the son of a coal miner , was wounded when our troops first landed in north africa six months ago .
there is ( still ) another , from illinois .
he was a coal miner -- his father and two brothers are coal miners .
he was seriously wounded in tunisia while attempting to rescue two comrades whose jeep had been blown up by a nazi mine .
these men do not consider themselves heroes .
they would probably be embarrassed if i mentioned their names over the air .
they were wounded in the line of duty .
they know how essential it is to the tens of thousands -- hundreds of thousands --and ultimately millions of other young americans to get the best of arms and equipment into the hands of our fighting forces -- and get them there quickly .
the fathers and mothers of our fighting men , their brothers and sisters and friends -- and that includes all of us -- are also in the line of duty -- the production line .
any failure in production may well result in costly defeat on the field of battle .
there can be no one among us -- no one faction powerful enough to interrupt the forward march of our people to victory .
you miners have ample reason to know that there are certain basic rights for which this country stands , and that those rights are worth fighting for and worth dying for .
that is why you have sent your sons and brothers from every mining town in the nation to join in the great struggle overseas .
that is why you have contributed so generously , so willingly , to the purchase of war bonds and to the many funds for the relief of war victims in foreign lands .
that is why , since this war was started in 1939 , you have increased the annual production of coal by almost two hundred million tons a year .
the toughness of your sons in our armed forces is not surprising .
they come of fine , rugged stock .
men who work in the mines are not unaccustomed to hardship .
it has been the objective of this government to reduce that hardship , to obtain for miners and for all who do the nation 's work a better standard of living .
i know only too well that the cost of living is troubling the miners ' families , and troubling the families of millions of other workers throughout the country as well .
a year ago it became evident to all of us that something had to be done about living costs .
your government determined not to let the cost of living continue to go up as it did in the first world war .
your government has been determined to maintain stability of both prices and wages -- so that a dollar would buy , so far as possible , the same amount of the necessities of life .
and by necessities i mean just that -- not the luxuries , not the ( and ) fancy goods that we have learned to do without in wartime .
so far , we have not been able to keep the prices of some necessities as low as we should have liked to keep them .
that is true not only in coal towns but in many other places .
wherever we find that prices of essentials have risen too high , they will be brought down .
wherever we find that price ceilings are being violated , the violators will be punished .
rents have been fixed in most parts of the country .
in many cities they have been cut to below where they were before we entered the war .
clothing prices have generally remained stable .
these two items make up more than a third of the total budget of the worker 's family .
as for food , which today accounts for about another ( a ) third of the family expenditure on the average , i want to repeat again : your government will continue to take all necessary measures to eliminate unjustified and avoidable price increases .
and we are today ( now ) taking measures to " roll back " the prices of meats .
the war is going to go on .
coal will be mined no matter what any individual thinks about it .
the operation of our factories , our power plants , our railroads will not be stopped .
our munitions must move to our troops .
and so , under these circumstances , it is inconceivable that any patriotic miner can choose any course other than going back to work and mining coal .
the nation can not afford violence of any kind at the coal mines or in coal towns .
i have placed authority for the resumption of coal mining in the hands of a civilian , the secretary of the interior .
if it becomes necessary to protect any miner who seeks patriotically to go back and work , then that miner must have and his family must have -- and will have -- complete and adequate protection .
if it becomes necessary to have troops at the mine mouths or in coal towns for the protection of working miners and their families , those troops will be doing police duty for the sake of the nation as a whole , and particularly for the sake of the fighting men in the army , the navy and the marines -- your sons and mine -- who are fighting our common enemies all over the world .
i understand the devotion of the coal miners to their union .
i know of the sacrifices they have made to build it up .
i believe now , as i have all my life , in the right of workers to join unions and to protect their unions .
i want to make it absolutely clear that this government is not going to do anything now to weaken those rights in the coalfields .
every improvement in the conditions of the coal miners of this country has had my hearty support , and i do not mean to desert them now .
but i also do not mean to desert my obligations and responsibilities as president of the united states and commander in chief of the army and navy .
the first necessity is the resumption of coal mining .
the terms of the old contract will be followed by the secretary of the interior .
if an adjustment in wages results from a decision of the war labor board , or from any new agreement between the operators and miners , which is approved by the war labor board , that adjustment will be made retroactive to april first .
in the message that i delivered to the congress four months ago , i expressed my conviction that the spirit of this nation is good .
since then , i have seen our troops in the caribbean area , in bases on the coasts of our ally , brazil , and in north africa .
recently i have again seen great numbers of our fellow countrymen -- soldiers and civilians -- from the atlantic seaboard to the mexican border and to the rocky mountains .
tonight , in the fact of a crisis of serious proportions in the coal industry , i say again that the spirit or this nation is good .
i know that the american people will not tolerate any threat offered to their government by anyone .
i believe the coal miners will not continue the strike against their ( the ) government .
i believe that the coal miners ( themselves ) as americans will not fail to heed the clear call to duty .
like all other good americans , they will march shoulder to shoulder with their armed forces to victory .
tomorrow the stars and stripes will fly over the coal mines , and i hope that every miner will be at work under that flag .

my friends : 
 this is not a fireside chat on war .
it is a talk on national security , because the nub of the whole purpose of your president is to keep you now , and your children later , and your grandchildren much later , out of a last - ditch war for the preservation of american independence and all of the things that american independence means to you and to me and to ours .
tonight , in the presence of a world crisis , my mind goes back eight years to a night in the midst of a domestic crisis .
it was a time when the wheels of american industry were grinding to a full stop , when the whole banking system of our country had ceased to function .
i well remember that while i sat in my study in the white house , preparing to talk with the people of the united states , i had before my eyes the picture of all those americans with whom i was talking .
i saw the workmen in the mills , the mines , the factories ; the girl behind the counter ; the small shopkeeper ; the farmer doing his spring plowing ; the widows and the old men wondering about their life 's savings .
i tried to convey to the great mass of american people what the banking crisis meant to them in their daily lives .
tonight , i want to do the same thing , with the same people , in this new crisis which faces america .
we met the issue of 1933 with courage and realism .
we face this new crisis -- this new threat to the security of our nation -- with the same courage and realism .
never before since jamestown and plymouth rock has our american civilization been in such danger as now .
for , on september 27th , 1940 , this year , by an agreement signed in berlin , three powerful nations , two in europe and one in asia , joined themselves together in the threat that if the united states of america interfered with or blocked the expansion program of these three nations -- a program aimed at world control -- they would unite in ultimate action against the united states .
the nazi masters of germany have made it clear that they intend not only to dominate all life and thought in their own country , but also to enslave the whole of europe , and then to use the resources of europe to dominate the rest of the world .
it was only three weeks ago their leader stated this : " there are two worlds that stand opposed to each other . "
and then in defiant reply to his opponents , he said this : " others are correct when they say : with this world we can not ever reconcile ourselves .... i can beat any other power in the world . "
so said the leader of the nazis .
in other words , the axis not merely admits but the axis proclaims that there can be no ultimate peace between their philosophy of government and our philosophy of government .
in view of the nature of this undeniable threat , it can be asserted , properly and categorically , that the united states has no right or reason to encourage talk of peace , until the day shall come when there is a clear intention on the part of the aggressor nations to abandon all thought of dominating or conquering the world .
at this moment , the forces of the states that are leagued against all peoples who live in freedom are being held away from our shores .
the germans and the italians are being blocked on the other side of the atlantic by the british , and by the greeks , and by thousands of soldiers and sailors who were able to escape from subjugated countries .
in asia the japanese are being engaged by the chinese nation in another great defense .
in the pacific ocean is our fleet .
some of our people like to believe that wars in europe and in asia are of no concern to us .
but it is a matter of most vital concern to us that european and asiatic war - makers should not gain control of the oceans which lead to this hemisphere .
one hundred and seventeen years ago the monroe doctrine was conceived by our government as a measure of defense in the face of a threat against this hemisphere by an alliance in continental europe .
thereafter , we stood ( on ) guard in the atlantic , with the british as neighbors .
there was no treaty .
there was no " unwritten agreement . "
and yet , there was the feeling , proven correct by history , that we as neighbors could settle any disputes in peaceful fashion .
and the fact is that during the whole of this time the western hemisphere has remained free from aggression from europe or from asia .
does anyone seriously believe that we need to fear attack anywhere in the americas while a free britain remains our most powerful naval neighbor in the atlantic ?
and does anyone seriously believe , on the other hand , that we could rest easy if the axis powers were our neighbors there ?
if great britain goes down , the axis powers will control the continents of europe , asia , africa , australia , and the high seas -- and they will be in a position to bring enormous military and naval resources against this hemisphere .
it is no exaggeration to say that all of us , in all the americas , would be living at the point of a gun -- a gun loaded with explosive bullets , economic as well as military .
we should enter upon a new and terrible era in which the whole world , our hemisphere included , would be run by threats of brute force .
and to survive in such a world , we would have to convert ourselves permanently into a militaristic power on the basis of war economy .
some of us like to believe that even if ( great ) britain falls , we are still safe , because of the broad expanse of the atlantic and of the pacific .
but the width of those ( these ) oceans is not what it was in the days of clipper ships .
at one point between africa and brazil the distance is less from washington than it is from washington to denver , colorado -- five hours for the latest type of bomber .
and at the north end of the pacific ocean america and asia almost touch each other .
why , even today we have planes that ( which ) could fly from the british isles to new england and back again without refueling .
and remember that the range of a ( the ) modern bomber is ever being increased .
during the past week many people in all parts of the nation have told me what they wanted me to say tonight .
almost all of them expressed a courageous desire to hear the plain truth about the gravity of the situation .
one telegram , however , expressed the attitude of the small minority who want to see no evil and hear no evil , even though they know in their hearts that evil exists .
that telegram begged me not to tell again of the ease with which our american cities could be bombed by any hostile power which had gained bases in this western hemisphere .
the gist of that telegram was : " please , mr. president , do n't frighten us by telling us the facts . "
frankly and definitely there is danger ahead -- danger against which we must prepare .
but we well know that we can not escape danger ( it ) , or the fear of danger , by crawling into bed and pulling the covers over our heads .
some nations of europe were bound by solemn non - intervention pacts with germany .
other nations were assured by germany that they need never fear invasion .
non - intervention pact or not , the fact remains that they were attacked , overrun , ( and ) thrown into ( the ) modern ( form of ) slavery at an hour 's notice , or even without any notice at all .
as an exiled leader of one of these nations said to me the other day , " the notice was a minus quantity .
it was given to my government two hours after german troops had poured into my country in a hundred places . "
the fate of these nations tells us what it means to live at the point of a nazi gun .
the nazis have justified such actions by various pious frauds .
one of these frauds is the claim that they are occupying a nation for the purpose of " restoring order . "
another is that they are occupying or controlling a nation on the excuse that they are " protecting it " against the aggression of somebody else .
for example , germany has said that she was occupying belgium to save the belgians from the british .
would she then hesitate to say to any south american country , " we are occupying you to protect you from aggression by the united states ? "
belgium today is being used as an invasion base against britain , now fighting for its life .
and any south american country , in nazi hands , would always constitute a jumping - off place for german attack on any one of the other republics of this hemisphere .
analyze for yourselves the future of two other places even nearer to germany if the nazis won .
could ireland hold out ?
would irish freedom be permitted as an amazing pet exception in an unfree world ?
or the islands of the azores which still fly the flag of portugal after five centuries ?
you and i think of hawaii as an outpost of defense in the pacific .
and yet , the azores are closer to our shores in the atlantic than hawaii is on the other side .
there are those who say that the axis powers would never have any desire to attack the western hemisphere .
that ( this ) is the same dangerous form of wishful thinking which has destroyed the powers of resistance of so many conquered peoples .
the plain facts are that the nazis have proclaimed , time and again , that all other races are their inferiors and therefore subject to their orders .
and most important of all , the vast resources and wealth of this american hemisphere constitute the most tempting loot in all of the round world .
let us no longer blind ourselves to the undeniable fact that the evil forces which have crushed and undermined and corrupted so many others are already within our own gates .
your government knows much about them and every day is ferreting them out .
their secret emissaries are active in our own and in neighboring countries .
they seek to stir up suspicion and dissension to cause internal strife .
they try to turn capital against labor , and vice versa .
they try to reawaken long slumbering racist and religious enmities which should have no place in this country .
they are active in every group that promotes intolerance .
they exploit for their own ends our own natural abhorrence of war .
these trouble - breeders have but one purpose .
it is to divide our people , to divide them into hostile groups and to destroy our unity and shatter our will to defend ourselves .
there are also american citizens , many of then in high places , who , unwittingly in most cases , are aiding and abetting the work of these agents .
i do not charge these american citizens with being foreign agents .
but i do charge them with doing exactly the kind of work that the dictators want done in the united states .
these people not only believe that we can save our own skins by shutting our eyes to the fate of other nations .
some of them go much further than that .
they say that we can and should become the friends and even the partners of the axis powers .
some of them even suggest that we should imitate the methods of the dictatorships .
but americans never can and never will do that .
the experience of the past two years has proven beyond doubt that no nation can appease the nazis .
no man can tame a tiger into a kitten by stroking it .
there can be no appeasement with ruthlessness .
there can be no reasoning with an incendiary bomb .
we know now that a nation can have peace with the nazis only at the price of total surrender .
even the people of italy have been forced to become accomplices of the nazis , but at this moment they do not know how soon they will be embraced to death by their allies .
the american appeasers ignore the warning to be found in the fate of austria , czechoslovakia , poland , norway , belgium , the netherlands , denmark and france .
they tell you that the axis powers are going to win anyway ; that all of this bloodshed in the world could be saved , that the united states might just as well throw its influence into the scale of a dictated peace , and get the best out of it that we can .
they call it a " negotiated peace . "
nonsense !
is it a negotiated peace if a gang of outlaws surrounds your community and on threat of extermination makes you pay tribute to save your own skins ?
such a dictated peace would be no peace at all .
it would be only another armistice , leading to the most gigantic armament race and the most devastating trade wars in all history .
and in these contests the americas would offer the only real resistance to the axis powers .
with all their vaunted efficiency , with all their ( and ) parade of pious purpose in this war , there are still in their background the concentration camp and the servants of god in chains .
the history of recent years proves that the shootings and the chains and the concentration camps are not simply the transient tools but the very altars of modern dictatorships .
they may talk of a " new order " in the world , but what they have in mind is only ( but ) a revival of the oldest and the worst tyranny .
in that there is no liberty , no religion , no hope .
the proposed " new order " is the very opposite of a united states of europe or a united states of asia .
it is not a government based upon the consent of the governed .
it is not a union of ordinary , self - respecting men and women to protect themselves and their freedom and their dignity from oppression .
it is an unholy alliance of power and pelf to dominate and to enslave the human race .
the british people and their allies today are conducting an active war against this unholy alliance .
our own future security is greatly dependent on the outcome of that fight .
our ability to " keep out of war " is going to be affected by that outcome .
thinking in terms of today and tomorrow , i make the direct statement to the american people that there is far less chance of the united states getting into war if we do all we can now to support the nations defending themselves against attack by the axis than if we acquiesce in their defeat , submit tamely to an axis victory , and wait our turn to be the object of attack in another war later on .
if we are to be completely honest with ourselves , we must admit that there is risk in any course we may take .
but i deeply believe that the great majority of our people agree that the course that i advocate involves the least risk now and the greatest hope for world peace in the future .
the people of europe who are defending themselves do not ask us to do their fighting .
they ask us for the implements of war , the planes , the tanks , the guns , the freighters which will enable them to fight for their liberty and for our security .
emphatically we must get these weapons to them , get them to them in sufficient volume and quickly enough , so that we and our children will be saved the agony and suffering of war which others have had to endure .
let not the defeatists tell us that it is too late .
it will never be earlier .
tomorrow will be later than today .
certain facts are self - evident .
in a military sense great britain and the british empire are today the spearhead of resistance to world conquest .
and they are putting up a fight which will live forever in the story of human gallantry .
there is no demand for sending an american expeditionary force outside our own borders .
there is no intention by any member of your government to send such a force .
you can , therefore , nail -- nail any talk about sending armies to europe as deliberate untruth .
our national policy is not directed toward war .
its sole purpose is to keep war away from our country and away from our people .
democracy 's fight against world conquest is being greatly aided , and must be more greatly aided , by the rearmament of the united states and by sending every ounce and every ton of munitions and supplies that we can possibly spare to help the defenders who are in the front lines .
and it is no more unneutral for us to do that than it is for sweden , russia and other nations near germany to send steel and ore and oil and other war materials into germany every day in the week .
we are planning our own defense with the utmost urgency , and in its vast scale we must integrate the war needs of britain and the other free nations which are resisting aggression .
this is not a matter of sentiment or of controversial personal opinion .
it is a matter of realistic , practical military policy , based on the advice of our military experts who are in close touch with existing warfare .
these military and naval experts and the members of the congress and the administration have a single - minded purpose -- the defense of the united states .
this nation is making a great effort to produce everything that is necessary in this emergency -- and with all possible speed .
and this great effort requires great sacrifice .
i would ask no one to defend a democracy which in turn would not defend everyone in the nation against want and privation .
the strength of this nation shall not be diluted by the failure of the government to protect the economic well - being of its ( all ) citizens .
if our capacity to produce is limited by machines , it must ever be remembered that these machines are operated by the skill and the stamina of the workers .
as the government is determined to protect the rights of the workers , so the nation has a right to expect that the men who man the machines will discharge their full responsibilities to the urgent needs of defense .
the worker possesses the same human dignity and is entitled to the same security of position as the engineer or the manager or the owner .
for the workers provide the human power that turns out the destroyers , and the ( air)planes and the tanks .
the nation expects our defense industries to continue operation without interruption by strikes or lockouts .
it expects and insists that management and workers will reconcile their differences by voluntary or legal means , to continue to produce the supplies that are so sorely needed .
and on the economic side of our great defense program , we are , as you know , bending every effort to maintain stability of prices and with that the stability of the cost of living .
nine days ago i announced the setting up of a more effective organization to direct our gigantic efforts to increase the production of munitions .
the appropriation of vast sums of money and a well coordinated executive direction of our defense efforts are not in themselves enough .
guns , planes , ( and ) ships and many other things have to be built in the factories and the arsenals of america .
they have to be produced by workers and managers and engineers with the aid of machines which in turn have to be built by hundreds of thousands of workers throughout the land .
in this great work there has been splendid cooperation between the government and industry and labor , and i am very thankful .
american industrial genius , unmatched throughout all the world in the solution of production problems , has been called upon to bring its resources and its talents into action .
manufacturers of watches , of farm implements , of linotypes , and cash registers , and automobiles , and sewing machines , and lawn mowers and locomotives are now making fuses , bomb packing crates , telescope mounts , shells , and pistols and tanks .
but all of our present efforts are not enough .
we must have more ships , more guns , more planes -- more of everything .
and this can only be accomplished if we discard the notion of " business as usual . "
this job can not be done merely by superimposing on the existing productive facilities the added requirements of the nation for defense .
our defense efforts must not be blocked by those who fear the future consequences of surplus plant capacity .
the possible consequences of failure of our defense efforts now are much more to be feared .
and after the present needs of our defense are past , a proper handling of the country 's peacetime needs will require all of the new productive capacity -- if not still more .
no pessimistic policy about the future of america shall delay the immediate expansion of those industries essential to defense .
we need them .
i want to make it clear that it is the purpose of the nation to build now with all possible speed every machine , every arsenal , every ( and ) factory that we need to manufacture our defense material .
we have the men -- the skill -- the wealth -- and above all , the will .
i am confident that if and when production of consumer or luxury goods in certain industries requires the use of machines and raw materials that are essential for defense purposes , then such production must yield , and will gladly yield , to our primary and compelling purpose .
so i appeal to the owners of plants -- to the managers -to the workers -- to our own government employees -- to put every ounce of effort into producing these munitions swiftly and without stint . (
and ) with this appeal i give you the pledge that all of us who are officers of your government will devote ourselves to the same whole - hearted extent to the great task that ( which ) lies ahead .
as planes and ships and guns and shells are produced , your government , with its defense experts , can then determine how best to use them to defend this hemisphere .
the decision as to how much shall be sent abroad and how much shall remain at home must be made on the basis of our overall military necessities .
we must be the great arsenal of democracy .
for us this is an emergency as serious as war itself .
we must apply ourselves to our task with the same resolution , the same sense of urgency , the same spirit of patriotism and sacrifice as we would show were we at war .
we have furnished the british great material support and we will furnish far more in the future .
there will be no " bottlenecks " in our determination to aid great britain .
no dictator , no combination of dictators , will weaken that determination by threats of how they will construe that determination .
the british have received invaluable military support from the heroic greek army and from the forces of all the governments in exile .
their strength is growing .
it is the strength of men and women who value their freedom more highly than they value their lives .
i believe that the axis powers are not going to win this war .
i base that belief on the latest and best of information .
we have no excuse for defeatism .
we have every good reason for hope -- hope for peace , yes , and hope for the defense of our civilization and for the building of a better civilization in the future .
i have the profound conviction that the american people are now determined to put forth a mightier effort than they have ever yet made to increase our production of all the implements of defense , to meet the threat to our democratic faith .
as president of the united states i call for that national effort .
i call for it in the name of this nation which we love and honor and which we are privileged and proud to serve .
i call upon our people with absolute confidence that our common cause will greatly succeed .

i have already indicated to you why i accept the nomination that you have offered me -- in spite of my desire to retire to the quiet of private life .
you in this convention are aware of what i have sought to gain for the nation , and you have asked me to continue .
it seems wholly likely that within the next four years our armed forces , and those of our allies , will have gained a complete victory over germany and japan , sooner or later , and that the world once more will be at peace -- under a system , we hope that will prevent a new world war .
in an event , whenever that time comes , new hands will then have full opportunity to realize the ideals which we seek .
in the last three elections the people of the united states have transcended party affiliation .
not only democrats but also forward - looking republicans and millions of independent voters have turned to progressive leadership -- a leadership which has sought consistently -- and with fair success -- to advance the lot of the average american citizen who had been so forgotten during the period after the last war .
i am confident that they will continue to look to that same kind of liberalism to build our safer economy for the future .
i am sure that you will understand me when i say that my decision , expressed to you formally tonight , is based solely on a sense of obligation to serve if called upon to do so by the people of the united states .
i shall not campaign , in the usual sense , for the office .
in these days of tragic sorrow , i do not consider it fitting .
and besides , in these days of global warfare , i shall not be able to find the time .
i shall , however , feel free to report to the people the facts about matters of concern to them and especially to correct any misrepresentations .
during the past few days i have been coming across the whole width of the continent , to a naval base where i am speaking to you now from the train .
as i was crossing the fertile lands and the wide plains and the great divide , i could not fail to think of the new relationship between the people of our farms and cities and villages and the people of the rest of the world overseas -- on the islands of the pacific , in the far east , and in the 
 other americas , in britain and normandy and germany and poland and russia 
 itself .
for oklahoma and california , for example , are becoming a part of all these distant spots as greatly as massachusetts and virginia were a part of the european picture in 1778 .
today , oklahoma and california are being defended in normandy and on saipan ; and they must be defended there -- for what happens in normandy and saipan vitally affects the security and well - being of every human being in oklahoma and california .
mankind changes the scope and the breadth of its thought and vision slowly indeed .
in the days of the roman empire eyes were focused on europe and the mediterranean area .
the civilization in the far east was barely known .
the american continents were unheard of .
and even after the people of europe began to spill over to other continents , the people of north america in colonial days knew only their atlantic seaboard and a tiny portion of the other americas , and they turned mostly for trade and international relationship to europe .
africa , at that time , was considered only as the provider of human chattels .
asia was essentially unknown to our ancestors .
during the nineteenth century , during that era of development and expansion on this continent , we felt a natural isolation -- geographic , economic , and political -- an isolation from the vast world which lay overseas .
not until this generation -- roughly this century -- have people here and elsewhere been compelled more and more to widen the orbit of their vision to include every part of the world .
yes , it has been a wrench perhaps -- but a very necessary one .
it is good that we are all getting that broader vision .
for we shall need it after the war .
the isolationists and the ostriches who plagued our thinking before pearl harbor are becoming slowly extinct .
the american people now know that all nations of the world -- large and small -- will have to play their appropriate part in keeping the peace by force , and in deciding peacefully the disputes which might lead to war .
we all know how truly the world has become one -- that if germany and japan , for example , were to come through this war with their philosophies established and their armies intact , our own grandchildren would again have to be fighting in their day for their liberties and their lives .
some day soon we shall all be able to fly to any other part of the world within twenty - four hours .
oceans will no longer figure as greatly in our physical defense as they have in the past .
for our own safety and for our own economic good , therefore -- if for no other reason -- we must take a leading part in the maintenance of peace and in the increase of trade among all the nations of the world .
and that is why your government for many , many months has been laying plans , and studying the problems of the near future -- preparing itself to act so that the people of the united states may not suffer hardships after the war , may continue constantly to improve their standards , and may join with other nations in doing the same .
there are even now working toward that end , the best staff in all our history -- men and women of all parties and from every part of the nation .
i realize that planning is a word which in some places brings forth sneers .
but , for example , before our entry into the war it was planning , which made possible the magnificent organization and equipment of the army and navy of the united states which are fighting for us and for our civilization today .
improvement through planning is the order of the day .
even military affairs , things do not stand still .
an army or a navy trained and equipped and fighting according to a 1932 model would not have been a safe reliance in 1944 .
and if we are to progress in our civilization , improvement is necessary in other fields -- in the physical things that are a part of our daily lives , and also in the concepts of social justice at home and abroad .
i am now at this naval base in the performance of my duties under the constitution .
the war waits for no elections .
decisions must be made -- plans must be laid -- strategy must be carried out .
they do not concern merely a party or a group .
they will affect the daily lives of americans for generations to come .
what is the job before us in 1944 ?
first , to win the war -- to win the war fast , to win it overpoweringly .
second , to form worldwide international organizations , and to arrange to use the armed forces of the sovereign nations of the world to make another war impossible within the foreseeable future .
and third , to build an economy for our returning veterans and for all americans -- which will provide employment and provide decent standards of living .
the people of the united states will decide this fall whether they wish to turn over this 1944 job -- this worldwide job -- to inexperienced or immature hands , to those who opposed lend - lease and international cooperation against the forces of aggression and tyranny , until they could read the polls of popular sentiment ; or whether they wish to leave it to those who saw the danger from abroad , who met it head - on , and who now have seized the offensive and carried the war to its present stages of success - to those who , by international conferences and united actions have begun to build that kind of common understanding and cooperative experience which will be so necessary in the world to come .
they will also decide , these people of ours , whether they will entrust the task of postwar reconversion to those who offered the veterans of the last war breadlines and apple - selling and who finally led the american people down to the abyss of 1932 ; or whether they will leave it to those who rescued american business , agriculture , industry , finance , and labor in 1933 , and who have already planned and put through much legislation to help our veterans resume their normal occupations in a well - ordered reconversion process .
they will not decide these questions by reading glowing words or platform pledges -- the mouthings of those who are willing to promise anything and 
 everything -- contradictions , inconsistencies , impossibilities -- anything which might snare a few votes here and a few votes there .
they will decide on the record - the record written on the seas , on the land , and in the skies .
they will decide on the record of our domestic accomplishments in recovery and reform since march 4 , 1933 .
and they will decide on the record of our war production and food 
 production -- unparalleled in all history , in spite of the doubts and sneers of those in high places who said it can not be done .
they will decide on the record of the international food conference , of u. n.r. r.a. , of the international labor conference , of the international education conference , of the international monetary conference .
and they will decide on the record written in the atlantic charter , at casablanca , at cairo , at moscow , and at teheran .
we have made mistakes .
who has not ?
things will not always be perfect .
are they ever perfect , in human affairs ?
but the objective at home and abroad has always been clear before us .
constantly , we have made steady , sure progress toward that objective .
the record is plain and unmistakable as to that - a record for everyone to read .
the greatest wartime president in our history , after a wartime election which he called the " most reliable indication of public purpose in this country , " set the goal for the united states , a goal in terms as applicable today as they were in 1865 -- terms which the human mind can not improve : 
 " . . .
.with firmness in the right , as god gives us to see the right , let us strive on to finish the work we are in ; to bind up the nation 's wounds ; to care for him who shall have borne the battle , and for his widow , and his orphan -- to do all which may achieve and cherish a just and lasting peace among ourselves , and with all nations . "

this dinner of the white house correspondents ' association is unique .
it is the first one at which i have made a speech in all these eight years .
it differs from the press conferences that you and i hold twice a week , for you can not ask me any questions tonight ; and everything that i have to say is word for word " on the record . "
for eight years you and i have been helping each other .
i have been trying to keep you informed of the news of washington , of the nation , and of the world , from the point of view of the presidency .
you , more than you realize , have been giving me a great deal of information about what the people of this country are thinking and saying .
in our press conferences , as at this dinner tonight , we include reporters representing papers and news agencies of many other lands .
to most of them it is a matter of constant amazement that press conferences such as ours can exist in any nation in the world .
that is especially true in those lands where freedoms do not exist -- where the purposes of our democracy and the characteristics of our country and of our people have been seriously distorted .
such misunderstandings are not new .
i remember that , a quarter of a century ago , in the early days of the first world war , the german government received solemn assurances from their representatives in the united states that the people of america were disunited ; that they cared more for peace at any price than for the preservation of ideals and freedom ; that there would even be riots and revolutions in the united states if this nation ever asserted its own interests .
let not dictators of europe or asia doubt our unanimity now .
before the present war broke out on september 1 , 1939 , i was more worried about the future than many people -- indeed , than most people .
the record shows that i was not worried enough .
that , however , is water over the dam .
do not let us waste time in reviewing the past , or fixing or dodging the blame for it .
history can not be rewritten by wishful thinking .
we , the american people , are writing new history today .
the big news story of this week is this : the world has been told that we , as a united nation , realize the danger that confronts us -- and that to meet that danger our democracy has gone into action .
we know that although prussian autocracy was bad enough in the first war , nazism is far worse in this .
nazi forces are not seeking mere modifications in colonial maps or in minor european boundaries .
they openly seek the destruction of all elective systems of government on every continent -- including our own ; they seek to establish systems of government based on the regimentation of all human beings by a handful of individual rulers who have seized power by force .
yes , these men and their hypnotized followers call this a new order .
it is not new and it is not order .
for order among nations presupposes something enduring -- some system of justice under which individuals , over a long period of time , are willing to live .
humanity will never permanently accept a system imposed by conquest and based on slavery .
these modern tyrants find it necessary to -- their plans to eliminate all democracies -- eliminate them one by one .
the nations of europe , and indeed we ourselves , did not appreciate that purpose .
we do now .
the process of the elimination of the european nations proceeded according to plan through 1939 and well into 1940 , until the schedule was shot to pieces by the unbeatable defenders of britain .
the enemies of democracy were wrong in their calculations for a very simple reason .
they were wrong because they believed that democracy could not adjust itself to the terrible reality of a world at war .
they believed that democracy , because of its profound respect for the rights of man , would never arm itself to fight .
they believed that democracy , because of its will to live at peace with its neighbors , could not mobilize its energies even in its own defense .
they know now that democracy can still remain democracy , and speak , and reach conclusions , and arm itself adequately for defense .
from the bureaus of propaganda of the axis powers came the confident prophecy that the conquest of our country would be " an inside job " -- a job accomplished not by overpowering invasion from without , but by disrupting confusion and disunion and moral disintegration from within .
those who believed that knew little of our history .
america is not a country which can be confounded by the appeasers , the defeatists , the backstairs manufacturers of panic .
it is a country that talks out its problems in the open , where any man can hear them .
we have just now engaged in a great debate .
it was not limited to the halls of congress .
it was argued in every newspaper , on every wave length , over every cracker barrel in all the land ; and it was finally settled and decided by the american people themselves .
yes , the decisions of our democracy may be slowly arrived at .
but when that decision is made , it is proclaimed not with the voice of any one man but with the voice of one hundred and thirty millions .
it is binding on us all .
and the world is no longer left in doubt .
this decision is the end of any attempts at appeasement in our land ; the end of urging us to get along with dictators ; the end of compromise with tyranny and the forces of oppression .
and the urgency is now .
we believe firmly that when our production output is in full swing , the democracies of the world will be able to prove that dictatorships can not win .
but , now , now , the time element is of supreme importance .
every plane , every other instrument of war , old and new , every instrument that we can spare now , we will send overseas because that is the common sense of strategy .
the great task of this day , the deep duty that rests upon each and every one of us is to move products from the assembly lines of our factories to the battle lines of democracy -- now !
we can have speed , we can have effectiveness , if we maintain our existing unity .
we do not have and never will have the false unity of a people browbeaten by threats , misled by propaganda .
ours is a unity that is possible only among free men and women who recognize the truth and face reality with intelligence and courage .
today , at last -- today at long last -- ours is not a partial effort .
it is a total effort and that is the only way to guarantee ultimate safety .
beginning a year ago , we started the erection of hundreds of plants ; we started the training of millions of men .
then , at the moment that the aid - to - democracies bill was passed , this week , we were ready to recommend the seven - billion - dollar appropriation on the basis of capacity production as now planned .
the articles themselves cover the whole range of munitions of war and of the facilities for transporting them across the seas .
the aid - to - democracies bill was agreed on by both houses of the congress last tuesday afternoon .
i signed it one half hour later .
five minutes after that i approved a list of articles for immediate shipment ; and today -- saturday night -- many of them are on their way .
on wednesday , i recommended an appropriation for new material to the extent of seven billion dollars ; and the congress is making patriotic speed in making the money available .
here in washington , we are thinking in terms of speed and speed now .
and i hope that that watchword -- " speed , and speed now " -- will find its way into every home in the nation .
we shall have to make sacrifices -- every one of us .
the final extent of those sacrifices will depend on the speed with which we act now !
i must tell you tonight in plain language what this undertaking means to you -- to you in your daily life .
whether you are in the armed services ; whether you are a steel worker or a stevedore ; a machinist or a housewife ; a farmer or a banker ; a storekeeper or a manufacturer -- to all of you it will mean sacrifice in behalf of your country and your liberties .
yes , you will feel the impact of this gigantic effort in your daily lives .
you will feel it in a way that will cause , to you , many inconveniences .
you will have to be content with lower profits , lower profits from business because obviously your taxes will be higher .
you will have to work longer at your bench , or your plow , or your machine , or your desk .
let me make it clear that the nation is calling for the sacrifice of some privileges , not for the sacrifice of fundamental rights .
and most of us will do it willingly .
that kind of sacrifice is for the common national protection and welfare ; for our defense against the most ruthless brutality in all history ; for the ultimate victory of a way of life now so violently menaced .
a halfhearted effort on our part will lead to failure .
this is no part - time job .
the concepts of " business as usual , " of " normalcy , " must be forgotten until the task is finished .
yes , it 's an all - out effort -- and nothing short of an all - out effort will win .
therefore , we are dedicated , from here on , to a constantly increasing tempo of production -- a production greater than we now know or have ever known before -- a production that does not stop and should not pause .
tonight , i am appealing to the heart and to the mind of every man and every woman within our borders who loves liberty .
i ask you to consider the needs of our nation and this hour , to put aside all personal differences until the victory is won .
the light of democracy must be kept burning .
to the perpetuation of this light , each of us must do his own share .
the single effort of one individual may seem very small .
but there are 130 million individuals overhere .
and there are many more millions in britain and elsewhere bravely shielding the great flame of democracy from the blackout of barbarism .
it is not enough for us merely to trim the wick , or polish the glass .
the time has come when we must provide the fuel in ever - increasing amounts to keep that flame alight .
there will be no divisions of party or section or race or nationality or religion .
there is not one among us who does not have a stake in the outcome of the effort in which we are now engaged .
a few weeks ago i spoke of four freedoms -- freedom of speech and expression , freedom of every person to worship god in his own way , freedom from want , freedom from fear .
they are the ultimate stake .
they may not be immediately attainable throughout the world but humanity does move toward those glorious ideals through democratic processes .
and if we fail -- if democracy is superseded by slavery -- then those four freedoms , or even the mention of them , will become forbidden things .
centuries will pass before they can be revived .
by winning now , we strengthen the meaning of those freedoms , we increase the stature of mankind , we establish the dignity of human life .
i have often thought that there is a vast difference between the word " loyalty " and the word " obedience . "
obedience can be obtained and enforced in a dictatorship by the use of threat or extortion or blackmail or it can be obtained by a failure on the part of government to tell the truth to its citizens .
loyalty is different .
it springs from the mind that is given the facts , that retains ancient ideals and proceeds without coercion to give support to its own government .
that is true in england and in greece and in china and in the united states , today .
and in many other countries millions of men and women are praying for the return of a day when they can give that kind of loyalty .
loyalty can not be bought .
dollars alone will not win this war .
let us not delude ourselves as to that .
today , nearly a million and a half american citizens are hard at work in our armed forces .
the spirit -- the determination of these men of our army and navy are worthy of the highest traditions of our country .
no better men ever served under washington or john paul jones or grant or lee or pershing .
that is a boast , i admit , but it is not an idle one .
upon the national will to sacrifice and to work depends the output of our industry and our agriculture .
upon that will depends the survival of the vital bridge across the ocean -- the bridge of ships that carry the arms and the food for those who are fighting the good fight .
upon that will depends our ability to aid other nations which may determine to offer resistance .
upon that will may depend practical assistance to people now living in nations that have been overrun , should they find the opportunity to strike back in an effort to regain their liberties and may that day come soon !
this will of the american people will not be frustrated , either by threats from powerful enemies abroad or by small , selfish groups or individuals at home .
the determination of america must not and will not be obstructed by war profiteering .
it must not be obstructed by unnecessary strikes of workers , by shortsighted management , or by the third danger -- deliberate sabotage .
for , unless we win there will be no freedom for either management or labor .
wise labor leaders and wise business managers will realize how necessary it is to their own existence to make common sacrifice for this great common cause .
there is no longer the slightest question or doubt that the american people recognize the extreme seriousness of the present situation .
that is why they have demanded , and got , a policy of unqualified , immediate , all - out aid for britain , for greece , for china , and for all the governments in exile whose homelands are temporarily occupied by the aggressors .
and from now on that aid will be increased -- and yet again increased -- until total victory has been won .
the british are stronger than ever in the magnificent morale that has enabled them to endure all the dark days and the shattered nights of the past ten months .
they have the full support and help of canada , of the other dominions , of the rest of their empire , and the full aid and support of non - british people throughout the world who still think in terms of the great freedoms .
the british people are braced for invasion whenever such attempt may come -- tomorrow -- next week -- next month .
in this historic crisis , britain is blessed with a brilliant and great leader in winston churchill .
but , knowing him , no one knows better than mr. churchill himself that it is not alone his stirring words and valiant deeds that give the british their superb morale .
the essence of that morale is in the masses of plain people who are completely clear in their minds about the one essential fact -- that they would rather die as free men than live as slaves .
these plain people -- civilians as well as soldiers and sailors and 
 airmen -- women and girls as well as men and boys -- they are fighting in the front line of civilization at this moment , and they are holding that line with a fortitude that will forever be the pride and the inspiration of all free men on every continent , on every isle of the sea .
the british people and their grecian allies need ships .
from america , they will get ships .
they need planes .
from america , they will get planes .
from america they need food .
from america , they will get food .
they need tanks and guns and ammunition and supplies of all kinds .
from america , they will get tanks and guns and ammunition and supplies of all kinds .
china likewise expresses the magnificent will of millions of plain people to resist the dismemberment of their historic nation .
china , through the generalissimo , chiang kai - shek , asks our help .
america has said that china shall have our help .
and so our country is going to be what our people have proclaimed it must be -- the arsenal of democracy .
our country is going to play its full part .
and when -- no , i did n't say if , i said when -- dictatorships disintegrate -- and pray god that will be sooner than any of us now dares to hope -- then our country must continue to play its great part in the period of world reconstruction for the good of humanity .
we believe that the rallying cry of the dictators , their boasting about a master - race , will prove to be pure stuff and nonsense .
there never has been , there is n't now , and there never will be , any race of people on the earth fit to serve as masters over their fellow men .
the world has no use for any nation which , because of size or because of military might , asserts the right to goosestep to world power over the bodies of other nations or other races .
we believe that any nationality , no matter how small , has the inherent right to its own nationhood .
we believe that the men and women of such nations , no matter what size , can , through the processes of peace , serve themselves and serve the world by protecting the common man 's security ; improve the standards of healthful living ; provide markets for manufacture and for agriculture .
through that kind of peaceful service every nation can increase its happiness , banish the terrors of war , and abandon man 's inhumanity to man .
never , in all our history , have americans faced a job so well worth while .
may it be said of us in the days to come that our children and our children 's children rise up and call us blessed .

mr. chief justice , mr. vice president , my friends : 
 you will understand and , i believe , agree with my wish that the form of this inauguration be simple and its words brief .
we americans of today , together with our allies , are passing through a period of supreme test .
it is a test of our courage -- of our resolve -- of our wisdom -- of our essential democracy .
if we meet that test -- successfully and honorably -- we shall perform a service of historic importance which men and women and children will honor throughout all time .
as i stand here today , having taken the solemn oath of office in the presence of my fellow countrymen -- in the presence of our god -- i know that it 
 is america 's purpose that we shall not fail .
in the days and the years that are to come , we shall work for ajust and honorable peace , a durable peace , as today we work and fight for total victory in war .
we can and we will achieve such a peace .
we shall strive for perfection .
we shall not achieve it immediately -- but we still shall strive .
we may make mistakes -- but they must never be mistakes which result from faintness of heart or abandonment of moral 
 principle .
i remember that my old schoolmaster , dr. peabody , said in days that seemed to us then to be secure and untroubled , " things in life will not always run smoothly .
sometimes we will be rising toward the heights -- then all will seem to reverse itself and start downward .
the great fact to remember is that the trend of civilization itself is forever upward ; that a line drawn through the middle of the peaks and the valleys of the centuries always has an upward trend . "
our constitution of 1787 was not a perfect instrument ; it is not perfect yet .
but it provided a firm base upon which all manner of men , of all races and colors and creeds , could build our solid structure of democracy .
today , in this year of war , 1945 , we have learned lessons -- at a fearful cost -- and we shall profit by them .
we have learned that we can not live alone , at peace ; that our own well - being is dependent on the well - being of other nations , far away .
we have learned that we must live as men and not as ostriches , nor as dogs in the manger .
we have learned to be citizens of the world , members of the human community .
we have learned the simple truth , as emerson said , that , " the only way to have a friend is to be one . "
we can gain no lasting peace if we approach it with suspicion and mistrust or with fear .
we can gain it only if we proceed with the understanding and the confidence and the courage which flow from conviction .
the almighty god has blessed our land in many ways .
he has given our people stout hearts and strong arms with which to strike mighty blows for freedom and truth .
he has given to our country a faith which has become the hope of all peoples in an anguished world .
so we pray to him now for the vision to see our way clearly to see the way that leads to a better life for ourselves and for all our fellow men -- and to the achievement of his will to peace on earth .

my fellow americans : 
 once upon a time , a few years ago , there was a city in our middle west which was threatened by a destructive flood in the great river .
the waters had risen to the top of the banks .
every man , woman and child in that city was called upon to fill sand bags in order to defend their homes against the rising waters .
for many days and nights , destruction and death stared them in the face .
as a result of the grim , determined community effort , that city still stands .
those people kept the levees above the peak of the flood .
all of them joined together in the desperate job that ( which ) had to be done -- business men , workers , farmers , and doctors , and preachers -- people of all races .
to me , that town is a living symbol of what community cooperation can accomplish .
today , in the same kind of community effort , only very much larger , the united nations and their peoples have kept the levees of civilization high enough to prevent the floods of aggression and barbarism and wholesale murder from engulfing us all .
the flood has been raging for four years .
at last we are beginning to gain on it ; but the waters have not yet receded enough for us to relax our sweating work with the sand bags .
in this war bond campaign we are filling bags and placing them against the flood -- bags which are essential if we are to stand off the ugly torrent which is trying to sweep us all away .
today , it is announced that an armistice with italy has been concluded .
this was a great victory for the united nations -- but it was also a great victory for the italian people .
after years of war and suffering and degradation , the italian people are at last coming to the day of liberation from their real enemies , the nazis .
but let us not delude ourselves that this armistice means the end of the war in the mediterranean .
we still have to ( must ) drive the germans out of italy as we have driven them out of tunisia and sicily ; we must drive them out of france and all other captive countries ; and we must strike them on their own soil from all directions .
our ultimate objectives in this war continue to be berlin and tokyo .
i ask you to bear these objectives constantly in mind -- and do not forget that we still have a long way to go before we attain ( attaining ) them .
the great news that you have heard today from general eisenhower does not give you license to settle back in your rocking chairs and say , " well , that does it .
we 've got them ( 'em ) on the run .
now we can start the celebration . "
the time for celebration is not yet .
and i have a suspicion that when this war does end , we shall not be in a very celebrating mood , a very celebrating frame of mind .
i think that our main emotion will be one of grim determination that this shall not happen again .
during the past weeks , mr. churchill and i have been in constant conference with the leaders of our combined fighting forces .
we have been in constant communication with our fighting allies , russian and chinese , who are prosecuting the war with relentless determination and with conspicuous success on far distant fronts .
and mr. churchill ( he ) and i are here together in washington ( here ) at this crucial moment .
we have seen the satisfactory fulfillment of plans that were made in casablanca last january and here in washington last may. and lately we have made new , well - considered ( extensive ) plans for the future .
but throughout these conferences we have never lost sight of the fact that this war will become bigger and tougher , rather than easier , during the long months that are to come .
this war does not and must not stop for one single instant .
your ( our ) fighting men know that .
those of them who are moving forward through jungles against lurking japs -- those who are ( in ) landing at this moment , in barges moving through the dawn up to strange enemy coasts -- those who are diving their bombers down on the targets at roof - top level at this moment -- every one of these men knows that this war is a full - time job and that it will continue to be that until total victory is won .
and , by the same token , every responsible leader in all the united nations knows that the fighting goes on twenty - four hours a day , seven days a week , and that any day lost may have to be paid for in terms of months added to the duration of the war .
every campaign , every single operation in all the campaigns that we plan and carry through must be figured in terms of staggering material costs .
we can not afford to be niggardly with any of our resources , for we shall need all of them to do the job that we have put our ( undertaken ) shoulder to .
your fellow americans have given a magnificent account of themselves -- on the battlefields and on the oceans and in the skies all over the world .
now it is up to you to prove to them that you are contributing your share and more than your share .
it is not sufficient to simply ( to ) put ( money ) into war bonds money which we would normally save .
we must put ( money ) into war bonds money which we would not normally save .
only then have we done everything that good conscience demands .
so it is up to you -- up to you , the americans in the american homes -- the very homes which our sons and daughters are working and fighting and dying to preserve .
i know i speak for every man and woman throughout the americas when i say that we americans will not be satisfied to send our troops into the fire of the enemy with equipment inferior in any way .
nor will we be satisfied to send our troops with equipment only equal to that of the enemy .
we are determined to provide our troops with overpowering superiority -- superiority of quantity ( quality ) and quality ( quantity ) in any and every category of arms and armaments that they may conceivably need .
and where does this our dominating power come from ?
why , it can come only from you .
the money you lend and the money you give in taxes buys that death - dealing , and at the same time life - saving power that we need for victory .
this is an expensive war -- expensive in money ; you can help it -- you can help to keep it at a minimum cost in lives .
the american people will never stop to reckon the cost of redeeming civilization .
they know there never can be any economic justification for failing to save freedom .
and we can be sure that our enemies will watch this drive with the keenest interest .
they know that success in this undertaking will shorten the war .
they know that the more money the american people lend to their government , the more powerful and relentless will be the american forces in the field .
they know that only a united and determined america could possibly produce on a voluntary basis so huge ( large ) a sum of money as fifteen billion dollars .
the overwhelming success of the second war loan drive last april showed that the people of this democracy stood firm behind their troops .
this ( the ) third war loan , which we are starting tonight , will also succeed --because the american people will not permit it to fail .
i can not tell you how much to invest in war bonds during this third war loan drive .
no one can tell you .
it is for you to decide under the guidance of your own conscience .
i will say this , however .
because the nation 's needs are greater than ever before , our sacrifices too must be greater than they have ever been before .
nobody knows when total victory will come -- but we do know that the harder we fight now , the more might and power we direct at the enemy now , the shorter the war will be and the smaller the sum total of sacrifice .
success of the third war loan will be the symbol that america does not propose to rest on its arms -- that we know the tough , bitter job ahead and will not stop until we have finished it .
now it is your turn !
every dollar that you invest in the third war loan is your personal message of defiance to our common enemies -- to the ruthless savages ( militarists ) of germany and japan -- and it is your personal message of faith and good cheer to our allies and to all the men at the front .
god bless them !

to the congress : 
 on the morning of december eleventh , the government of germany , pursuing its course of world conquest , declared war against the united states .
the long known and the long expected has thus taken place .
the forces endeavoring to enslave the entire world now are moving toward this hemisphere .
never before has there been a greater challenge to life , liberty , and civilization .
delay invites greater danger .
rapid and united effort by all of the peoples of the world who are determined to remain free will insure a world victory of the forces of justice and of righteousness over the forces of savagery and of barbarism .
italy also has declared war against the united states .
i therefore request the congress to recognize a state of war between the united states and germany , and between the united states and italy .

ladies and gentlemen : 
 all our fighting men overseas today have their appointed stations on the far - flung battlefronts of the world .
we at home have ours too .
we need , we ( and ) are proud of , our fighting men -- most decidedly .
but , during the anxious times ahead , let us not forget that they need us too .
it goes almost without saying that we must continue to forge the weapons of victory -- the hundreds of thousands of items , large and small , essential to the waging of the war .
this has been the major task from the very start , and it is still a major task .
this is the very worst time for any war worker to think of leaving his machine or to look for a peacetime job .
and it goes almost without saying , too , that we must continue to provide our government with the funds necessary for waging war not only by the payment of taxes -- which , after all , is an obligation of american citizenship -- but also by the purchase of war bonds -- an act of free choice which every citizen has to make for himself under the guidance of his own conscience .
whatever else any of us may be doing , the purchase of war bonds and stamps is something all of us can do and should do to help win the war .
i am happy to report tonight that it is something which -- something nearly everyone seems to be doing .
although there are now approximately sixty - seven million persons who have or earn some form of income ( including the armed forces ) , eighty - one million persons or their children have already bought war bonds .
they have bought more than six hundred million individual bonds .
their purchases have totaled more than thirty - two billion dollars .
these are the purchases of individual men , women and children .
anyone who would have said this was possible a few years ago would have been put down as a starry - eyed visionary .
but of such visions ( however ) is the stuff of america ( fashioned ) .
of course , there are always pessimists with us everywhere , a few here and a few there .
i am reminded of the fact that after the fall of france in 1940 i asked the congress for the money for the production by the united states of fifty thousand airplanes per year .
well , i was called crazy -- it was said that the figure was fantastic ; that it could not be done .
and yet today we are building airplanes at the rate of one hundred thousand a year .
there is a direct connection between the bonds you have bought and the stream of men and equipment now rushing over the english channel for the liberation of europe .
there is a direct connection between your ( war ) bonds and every part of this global war today .
tonight , therefore on the opening of this fifth war loan drive , it is appropriate for us to take a broad look at this panorama of world war , for the success or the failure of the drive is going to have so much to do with the speed with which we can accomplish victory and the peace .
while i know that the chief interest tonight is centered on the english channel and on the beaches and farms and the cities of normandy , we should not lose sight of the fact that our armed forces are engaged on other battlefronts all over the world , and that no one front can be considered alone without its proper relation to all .
it is worth while , therefore , to make over - all comparisons with the past .
let us compare today with just two years ago -- june , 1942 .
at that time germany was in control of practically all of europe , and was steadily driving the russians back toward the ural mountains .
germany was practically in control of north africa and the mediterranean , and was beating at the gates of the suez canal and the route to india .
italy was still an important military and supply factor -- as subsequent , long campaigns have proved .
japan was in control of the western aleutian islands ; and in the south pacific was knocking at the gates of australia and new zealand -- and also was threatening india .
japan ( she ) had seized control of ( nearly one half ) of the central pacific .
american armed forces on land and sea and in the air were still very definitely on the defensive , and in the building - up stage .
our allies were bearing the heat and the brunt of the attack .
in 1942 washington heaved a sigh of relief that the first war bond issue had been cheerfully over - subscribed by the american people .
way back in those days , two years ago , america was still hearing from many " amateur strategists " and political critics , some of whom were doing more good for hitler than for the united states -- two years ago .
but today we are on the offensive all over the world -- bringing the attack to our enemies .
in the pacific , by relentless submarine and naval attacks , and amphibious thrusts , and ever - mounting air attacks , we have deprived the japs of the power to check the momentum of our ever - growing and ever - advancing military forces .
we have reduced the japs ' ( their ) shipping by more than three million tons .
we have overcome their original advantage in the air .
we have cut off from a return to the homeland , cut off from that return , tens of thousands of beleaguered japanese troops who now face starvation or ultimate surrender .
and we have cut down their naval strength , so that for many months they have avoided all risk of encounter with our naval forces .
true , we still have a long way to go to tokyo .
but , carrying out our original strategy of eliminating our european enemy first and then turning all our strength to the pacific , we can force the japanese to unconditional surrender or to national suicide much more rapidly than has been thought possible .
turning now to our enemy who is first on the list for destruction --germany has her back against the wall -- in fact three walls at once !
in the south -- we have broken the german hold on central italy .
on june fourth , the city of rome fell to the allied armies .
and allowing the enemy no respite , the allies are now pressing hard on the heels of the germans as they retreat northwards in ever - growing confusion .
on the east -- our gallant soviet allies have driven the enemy back from the lands which were invaded three years ago .
the great soviet armies are now initiating crushing blows .
overhead -- vast allied air fleets of bombers and fighters have been waging a bitter air war over germany and western europe .
they have had two major objectives : to destroy german war industries which maintain the german armies and air forces ; and to shoot the german luftwaffe out of the air .
as a result german production has been whittled down continuously , and the german fighter forces now have ( has ) only a fraction of their ( its ) former power .
this great air campaign , strategic and tactical , is going to ( will ) continue --with increasing power .
and on the west -- the hammer blow which struck the coast of france last tuesday morning , less than a week ago , was the culmination of many months of careful planning and strenuous preparation .
millions of tons of weapons and supplies , ( and ) hundreds of thousands of men assembled in england , are now being poured into the great battle in europe .
i think that from the standpoint of our enemy we have achieved the impossible .
we have broken through their supposedly impregnable wall in northern france .
but the assault has been costly in men and costly in materials .
some of our landings were desperate adventures ; but from advices received so far , the losses were lower than our commanders had estimated would occur .
we have established a firm foothold .
we ( and ) are now prepared to meet the inevitable counter - attacks of the germans -- with power and with confidence .
and we all pray that we will have far more , soon , than a firm foothold .
americans have all worked together to make this day possible .
the liberation forces now streaming across the channel , and up the beaches and through the fields and the forests ( down the highways ) of france are using thousands and thousands of planes and ships and tanks and heavy guns .
they are carrying with them many thousands of items needed for their dangerous , stupendous undertaking .
there is a shortage of nothing -- nothing !
and this must continue .
what has been done in the united states since those days of 1940 -- when france fell -- in raising and equipping and transporting our fighting forces , and in producing weapons and supplies for war , has been nothing short of a miracle .
it was largely due to american teamwork -- teamwork among capital and labor and agriculture , between the armed forces and the civilian economy -- indeed among all of them .
and every one -- every man or woman or child -- who bought a war bond helped -- and helped mightily !
there are still many people in the united states who have not bought war bonds , or who have not bought as many as they can afford .
everyone knows for himself whether he falls into that category or not .
in some cases his neighbors know too ( also ) .
to the consciences of those people , this appeal by the president of the united states is very much in order .
for all of the things which we use in this war , everything we send to our fighting allies , costs money -- a lot of money .
one sure way every man , woman and child can keep faith with those who have given , and are giving , their lives , is to provide the money which is needed to win the final victory .
i urge all americans to buy war bonds without stint .
swell the mighty chorus to bring us nearer to victory !

my fellow americans : 
 as you know , i have recently come back from a trip of inspection of camps and training stations and war factories .
the main thing that i observed on this trip is not exactly news .
it is the plain fact that the american people are united as never before in their determination to do a job and to do it well .
this whole nation of one hundred and thirty million free men , women and children is becoming one great fighting force .
some of us are soldiers or sailors , some of us are civilians .
some of us are fighting the war in airplanes five miles above the continent of europe or the islands of the pacific -- and some of us are fighting it in mines deep doom in the earth of pennsylvania or montana .
a few of us are decorated with medals for heroic achievement , but all of us can have that deep and permanent inner satisfaction that comes from doing the best we know how -- each of us playing an honorable part in the great struggle to save our democratic civilization .
whatever our individual circumstances or opportunities -we are all in it , and our spirit is good , and we americans and our allies are going to win -- and do not let anyone tell you anything different .
that is the main thing that i saw on my trip around the country -- unbeatable spirit .
if the leaders of germany and japan could have come along with me , and had seen what i saw , they would agree with my conclusions .
unfortunately , they were unable to make the trip with me .
and that is one reason why we are carrying our war effort overseas -- to them .
with every passing week the war increases in scope and intensity .
that is true in europe , in africa , in asia , and on all the seas .
the strength of the united nations is on the upgrade in this war .
the axis leaders , on the other hand , know by now that they have already reached their full strength , and that their steadily mounting losses in men and material can not be fully replaced .
germany and japan are already realizing what the inevitable result will be when the total strength of the united nations hits them -- at additional places on the earth 's surface .
one of the principal weapons of our enemies in the past has been their use of what is called " the war of nerves . "
they have spread falsehood and terror ; they have started fifth columns everywhere ; they have duped the innocent ; they have fomented suspicion and hate between neighbors ; they have aided and abetted those people in other nations -- ( even ) including our own -- whose words and deeds are advertised from berlin and from tokyo as proof of our disunity .
the greatest defense against all such propaganda , of course , is the common sense of the common people -- and that defense is prevailing .
the " war of nerves " against the united nations is now turning into a boomerang .
for the first time , the nazi propaganda machine is on the defensive .
they begin to apologize to their own people for the repulse of their vast forces at stalingrad , and for the enormous casualties they are suffering .
they are compelled to beg their overworked people to rally their weakened production .
they even publicly admit , for the first time , that germany can be fed only at the cost of stealing food from the rest of europe .
they are proclaiming that a second front is impossible ; but , at the same time , they are desperately rushing troops in all directions , and stringing barbed wire all the way from the coasts of finland and norway to the islands of the eastern mediterranean .
meanwhile , they are driven to increase the fury of their atrocities .
the united nations have decided to establish the identity of those nazi leaders who are responsible for the innumerable acts of savagery .
as each of these criminal deeds is committed , it is being carefully investigated ; and the evidence is being relentlessly piled up for the future purposes of justice .
we have made it entirely clear that the united nations seek no mass reprisals against the populations of germany or italy or japan .
but the ring leaders and their brutal henchmen must be named , and apprehended , and tried in accordance with the judicial processes of criminal law .
there are now millions of americans in army camps , in naval stations , in factories and in shipyards .
who are these millions upon whom the life of our country depends ?
what are they thinking ?
what are their doubts ? (
and ) what are their hopes ?
and how is the work progressing ?
the commander - in - chief can not learn all of the answers to these questions in washington .
and that is why i made the trip i did .
it is very easy to say , as some have said , that when the president travels through the country he should go with a blare of trumpets , with crowds on the sidewalks , with batteries of reporters and photographers -- talking and posing with all of the politicians of the land .
but having had some experience in this war and in the last war , i can tell you very simply that the kind of trip i took permitted me to concentrate on the work i had to do without expending time , meeting all the demands of publicity .
and -- i might add -- it was a particular pleasure to make a tour of the country without having to give a single thought to politics .
i expect to make other trips for similar purposes , and i shall make them in the same way .
in the last war , i had seen great factories ; but until i saw some of the new present - day plants , i had not thoroughly visualized our american war effort .
of course , i saw only a small portion of all our plants , but that portion was a good cross - section , and it was deeply impressive .
the united states has been at war for only ten months , and is engaged in the enormous task of multiplying its armed forces many times .
we are by no means at full production level yet .
but i could not help asking myself on the trip , where would we be today if the government of the united states had not begun to build many of its factories for this huge increase more than two years ago , more than a year before war was forced upon us at pearl harbor ?
we have also had to face the problem of shipping .
ships in every part of the world continue to be sunk by enemy action .
but the total tonnage of ships coming out of american , canadian and british shipyards , day by day , has increased so fast that we are getting ahead of our enemies in the bitter battle of transportation .
in expanding our shipping , we have had to enlist many thousands of men for our merchant marine .
these men are serving magnificently .
they are risking their lives every hour so that guns and tanks and planes and ammunition and food may be carried to the heroic defenders of stalingrad and to all the united nations ' forces all over the world .
a few days ago i awarded the first maritime distinguished service medal to a young man -- edward f. cheney of yeadon , pennsylvania -- who had shown great gallantry in rescuing his comrades from the oily waters of the sea after their ship had been torpedoed .
there will be many more such acts of bravery .
in one sense my recent trip was a hurried one , out through the middle west , to the northwest , down the length of the pacific coast and back through the southwest and the south .
in another sense , however , it was a leisurely trip , because i had the opportunity to talk to the people who are actually doing the work -- management and labor alike -- on their own home grounds .
and it gave me a fine chance to do some thinking about the major problems of our war effort on the basis of first things first .
as i told the three press association representatives who accompanied me , i was impressed by the large proportion of women employed -- doing skilled manual ( work ) labor running machines .
as time goes on , and many more of our men enter the armed forces , this proportion of women will increase .
within less than a year from now , i think , there will probably be as many women as men working in our war production plants .
i had some enlightening experiences relating to the old saying of us men that curiosity -- inquisitiveness -- is stronger among woman .
i noticed ( that ) , frequently , that when we drove unannounced down the middle aisle of a great plant full of workers and machines , the first people to look up from their work were the men -- and not the women .
it was chiefly the men who were arguing as to whether that fellow in the straw hat was really the president or not .
so having seen the quality of the work and of the workers on our production lines -- and coupling these firsthand observations with the reports of actual performance of our weapons on the fighting fronts -- i can say to you that we are getting ahead of our enemies in the battle of production .
and of great importance to our future production was the effective and rapid manner in which the congress met the serious problem of the rising cost of living .
it was a splendid example of the operation of democratic processes in wartime .
the machinery to carry out this act of the congress was put into effect within twelve hours after the bill was signed .
the legislation will help the cost - of - living problems of every worker in every factory and on every farm in the land .
in order to keep stepping up our production , we have had to add millions of workers to the total labor force of the nation .
and as new factories came into operation , we must find additional millions of workers .
this presents a formidable problem in the mobilization of manpower .
it is not that we do not have enough people in this country to do the job .
the problem is to have the right numbers of the right people in the right places at the right time .
we are learning to ration materials , and we must now learn to ration manpower .
the major objectives of a sound manpower policy are : 
 first , to select and train men of the highest fighting efficiency needed for our armed forces in the achievement of victory over our enemies in combat .
second , to man our war industries and farms with the workers needed to produce the arms and munitions and food required by ourselves and by our fighting allies to win this war .
in order to do this , we shall be compelled to stop workers from moving from one war job to another as a matter of personal preference ; to stop employers from stealing labor from each other ; to use older men , and handicapped people , and more women , and even grown boys and girls , wherever possible and reasonable , to replace men of military age and fitness ; to train new personnel for essential war work ; and to stop the wastage of labor in all non - essential activities .
there are many other things that we can do , and do immediately , to help meet ( the ) this manpower problem .
the school authorities in all the states should work out plans to enable our high school students to take some time from their school year , ( and ) to use their summer vacations , to help farmers raise and harvest their crops , or to work somewhere in the war industries .
this does not mean closing schools and stopping education .
it does mean giving older students a better opportunity to contribute their bit to the war effort .
such work will do no harm to the students .
people should do their work as near their homes as possible .
we can not afford to transport a single worker into an area where there is already a worker available to do the job .
in some communities , employers dislike to employ women .
in others they are reluctant to hire negroes .
in still others , older men are not wanted .
we can no longer afford to indulge such prejudices or practices .
every citizen wants to know what essential war work he can do the best .
he can get the answer by applying to the nearest united states employment service office .
there are four thousand five hundred of these offices throughout the nation .
they ( are ) form the corner grocery stores of our manpower system .
this network of employment offices is prepared to advise every citizen where his skills and labors are needed most , and to refer him to an employer who can utilize them to best advantage in the war effort .
perhaps the most difficult phase of the manpower problem is the scarcity of farm labor in many places .
i have seen evidences of the fact , however , that the people are trying to meet it as well as possible .
in one community that i visited a perishable crop was harvested by turning out the whole of the high school for three or four days .
and in another community of fruit growers the usual japanese labor was not available ; but when the fruit ripened , the banker , the butcher , the lawyer , the garage man , the druggist , the local editor , and in fact every able - bodied man and woman in the town , left their occupations , ( and ) went out gathering(ed ) the fruit , and sent it to market .
every farmer in the land must realize fully that his production is part of war production , and that he is regarded by the nation as essential to victory .
the american people expect him to keep his production up , and even to increase it .
we will use every effort to help him to get labor ; but , at the same time , he and the people of his community must use ingenuity and cooperative effort to produce crops , and livestock and dairy products .
it may be that all of our volunteer effort -- however well intentioned and well administered -- will not suffice wholly to solve ( the ) this problem .
in that case , we shall have to adopt new legislation .
and if this is necessary , i do not believe that the american people will shrink from it .
in a sense , every american , because of the privilege of his citizenship , is a part of the selective service .
the nation owes a debt of gratitude to the selective service boards .
the successful operation of the selective service system and the way it has been accepted by the great mass of our citizens give us confidence that if necessary , the same principle could be used to solve any manpower problem .
and i want to say also a word of praise and thanks ( for ) to the more than ten million people , all over the country , who have volunteered for the work of civilian defense -- and who are working hard at it .
they are displaying unselfish devotion in the patient performance of their often tiresome and always anonymous tasks .
in doing this important neighborly work they are helping to fortify our national unity and our real understanding of the fact that we are all involved in this war .
naturally , on my trip i was most interested in watching the training of our fighting forces .
all of our combat units that go overseas must consist of young , strong men who have had thorough training . (
a ) an army division that has an average age of twenty - three or twenty - four is a better fighting unit than one which has an average age of thirty - three or thirty - four .
the more of such troops we have in the field , the sooner the war will be won , and the smaller will be the cost in casualties .
therefore , i believe that it will be necessary to lower the present minimum age limit for selective service from twenty years down to eighteen .
we have learned how inevitable that is -- and how important to the speeding up of victory .
i can very thoroughly understand the feelings of all parents whose sons have entered our armed forces .
i have an appreciation of that feeling and so has my wife .
i want every father and every mother who has a son in the service to know --again , from what i have seen with my own eyes -- that the men in the army , navy and marine corps are receiving today the best possible training , equipment and medical care .
and we will never fail to provide for the spiritual needs of our officers and men under the chaplains of our armed services .
good training will save many , many lives in battle .
the highest rate of casualties is always suffered by units comprised of inadequately trained men .
we can be sure that the combat units of our army and navy are well manned , ( and ) well equipped , ( and ) well trained .
their effectiveness in action will depend upon the quality of their leadership , and upon the wisdom of the strategic plans on which all military operations are based .
i can say one thing about ( our ) these plans of ours : they are not being decided by the typewriter strategists who expound their views in the press or on the radio .
one of the greatest of american soldiers , robert e. lee , once remarked on the tragic fact that in the war of his day all of the best generals were apparently working on newspapers instead of in the army .
and that seems to be true in all wars .
the trouble with the typewriter strategists is that while they may be full of bright ideas , they are not in possession of much information about the facts or problems of military operations .
we , therefore , will continue to leave the plans for this war to the military leaders .
the military and naval plans of the united states are made by the joint staff of the army and navy which is constantly in session in washington .
the chiefs of this staff are admiral leahy , general marshall , admiral king and general arnold .
they meet and confer regularly with representatives of the british joint staff , and with representatives of russia , china , the netherlands , poland , norway , the british dominions and other nations working in the common cause .
since this unity of operations was put into effect last january , there has been a very substantial agreement between these planners , all of whom are trained in the profession of arms -- air , sea and land -- from their early years .
as commander - in - chief i have at all times also been in substantial agreement .
as i have said before , many major decisions of strategy have been made .
one of them -- on which we have all agreed -- relates to the necessity of diverting enemy forces from russia and china to other theaters of war by new offensives against germany and japan .
an announcement of how these offensives are to be launched , and when , and where , can not be broadcast over the radio at this time .
we are celebrat(e)ing today the exploit of a bold and adventurous italian --christopher columbus -- who with the aid of spain opened up a new world where freedom and tolerance and respect for human rights and dignity provided an asylum for the oppressed of the old world .
today , the sons of the new world are fighting in lands far distant from their own america .
they are fighting to save for all mankind , including ourselves , the principles which have flourished in this new world of freedom .
we are mindful of the countless millions of people whose future liberty and whose very lives depend upon permanent victory for the united nations .
there are a few people in this country who , when the collapse of the axis begins , will tell our people that we are safe once more ; that we can tell the rest of the world to " stew in its own juice " ; that never again will we help to pull " the other fellow 's chestnuts from the fire " ; that the future of civilization can jolly well take care of itself insofar as we are concerned .
but it is useless to win battles if the cause for which we fight these battles is lost .
it is useless to win a war unless it stays won .
we , therefore , fight for the restoration and perpetuation of faith and hope and peace throughout the world .
the objective of today is clear and realistic .
it is to destroy completely the military power of germany , italy and japan to such good purpose that their threat against us and all the other united nations can not be revived a generation hence .
we are united in seeking the kind of victory that will guarantee that our grandchildren can grow and , under gods may live their lives , free from the constant threat of invasion , destruction , slavery and violent death .

since my annual message to the congress on january fourth , last , i have not addressed the general public over the air .
in the many weeks since that time the congress has devoted itself to the arduous task of formulating legislation necessary to the country 's welfare .
it has made and is making distinct progress .
before i come to any of the specific measures , however , i want to leave in your minds one clear fact .
the administration and the congress are not proceeding in any haphazard fashion in this task of government .
each of our steps has a definite relationship to every other step .
the job of creating a program for the nation 's welfare is , in some respects , like the building of a ship .
at different points on the coast where i often visit they build great seagoing ships .
when one of these ships is under construction and the steel frames have been set in the keel , it is difficult for a person who does not know ships to tell how it will finally look when it is sailing the high seas .
it may seem confused to some , but out of the multitude of detailed parts that go into the making of the structure the creation of a useful instrument for man ultimately comes .
it is that way with the making of a national policy .
the objective of the nation has greatly changed in three years .
before that time individual self - interest and group selfishness were paramount in public thinking .
the general good was at a discount .
three years of hard thinking have changed the picture .
more and more people , because of clearer thinking and a better understanding , are considering the whole rather than a mere part relating to one section or to one crop , or to one industry , or to an individual private occupation .
that is a tremendous gain for the principles of democracy .
the overwhelming majority of people in this country know how to sift the wheat from the chaff in what they hear and what they read .
they know that the process of the constructive rebuilding of america can not be done in a day or a year , but that it is being done in spite of the few who seek to confuse them and to profit by their confusion .
americans as a whole are feeling a lot better -- a lot more cheerful than for many , many years .
the most difficult place in the world to get a clear open perspective of the country as a whole is washington .
i am reminded sometimes of what president wilson once said : " so many people come to washington who know things that are not so , and so few people who know anything about what the people of the united states are thinking about . "
that is why i occasionally leave this scene of action for a few days to go fishing or back home to hyde park , so that i can have a chance to think quietly about the country as a whole . "
to get away from the trees " , as they say , " and to look at the whole forest . "
this duty of seeing the country in a long - range perspective is one which , in a very special manner , attaches to this office to which you have chosen me .
did you ever stop to think that there are , after all , only two positions in the nation that are filled by the vote of all of the voters -- the president and the vice - president ?
that makes it particularly necessary for the vice - president and for me to conceive of our duty toward the entire country .
i speak , therefore , tonight , to and of the american people as a whole .
my most immediate concern is in carrying out the purposes of the great work program just enacted by the congress .
its first objective is to put men and women now on the relief rolls to work and , incidentally , to assist materially in our already unmistakable march toward recovery .
i shall not confuse my discussion by a multitude of figures .
so many figures are quoted to prove so many things .
sometimes it depends upon what paper you read and what broadcast you hear .
therefore , let us keep our minds on two or three simple , essential facts in connection with this problem of unemployment .
it is true that while business and industry are definitely better our relief rolls are still too large .
however , for the first time in five years the relief rolls have declined instead of increased during the winter months .
they are still declining .
the simple fact is that many million more people have private work today than two years ago today or one year ago today , and every day that passes offers more chances to work for those who want to work .
in spite of the fact that unemployment remains a serious problem here as in every other nation , we have come to recognize the possibility and the necessity of certain helpful remedial measures .
these measures are of two kinds .
the first is to make provisions intended to relieve , to minimize , and to prevent future unemployment ; the second is to establish the practical means to help those who are unemployed in this present emergency .
our social security legislation is an attempt to answer the first of these questions .
our work relief program the second .
the program for social security now pending before the congress is a necessary part of the future unemployment policy of the government .
while our present and projected expenditures for work relief are wholly within the reasonable limits of our national credit resources , it is obvious that we can not continue to create governmental deficits for that purpose year after year .
we must begin now to make provision for the future .
that is why our social security program is an important part of the complete picture .
it proposes , by means of old age pensions , to help those who have reached the age of retirement to give up their jobs and thus give to the younger generation greater opportunities for work and to give to all a feeling of security as they look toward old age .
the unemployment insurance part of the legislation will not only help to guard the individual in future periods of lay - off against dependence upon relief , but it will , by sustaining purchasing power , cushion the shock of economic distress .
another helpful feature of unemployment insurance is the incentive it will give to employers to plan more carefully in order that unemployment may be prevented by the stabilizing of employment itself .
provisions for social security , however , are protections for the future .
our responsibility for the immediate necessities of the unemployed has been met by the congress through the most comprehensive work plan in the history of the nation .
our problem is to put to work three and one - half million employable persons now on the relief rolls .
it is a problem quite as much for private industry as for the government .
we are losing no time getting the government 's vast work relief program underway , and we have every reason to believe that it should be in full swing by autumn .
in directing it , i shall recognize six fundamental principles : 
 ( 1 ) the projects should be useful .
( 2 ) projects shall be of a nature that a considerable proportion of the money spent will go into wages for labor .
( 3 ) projects which promise ultimate return to the federal treasury of a considerable proportion of the costs will be sought .
( 4 ) funds allotted for each project should be actually and promptly spent and not held over until later years .
( 5 ) in all cases projects must be of a character to give employment to those on the relief rolls .
( 6 ) projects will be allocated to localities or relief areas in relation to the number of workers on relief rolls in those areas .
i next want to make it clear exactly how we shall direct the work .
( 1 ) i have set up a division of applications and information to which all proposals for the expenditure of money must go for preliminary study and consideration .
( 2 ) after the division of applications and information has sifted those projects , they will be sent to an allotment division composed of representatives of the more important governmental agencies charged with carrying on work relief projects .
the group will also include representatives of cities , and of labor , farming , banking and industry .
this allotment division will consider all of the recommendations submitted to it and such projects as they approve will be next submitted to the president who under the act is required to make final allocations .
( 3 ) the next step will be to notify the proper government agency in whose field the project falls , and also to notify another agency which i am creating -- a progress division .
this division will have the duty of coordinating the purchases of materials and supplies and of making certain that people who are employed will be taken from the relief rolls .
it will also have the responsibility of determining work payments in various localities , of making full use of existing employment services and to assist people engaged in relief work to move as rapidly as possible back into private employment when such employment is available .
moreover , this division will be charged with keeping projects moving on schedule .
( 4 ) i have felt it to be essentially wise and prudent to avoid , so far as possible , the creation of new governmental machinery for supervising this work .
the national government now has at least sixty different agencies with the staff and the experience and the competence necessary to carry on the two hundred and fifty or three hundred kinds of work that will be undertaken .
these agencies , therefore , will simply be doing on a somewhat enlarged scale the same sort of things that they have been doing .
this will make certain that the largest possible portion of the funds allotted will be spent for actually creating new work and not for building up expensive overhead organizations here in washington .
for many months preparations have been under way .
the allotment of funds for desirable projects has already begun .
the key men for the major responsibilities of this great task already have been selected .
i well realize that the country is expecting before this year is out to see the " dirt fly " , as they say , in carrying on the work , and i assure my fellow citizens that no energy will be spared in using these funds effectively to make a major attack upon the problem of unemployment .
our responsibility is to all of the people in this country .
this is a great national crusade to destroy enforced idleness which is an enemy of the human spirit generated by this depression .
our attack upon these enemies must be without stint and without discrimination .
no sectional , no political distinctions can be permitted .
it must , however , be recognized that when an enterprise of this character is extended over more than three thousand counties throughout the nation , there may be occasional instances of inefficiency , bad management , or misuse of funds .
when cases of this kind occur , there will be those , of course , who will try to tell you that the exceptional failure is characteristic of the entire endeavor .
it should be remembered that in every big job there are some imperfections .
there are chiselers in every walk of life ; there are those in every industry who are guilty of unfair practices , every profession has its black sheep , but long experience in government has taught me that the exceptional instances of wrong - doing in government are probably less numerous than in almost every other line of endeavor .
the most effective means of preventing such evils in this work relief program will be the eternal vigilance of the american people themselves .
i call upon my fellow citizens everywhere to cooperate with me in making this the most efficient and the cleanest example of public enterprise the world has ever seen .
it is time to provide a smashing answer for those cynical men who say that a democracy can not be honest and efficient .
if you will help , this can be done .
i , therefore , hope you will watch the work in every corner of this nation .
feel free to criticize .
tell me of instances where work can be done better , or where improper practices prevail .
neither you nor i want criticism conceived in a purely fault - finding or partisan spirit , but i am jealous of the right of every citizen to call to the attention of his or her government examples of how the public money can be more effectively spent for the benefit of the american people .
i now come , my friends , to a part of the remaining business before the congress .
it has under consideration many measures which provide for the rounding out of the program of economic and social reconstruction with which we have been concerned for two years .
i can mention only a few of them tonight , but i do not want my mention of specific measures to be interpreted as lack of interest in or disapproval of many other important proposals that are pending .
the national industrial recovery act expires on the sixteenth of june .
after careful consideration , i have asked the congress to extend the life of this useful agency of government .
as we have proceeded with the administration of this act , we have found from time to time more and more useful ways of promoting its purposes .
no reasonable person wants to abandon our present gains -- we must continue to protect children , to enforce minimum wages , to prevent excessive hours , to safeguard , define and enforce collective bargaining , and , while retaining fair competition , to eliminate so far as humanly possible , the kinds of unfair practices by selfish minorities which unfortunately did more than anything else to bring about the recent collapse of industries .
there is likewise pending before the congress legislation to provide for the elimination of unnecessary holding companies in the public utility field .
i consider this legislation a positive recovery measure .
power production in this country is virtually back to the 1929 peak .
the operating companies in the gas and electric utility field are by and large in good condition .
but under holding company domination the utility industry has long been hopelessly at war within itself and with public sentiment .
by far the greater part of the general decline in utility securities had occurred before i was inaugurated .
the absentee management of unnecessary holding company control has lost touch with and has lost the sympathy of the communities it pretends to serve .
even more significantly , it has given the country as a whole an uneasy apprehension of over concentrated economic power .
a business that loses the confidence of its customers and the good will of the public can not long continue to be a good risk for the investor .
this legislation will serve the investor by ending the conditions which have caused that lack of confidence and good will .
it will put the public utility operating industry on a sound basis for the future , both in its public relations and in its internal relations .
this legislation will not only in the long run result in providing lower electric and gas rates to the consumer , but it will protect the actual value and earning power of properties now owned by thousands of investors who have little protection under the old laws against what used to be called frenzied finance .
it will not destroy values .
not only business recovery , but the general economic recovery of the nation will be greatly stimulated by the enactment of legislation designed to improve the status of our transportation agencies .
there is need for legislation providing for the regulation of interstate transportation by buses and trucks , to regulate transportation by water , new provisions for strengthening our merchant marine and air transport , measures for the strengthening of the interstate commerce commission to enable it to carry out a rounded conception of the national transportation system in which the benefits of private ownership are retained , while the public stake in these important services is protected by the public 's government .
finally , the reestablishment of public confidence in the banks of the nation is one of the most hopeful results of our efforts as a nation to reestablish public confidence in private banking .
we all know that private banking actually exists by virtue of the permission of and regulation by the people as a whole , speaking through their government .
wise public policy , however , requires not only that banking be safe but that its resources be most fully utilized , in the economic life of the country .
to this end it was decided more than twenty years ago that the government should assume the responsibility of providing a means by which the credit of the nation might be controlled , not by a few private banking institutions , but by a body with public prestige and authority .
the answer to this demand was the federal reserve system .
twenty years of experience with this system have justified the efforts made to create it , but these twenty years have shown by experience definite possibilities for improvement .
certain proposals made to amend the federal reserve act deserve prompt and favorable action by the congress .
they are a minimum of wise readjustment of our federal reserve system in the light of past experience and present needs .
these measures i have mentioned are , in large part , the program which under my constitutional duty i have recommended to the congress .
they are essential factors in a rounded program for national recovery .
they contemplate the enrichment of our national life by a sound and rational ordering of its various elements and wise provisions for the protection of the weak against the strong .
never since my inauguration in march , 1933 , have i felt so unmistakably the atmosphere of recovery .
but it is more than the recovery of the material basis of our individual lives .
it is the recovery of confidence in our democratic processes and institutions .
we have survived all of the arduous burdens and the threatening dangers of a great economic calamity .
we have in the darkest moments of our national trials retained our faith in our own ability to master our destiny .
fear is vanishing and confidence is growing on every side , renewed faith in the vast possibilities of human beings to improve their material and spiritual status through the instrumentality of the democratic form of government .
that faith is receiving its just reward .
for that we can be thankful to the god who watches over america .

my friends : 
 yesterday , on june fourth , 1944 , rome fell to american and allied troops .
the first of the axis capitals is now in our hands .
one up and two to go !
it is perhaps significant that the first of these capitals to fall should have the longest history of all of them .
the story of rome goes back to the time of the foundations of our civilization .
we can still see there monuments of the time when rome and the romans controlled the whole of the then known world .
that , too , is significant , for the united nations are determined that in the future no one city and no one race will be able to control the whole of the world .
in addition to the monuments of the older times , we also see in rome the great symbol of christianity , which has reached into almost every part of the world .
there are other shrines and other churches in many places , but the churches and shrines of rome are visible symbols of the faith and determination of the early saints and martyrs that christianity should live and become universal .
and tonight ( now ) it will be a source of deep satisfaction that the freedom of the pope and the ( of ) vatican city is assured by the armies of the united nations .
it is also significant that rome has been liberated by the armed forces of many nations .
the american and british armies -- who bore the chief burdens of battle -- found at their sides our own north american neighbors , the gallant canadians .
the fighting new zealanders from the far south pacific , the courageous french and the french moroccans , the south africans , the poles and the east indians -- all of them fought with us on the bloody approaches to the city of rome .
the italians , too , forswearing a partnership in the axis which they never desired , have sent their troops to join us in our battles against the german trespassers on their soil .
the prospect of the liberation of rome meant enough to hitler and his generals to induce them to fight desperately at great cost of men and materials and with great sacrifice to their crumbling eastern line and to their western front .
no thanks are due to them if rome was spared the devastation which the germans wreaked on naples and other italian cities .
the allied generals maneuvered so skillfully that the nazis could only have stayed long enough to damage rome at the risk of losing their armies .
but rome is of course more than a military objective .
ever since before the days of the caesars , rome has stood as a symbol of authority .
rome was the republic .
rome was the empire .
rome was and is in a sense the catholic church , and rome was the capital of a united italy .
later , unfortunately , a quarter of a century ago , rome became the seat of fascism -- one of the three capitals of the axis .
for this ( a ) quarter century the italian people were enslaved .
they were ( and ) degraded by the rule of mussolini from rome .
they will mark its liberation with deep emotion .
in the north of italy , the people are still dominated and threatened by the nazi overlords and their fascist puppets .
somehow , in the back of my head , i still remember a name -- mussolini .
our victory comes at an excellent time , while our allied forces are poised for another strike at western europe -- and while the armies of other nazi soldiers nervously await our assault .
and in the meantime our gallant russian allies continue to make their power felt more and more .
from a strictly military standpoint , we had long ago accomplished certain of the main objectives of our italian campaign -- the control of the islands -- the major islands -- the control of the sea lanes of the mediterranean to shorten our combat and supply lines , and the capture of the airports , such as the great airports of foggia , south of rome , from which we have struck telling blows on the continent -- the whole of the continent all the way up to the russian front .
it would be unwise to inflate in our own minds the military importance of the capture of rome .
we shall have to push through a long period of greater effort and fiercer fighting before we get into germany itself .
the germans have retreated thousands of miles , all the way from the gates of cairo , through libya and tunisia and sicily and southern italy .
they have suffered heavy losses , but not great enough yet to cause collapse .
germany has not yet been driven to surrender .
germany has not yet been driven to the point where she will be unable to recommence world conquest a generation hence .
therefore , the victory still lies some distance ahead .
that distance will be covered in due time -- have no fear of that .
but it will be tough and it will be costly , as i have told you many , many times .
in italy the people had lived so long under the corrupt rule of mussolini that , in spite of the tinsel at the top -- you have seen the pictures of him -- their economic condition had grown steadily worse .
our troops have found starvation , malnutrition , disease , a deteriorating education and lowered public health -- all by - products of the fascist misrule .
the task of the allies in occupation has been stupendous .
we have had to start at the very bottom , assisting local governments to reform on democratic lines .
we have had to give them bread to replace that which was stolen out of their mouths by the germans .
we have had to make it possible for the italians to raise and use their own local crops .
we have to help them cleanse their schools of fascist trappings .
i think the american people as a whole approve the salvage of these human beings , who are only now learning to walk in a new atmosphere of freedom .
some of us may let our thoughts run to the financial cost of it .
essentially it is what we can call a form of relief .
and at the same time , we hope that this relief will be an investment for the future -- an investment that will pay dividends by eliminating fascism , by ( and ) ending any italian desires to start another war of aggression in the future .
and that means that they are dividends which justify such an investment , because they are additional supports for world peace .
the italian people are capable of self - government .
we do not lose sight of their virtues as a peace - loving nation .
we remember the many centuries in which the italians were leaders in the arts and sciences , enriching the lives of all mankind .
we remember the great sons of the italian people -- galileo and marconi , michelangelo and dante -- and incidentally that fearless discoverer who typifies the courage of italy -- christopher columbus .
italy can not grow in stature by seeking to build up a great militaristic empire .
italians have been overcrowded within their own territories , but they do not need to try to conquer the lands of other peoples in order to find the breath of life .
other peoples may not want to be conquered .
in the past , italians have come by the millions into ( to ) the united states .
they have been welcomed , they have prospered , they have become good citizens , community and governmental leaders .
they are not italian - americans .
they are americans -- americans of italian descent .
the italians have gone in great numbers to the other americas -- brazil and the argentine , for example -- hundreds and hundreds of thousands of them .
they have gone ( and ) to many other nations in every continent of the world , giving of their industry and their talents , and achieving success and the comfort of good living , and good citizenship .
italy should go on as a great mother nation , contributing to the culture and the progress and the goodwill of all mankind -- ( and ) developing her special talents in the arts and crafts and sciences , and preserving her historic and cultural heritage for the benefit of all peoples .
we want and expect the help of the future italy toward lasting peace .
all the other nations opposed to fascism and nazism ought to ( should ) help to give italy a chance .
the germans , after years of domination in rome , left the people in the eternal city on the verge of starvation .
we and the british will do and are doing everything we can to bring them relief .
anticipating the fall of rome , we made preparations to ship food supplies to the city , but , of course , it should be borne in mind that the needs are so great , ( and ) the transportation requirements of our armies so heavy that improvement must be gradual .
but we have already begun to save the lives of the men , women and children of rome .
this , i think , is an example of the efficiency of your machinery of war .
the magnificent ability and energy of the american people in growing the crops , building the merchant ships , in making and collecting the cargoes , in getting the supplies over thousands of miles of water , and thinking ahead to meet emergencies -- all this spells , i think , an amazing efficiency on the part of our armed forces , all the various agencies working with them , and american industry and labor as a whole .
no great effort like this can be a hundred percent perfect , but the batting average is very , very high .
and so i extend the congratulations and thanks tonight of the american people to general alexander , who has been in command of the whole italian operation ; to our general clark and general leese of the fifth and the eighth armies ; to general wilson , the supreme allied commander of the mediterranean theater , to ( and ) general devers his american deputy ; to ( lieutenant ) general eaker ; to admirals cunningham and hewitt ; and to all their brave officers and men .
may god bless them and watch over them and over all of our gallant , fighting men .

on each national day of inauguration since 1789 , the people have renewed their sense of dedication to the united states .
in washington 's day the task of the people was to create and weld together a nation .
in lincoln 's day the task of the people was to preserve that nation from disruption from within .
in this day the task of the people is to save that nation and its institutions from disruption from without .
to us there has come a time , in the midst of swift happenings , to pause for a moment and take stock  to recall what our place in history has been , and to rediscover what we are and what we may be .
if we do not , we risk the real peril of isolation , the real peril of inaction .
lives of nations are determined not by the count of years , but by the lifetime of the human spirit .
the life of a man is threescore years and ten : a little more , a little less .
the life of a nation is the fullness of the measure of its will to live .
there are men who doubt this .
there are men who believe that democracy , as a form of government and a frame of life , is limited or measured by a kind of mystical and artificial fate that , for some unexplained reason , tyranny and slavery have become the surging wave of the future  and that freedom is an ebbing tide .
but we americans know that this is not true .
eight years ago , when the life of this republic seemed frozen by a fatalistic terror , we proved that this is not true .
we were in the midst of shock  but we acted .
we acted quickly , boldly , decisively .
these later years have been living years  fruitful years for the people of this democracy .
for they have brought to us greater security and , i hope , a better understanding that life 's ideals are to be measured in other than material things .
most vital to our present and to our future is this experience of a democracy which successfully survived crisis at home ; put away many evil things ; built new structures on enduring lines ; and , through it all , maintained the fact of its democracy .
for action has been taken within the three - way framework of the constitution of the united states .
the coordinate branches of the government continue freely to function .
the bill of rights remains inviolate .
the freedom of elections is wholly maintained .
prophets of the downfall of american democracy have seen their dire predictions come to naught .
no , democracy is not dying .
we know it because we have seen it revive  and grow .
we know it can not die  because it is built on the unhampered 
 initiative of individual men and women joined together in a common 
 enterprise  an enterprise undertaken and carried through by the free expression of a free majority .
we know it because democracy alone , of all forms of government , enlists the full force of men 's enlightened will .
we know it because democracy alone has constructed an unlimited civilization capable of infinite progress in the improvement of human life .
we know it because , if we look below the surface , we sense it still spreading on every continent  for it is the most humane , the most advanced , and in the end the most unconquerable of all forms of human society .
a nation , like a person , has a body  a body that must be fed and clothed and housed , invigorated and rested , in a manner that measures up to the standards of our time .
a nation , like a person , has a mind  a mind that must be kept informed and alert , that must know itself , that understands the hopes and the needs of its neighbors  all the other nations that live within the narrowing circle of the world .
a nation , like a person , has something deeper , something more permanent , something larger than the sum of all its parts .
it is that something which matters most to its future  which calls forth the most sacred guarding of its present .
it is a thing for which we find it difficult  even impossible to hit upon a single , simple word .
and yet , we all understand what it is  the spirit - the faith of america .
it is the product of centuries .
it was born in the multitudes of those who came from many lands - some of high degree , but mostly plain people  who sought here , early and late , to find freedom more freely .
the democratic aspiration is no mere recent phase in human history .
it is human history .
it permeated the ancient life of early peoples .
it blazed anew in the middle ages .
it was written in magna charta .
in the americas its impact has been irresistible .
america has been the new world in all tongues , and to all peoples , not because this continent was a new - found land , but because all those who came here believed they could create upon this continent a new life  a life that should be new in freedom .
its vitality was written into our own mayflower compact , into the declaration of independence , into the constitution of the united states , into the gettysburg address .
those who first came here to carry out the longings of their spirit , and the millions who followed , and the stock that sprang from them  all have moved forward constantly and consistently toward an ideal which in itself has gained stature and clarity with each generation .
the hopes of the republic can not forever tolerate either undeserved poverty or self - serving wealth .
we know that we still have far to go ; that we must more greatly build the security and the opportunity and the knowledge of every citizen , in the measure justified by the resources and the capacity of the land .
but it is not enough to achieve these purposes alone .
it is not enough to clothe and feed the body of this nation , to instruct , and inform its mind .
for there is also the spirit .
and of the three , the greatest is the spirit .
without the body and the mind , as all men know , the nation could not live .
but if the spirit of america were killed , even though the nation 's body and mind , constricted in an alien world , lived on , the america we know would have perished .
that spirit  that faith  speaks to us in our daily lives in ways often unnoticed , because they seem so obvious .
it speaks to us here in the capital of the nation .
it speaks to us through the processes of governing in the sovereignties of 48 states .
it speaks to us in our counties , in our cities , in our towns , and in our villages .
it speaks to us from the other nations of the hemisphere , and from those across the seas  the enslaved , as well as the free .
sometimes we fail to hear or heed these voices of freedom because to us the privilege of our freedom is such an old , old story .
the destiny of america was proclaimed in words of prophecy spoken by our first president in his first inaugural in 1789words almost directed , it 
 would seem , to this year of 1941 : " the preservation of the sacred fire of 
 liberty and the destiny of the republican model of government are justly 
 considered . . .
deeply , . . .
finally , staked on the experiment intrusted to 
 the hands of the american people . "
if you and i in this later day lose that sacred fire  if we let it be smothered with doubt and fear  then we shall reject the destiny which washington strove so valiantly and so triumphantly to establish .
the preservation of the spirit and faith of the nation does , and will , furnish the highest justification for every sacrifice that we may make in the cause of national defense .
in the face of great perils never before encountered , our strong purpose is to protect and to perpetuate the integrity of democracy .
for this we muster the spirit of america , and the faith of america .
we do not retreat .
we are not content to stand still .
as americans , we go forward , in the service of our country , by the will of god .

on a sunday night a week after my inauguration i used the radio to tell you about the banking crisis and the measures we were taking to meet it .
i think that in that way i made clear to the country various facts that might otherwise have been misunderstood and in general provided a means of understanding which did much to restore confidence .
tonight , eight weeks later , i come for the second time to give you my report -- in the same spirit and by the same means to tell you about what we have been doing and what we are planning to do .
two months ago we were facing serious problems .
the country was dying by inches .
it was dying because trade and commerce had declined to dangerously low levels ; prices for basic commodities were such as to destroy the value of the assets of national institutions such as banks , savings banks , insurance companies , and others .
these institutions , because of their great needs , were foreclosing mortgages , calling loans , refusing credit .
thus there was actually in process of destruction the property of millions of people who had borrowed money on that property in terms of dollars which had had an entirely different value from the level of march , 1933 .
that situation in that crisis did not call for any complicated consideration of economic panaceas or fancy plans .
we were faced by a condition and not a theory .
there were just two alternatives : the first was to allow the foreclosures to continue , credit to be withheld and money to go into hiding , and thus forcing liquidation and bankruptcy of banks , railroads and insurance companies and a recapitalizing of all business and all property on a lower level .
this alternative meant a continuation of what is loosely called " deflation " , the net result of which would have been extraordinary hardship on all property owners and , incidentally , extraordinary hardships on all persons working for wages through an increase in unemployment and a further reduction of the wage scale .
it is easy to see that the result of this course would have not only economic effects of a very serious nature but social results that might bring incalculable harm .
even before i was inaugurated i came to the conclusion that such a policy was too much to ask the american people to bear .
it involved not only a further loss of homes , farms , savings and wages but also a loss of spiritual values -- the loss of that sense of security for the present and the future so necessary to the peace and contentment of the individual and of his family .
when you destroy these things you will find it difficult to establish confidence of any sort in the future .
it was clear that mere appeals from washington for confidence and the mere lending of more money to shaky institutions could not stop this downward course .
a prompt program applied as quickly as possible seemed to me not only justified but imperative to our national security .
the congress , and when i say congress i mean the members of both political parties , fully understood this and gave me generous and intelligent support .
the members of congress realized that the methods of normal times had to be replaced in the emergency by measures which were suited to the serious and pressing requirements of the moment .
there was no actual surrender of power , congress still retained its constitutional authority and no one has the slightest desire to change the balance of these powers .
the function of congress is to decide what has to be done and to select the appropriate agency to carry out its will .
this policy it has strictly adhered to .
the only thing that has been happening has been to designate the president as the agency to carry out certain of the purposes of the congress .
this was constitutional and in keeping with the past american tradition .
the legislation which has been passed or in the process of enactment can properly be considered as part of a well - grounded plan .
first , we are giving opportunity of employment to one - quarter of a million of the unemployed , especially the young men who have dependents , to go into the forestry and flood prevention work .
this is a big task because it means feeding , clothing and caring for nearly twice as many men as we have in the regular army itself .
in creating this civilian conservation corps we are killing two birds with one stone .
we are clearly enhancing the value of our natural resources and second , we are relieving an appreciable amount of actual distress .
this great group of men have entered upon their work on a purely voluntary basis , no military training is involved and we are conserving not only our natural resources but our human resources .
one of the great values to this work is the fact that it is direct and requires the intervention of very little machinery .
second , i have requested the congress and have secured action upon a proposal to put the great properties owned by our government at muscle shoals to work after long years of wasteful inaction , and with this a broad plan for the improvement of a vast area in the tennessee valley .
it will add to the comfort and happiness of hundreds of thousands of people and the incident benefits will reach the entire nation .
next , the congress is about to pass legislation that will greatly ease the mortgage distress among the farmers and the home owners of the nation , by providing for the easing of the burden of debt now bearing so heavily upon millions of our people .
our next step in seeking immediate relief is a grant of half a billion dollars to help the states , counties and municipalities in their duty to care for those who need direct and immediate relief .
the congress also passed legislation authorizing the sale of beer in such states as desired .
this has already resulted in considerable reemployment and , incidentally , has provided much needed tax revenue .
we are planning to ask the congress for legislation to enable the government to undertake public works , thus stimulating directly and indirectly the employment of many others in well - considered projects .
further legislation has been taken up which goes much more fundamentally into our economic problems .
the farm relief bill seeks by the use of several methods , alone or together , to bring about an increased return to farmers for their major farm products , seeking at the same time to prevent in the days to come disastrous over - production which so often in the past has kept farm commodity prices far below a reasonable return .
this measure provides wide powers for emergencies .
the extent of its use will depend entirely upon what the future has in store .
well - considered and conservative measures will likewise be proposed which will attempt to give to the industrial workers of the country a more fair wage return , prevent cut - throat competition and unduly long hours for labor , and at the same time to encourage each industry to prevent over - production .
our railroad bill falls into the same class because it seeks to provide and make certain definite planning by the railroads themselves , with the assistance of the government , to eliminate the duplication and waste that is now resulting in railroad receiverships and continuing operating deficits .
i am certain that the people of this country understand and approve the broad purposes behind these new governmental policies relating to agriculture and industry and transportation .
we found ourselves faced with more agricultural products than we could possibly consume ourselves and surpluses which other nations did not have the cash to buy from us except at prices ruinously low .
we have found our factories able to turn out more goods than we could possibly consume , and at the same time we were faced with a falling export demand .
we found ourselves with more facilities to transport goods and crops than there were goods and crops to be transported .
all of this has been caused in large part by a complete lack of planning and a complete failure to understand the danger signals that have been flying ever since the close of the world war .
the people of this country have been erroneously encouraged to believe that they could keep on increasing the output of farm and factory indefinitely and that some magician would find ways and means for that increased output to be consumed with reasonable profit to the producer .
today we have reason to believe that things are a little better than they were two months ago .
industry has picked up , railroads are carrying more freight , farm prices are better , but i am not going to indulge in issuing proclamations of over enthusiastic assurance .
we can not bally - ho ourselves back to prosperity .
i am going to be honest at all times with the people of the country .
i do not want the people of this country to take the foolish course of letting this improvement come back on another speculative wave .
i do not want the people to believe that because of unjustified optimism we can resume the ruinous practice of increasing our crop output and our factory output in the hope that a kind providence will find buyers at high prices .
such a course may bring us immediate and false prosperity but it will be the kind of prosperity that will lead us into another tailspin .
it is wholly wrong to call the measure that we have taken government control of farming , control of industry , and control of transportation .
it is rather a partnership between government and farming and industry and transportation , not partnership in profits , for the profits would still go to the citizens , but rather a partnership in planning and partnership to see that the plans are carried out .
let me illustrate with an example .
take the cotton goods industry .
it is probably true that ninety per cent of the cotton manufacturers would agree to eliminate starvation wages , would agree to stop long hours of employment , would agree to stop child labor , would agree to prevent an overproduction that would result in unsalable surpluses .
but , what good is such an agreement if the other ten per cent of cotton manufacturers pay starvation wages , require long hours , employ children in their mills and turn out burdensome surpluses ?
the unfair ten per cent could produce goods so cheaply that the fair ninety per cent would be compelled to meet the unfair conditions .
here is where government comes in .
government ought to have the right and will have the right , after surveying and planning for an industry to prevent , with the assistance of the overwhelming majority of that industry , unfair practice and to enforce this agreement by the authority of government .
the so - called anti - trust laws were intended to prevent the creation of monopolies and to forbid unreasonable profits to those monopolies .
that purpose of the anti - trust laws must be continued , but these laws were never intended to encourage the kind of unfair competition that results in long hours , starvation wages and overproduction .
the same principle applies to farm products and to transportation and every other field of organized private industry .
we are working toward a definite goal , which is to prevent the return of conditions which came very close to destroying what we call modern civilization .
the actual accomplishment of our purpose can not be attained in a day .
our policies are wholly within purposes for which our american constitutional government was established 150 years ago .
i know that the people of this country will understand this and will also understand the spirit in which we are undertaking this policy .
i do not deny that we may make mistakes of procedure as we carry out the policy .
i have no expectation of making a hit every time i come to bat .
what i seek is the highest possible batting average , not only for myself but for the team .
theodore roosevelt once said to me : " if i can be right 75 percent of the time i shall come up to the fullest measure of my hopes . "
much has been said of late about federal finances and inflation , the gold standard , etc .
let me make the facts very simple and my policy very clear .
in the first place , government credit and government currency are really one and the same thing .
behind government bonds there is only a promise to pay .
behind government currency we have , in addition to the promise to pay , a reserve of gold and a small reserve of silver .
in this connection it is worth while remembering that in the past the government has agreed to redeem nearly thirty billions of its debts and its currency in gold , and private corporations in this country have agreed to redeem another sixty or seventy billions of securities and mortgages in gold .
the government and private corporations were making these agreements when they knew full well that all of the gold in the united states amounted to only between three and four billions and that all of the gold in all of the world amounted to only about eleven billions .
if the holders of these promises to pay started in to demand gold the first comers would get gold for a few days and they would amount to about one twenty - fifth of the holders of the securities and the currency .
the other twenty - four people out of twenty - five , who did not happen to be at the top of the line , would be told politely that there was no more gold left .
we have decided to treat all twenty - five in the same way in the interest of justice and the exercise of the constitutional powers of this government .
we have placed every one on the same basis in order that the general good may be preserved .
nevertheless , gold , and to a partial extent silver , are perfectly good bases for currency and that is why i decided not to let any of the gold now in the country go out of it .
a series of conditions arose three weeks ago which very readily might have meant , first , a drain on our gold by foreign countries , and secondly , as a result of that , a flight of american capital , in the form of gold , out of our country .
it is not exaggerating the possibility to tell you that such an occurrence might well have taken from us the major part of our gold reserve and resulted in such a further weakening of our government and private credit as to bring on actual panic conditions and the complete stoppage of the wheels of industry .
the administration has the definite objective of raising commodity prices to such an extent that those who have borrowed money will , on the average , be able to repay that money in the same kind of dollar which they borrowed .
we do not seek to let them get such a cheap dollar that they will be able to pay bock a great deal less than they borrowed .
in other words , we seek to correct a wrong and not to create another wrong in the opposite direction .
that is why powers are being given to the administration to provide , if necessary , for an enlargement of credit , in order to correct the existing wrong .
these powers will be used when , as , and if it may be necessary to accomplish the purpose .
hand in hand with the domestic situation which , of course , is our first concern , is the world situation , and i want to emphasize to you that the domestic situation is inevitably and deeply tied in with the conditions in all of the other nations of the world .
in other words , we can get , in all probability , a fair measure of prosperity return in the united states , but it will not be permanent unless we get a return to prosperity all over the world .
in the conferences which we have held and are holding with the leaders of other nations , we are seeking four great objectives .
first , a general reduction of armaments and through this the removal of the fear of invasion and armed attack , and , at the same time , a reduction in armament costs , in order to help in the balancing of government budgets and the reduction of taxation .
secondly , a cutting down of the trade barriers , in order to re - start the flow of exchange of crops and goods between nations .
third , the setting up of a stabilization of currencies , in order that trade can make contracts ahead .
fourth , the reestablishment of friendly relations and greater confidence between all nations .
our foreign visitors these past three weeks have responded to these purposes in a very helpful way .
all of the nations have suffered alike in this great depression .
they have all reached the conclusion that each can best be helped by the common action of all .
it is in this spirit that our visitors have met with us and discussed our common problems .
the international conference that lies before us must succeed .
the future of the world demands it and we have each of us pledged ourselves to the best joint efforts to this end .
to you , the people of this country , all of us , the members of the congress and the members of this administration owe a profound debt of gratitude .
throughout the depression you have been patient .
you have granted us wide powers , you have encouraged us with a wide - spread approval of our purposes .
every ounce of strength and every resource at our command we have devoted to the end of justifying your confidence .
we are encouraged to believe that a wise and sensible beginning has been made .
in the present spirit of mutual confidence and mutual encouragement we go forward .

senator wagner , governor lehman , ladies and gentlemen : 
 on the eve of a national election , it is well for us to stop for a moment and analyze calmly and without prejudice the effect on our nation of a victory by either of the major political parties .
the problem of the electorate is far deeper , far more vital than the continuance in the presidency of any individual .
for the greater issue goes beyond units of humanity -- it goes to humanity itself .
in 1932 the issue was the restoration of american democracy ; and the american people were in a mood to win .
they did win .
in 1936 the issue is the preservation of their victory .
again they are in a mood to win .
again they will win .
more than four years ago in accepting the democratic nomination in chicago , i said : " give me your help not to win votes alone , but to win in this crusade to restore america to its own people . "
the banners of that crusade still fly in the van of a nation that is on the march .
it is needless to repeat the details of the program which this administration has been hammering out on the anvils of experience .
no amount of misrepresentation or statistical contortion can conceal or blur or smear that record .
neither the attacks of unscrupulous enemies nor the exaggerations of over - zealous friends will serve to mislead the american people .
what was our hope in 1932 ?
above all other things the american people wanted peace .
they wanted peace of mind instead of gnawing fear .
first , they sought escape from the personal terror which had stalked them for three years .
they wanted the peace that comes from security in their homes : safety for their savings , permanence in their jobs , a fair profit from their enterprise .
next , they wanted peace in the community , the peace that springs from the ability to meet the needs of community life : schools , playgrounds , parks , sanitation , highways -- those things which are expected of solvent local government .
they sought escape from disintegration and bankruptcy in local and state affairs .
they also sought peace within the nation : protection of their currency , fairer wages , the ending of long hours of toil , the abolition of child labor , the elimination of wild - cat speculation , the safety of their children from kidnappers .
and , finally , they sought peace with other nations -- peace in a world of unrest .
the nation knows that i hate war , and i know that the nation hates war .
i submit to you a record of peace ; and on that record a well - founded expectation for future peace -- peace for the individual , peace for the community , peace for the nation , and peace with the world .
tonight i call the roll -- the roll of honor of those who stood with us in 1932 and still stand with us today .
written on it are the names of millions who never had a chance -- men at starvation wages , women in sweatshops , children at looms .
written on it are the names of those who despaired , young men and young women for whom opportunity had become a will - o'-the - wisp .
written on it are the names of farmers whose acres yielded only bitterness , business men whose books were portents of disaster , home owners who were faced with eviction , frugal citizens whose savings were insecure .
written there in large letters are the names of countless other americans of all parties and all faiths , americans who had eyes to see and hearts to understand , whose consciences were burdened because too many of their fellows were burdened , who looked on these things four years ago and said , " this can be changed .
we will change it . "
we still lead that army in 1936 .
they stood with us then because in 1932 they believed .
they stand with us today because in 1936 they know .
and with them stand millions of new recruits who have come to know .
their hopes have become our record .
we have not come this far without a struggle and i assure you we can not go further without a struggle .
for twelve years this nation was afflicted with hear - nothing , see - nothing , do - nothing government .
the nation looked to government but the government looked away .
nine mocking years with the golden calf and three long years of the scourge !
nine crazy years at the ticker and three long years in the breadlines !
nine mad years of mirage and three long years of despair !
powerful influences strive today to restore that kind of government with its doctrine that that government is best which is most indifferent .
for nearly four years you have had an administration which instead of twirling its thumbs has rolled up its sleeves .
we will keep our sleeves rolled up .
we had to struggle with the old enemies of peace -- business and financial monopoly , speculation , reckless banking , class antagonism , sectionalism , war profiteering .
they had begun to consider the government of the united states as a mere appendage to their own affairs .
we know now that government by organized money is just as dangerous as government by organized mob .
never before in all our history have these forces been so united against one candidate as they stand today .
they are unanimous in their hate for me -- and i welcome their hatred .
i should like to have it said of my first administration that in it the forces of selfishness and of lust for power met their match .
i should like to have it said of my second administration that in it these forces met their master .
the american people know from a four - year record that today there is only one entrance to the white house -- by the front door .
since march 4 , 1933 , there has been only one pass - key to the white house .
i have carried that key in my pocket .
it is there tonight .
so long as i am president , it will remain in my pocket .
those who used to have pass - keys are not happy .
some of them are desperate .
only desperate men with their backs to the wall would descend so far below the level of decent citizenship as to foster the current pay - envelope campaign against america 's working people .
only reckless men , heedless of consequences , would risk the disruption of the hope for a new peace between worker and employer by returning to the tactics of the labor spy .
here is an amazing paradox !
the very employers and politicians and publishers who talk most loudly of class antagonism and the destruction of the american system now undermine that system by this attempt to coerce the votes of the wage earners of this country .
it is the 1936 version of the old threat to close down the factory or the office if a particular candidate does not win .
it is an old strategy of tyrants to delude their victims into fighting their battles for them .
every message in a pay envelope , even if it is the truth , is a command to vote according to the will of the employer .
but this propaganda is worse -- it is deceit .
they tell the worker his wage will be reduced by a contribution to some vague form of old - age insurance .
they carefully conceal from him the fact that for every dollar of premium he pays for that insurance , the employer pays another dollar .
that omission is deceit .
they carefully conceal from him the fact that under the federal law , he receives another insurance policy to help him if he loses his job , and that the premium of that policy is paid 100 percent by the employer and not one cent by the worker .
they do not tell him that the insurance policy that is bought for him is far more favorable to him than any policy that any private insurance company could afford to issue .
that omission is deceit .
they imply to him that he pays all the cost of both forms of insurance .
they carefully conceal from him the fact that for every dollar put up by him his employer puts up three dollars three for one .
and that omission is deceit .
but they are guilty of more than deceit .
when they imply that the reserves thus created against both these policies will be stolen by some future congress , diverted to some wholly foreign purpose , they attack the integrity and honor of american government itself .
those who suggest that , are already aliens to the spirit of american democracy .
let them emigrate and try their lot under some foreign flag in which they have more confidence .
the fraudulent nature of this attempt is well shown by the record of votes on the passage of the social security act .
in addition to an overwhelming majority of democrats in both houses , seventy - seven republican representatives voted for it and only eighteen against it and fifteen republican senators voted for it and only five against it .
where does this last - minute drive of the republican leadership leave these republican representatives and senators who helped enact this law ?
i am sure the vast majority of law - abiding businessmen who are not parties to this propaganda fully appreciate the extent of the threat to honest business contained in this coercion .
i have expressed indignation at this form of campaigning and i am confident that the overwhelming majority of employers , workers and the general public share that indignation and will show it at the polls on tuesday next .
aside from this phase of it , i prefer to remember this campaign not as bitter but only as hard - fought .
there should be no bitterness or hate where the sole thought is the welfare of the united states of america .
no man can occupy the office of president without realizing that he is president of all the people .
it is because i have sought to think in terms of the whole nation that i am confident that today , just as four years ago , the people want more than promises .
our vision for the future contains more than promises .
this is our answer to those who , silent about their own plans , ask us to state our objectives .
of course we will continue to seek to improve working conditions for the workers of america -- to reduce hours over - long , to increase wages that spell starvation , to end the labor of children , to wipe out sweatshops .
of course we will continue every effort to end monopoly in business , to support collective bargaining , to stop unfair competition , to abolish dishonorable trade practices .
for all these we have only just begun to fight .
of course we will continue to work for cheaper electricity in the homes and on the farms of america , for better and cheaper transportation , for low interest rates , for sounder home financing , for better banking , for the regulation of security issues , for reciprocal trade among nations , for the wiping out of slums .
for all these we have only just begun to fight .
of course we will continue our efforts in behalf of the farmers of america .
with their continued cooperation we will do all in our power to end the piling up of huge surpluses which spelled ruinous prices for their crops .
we will persist in successful action for better land use , for reforestation , for the conservation of water all the way from its source to the sea , for drought and flood control , for better marketing facilities for farm commodities , for a definite reduction of farm tenancy , for encouragement of farmer cooperatives , for crop insurance and a stable food supply .
for all these we have only just begun to fight .
of course we will provide useful work for the needy unemployed ; we prefer useful work to the pauperism of a dole .
here and now i want to make myself clear about those who disparage their fellow citizens on the relief rolls .
they say that those on relief are not merely jobless -- that they are worthless .
their solution for the relief problem is to end relief -- to purge the rolls by starvation .
to use the language of the stock broker , our needy unemployed would be cared for when , as , and if some fairy godmother should happen on the scene .
you and i will continue to refuse to accept that estimate of our unemployed fellow americans .
your government is still on the same side of the street with the good samaritan and not with those who pass by on the other side .
again -- what of our objectives ?
of course we will continue our efforts for young men and women so that they may obtain an education and an opportunity to put it to use .
of course we will continue our help for the crippled , for the blind , for the mothers , our insurance for the unemployed , our security for the aged .
of course we will continue to protect the consumer against unnecessary price spreads , against the costs that are added by monopoly and speculation .
we will continue our successful efforts to increase his purchasing power and to keep it constant .
for these things , too , and for a multitude of others like them , we have only just begun to fight .
all this -- all these objectives -- spell peace at home .
all our actions , all our ideals , spell also peace with other nations .
today there is war and rumor of war .
we want none of it .
but while we guard our shores against threats of war , we will continue to remove the causes of unrest and antagonism at home which might make our people easier victims to those for whom foreign war is profitable .
you know well that those who stand to profit by war are not on our side in this campaign .
" peace on earth , good will toward men " -- democracy must cling to that message .
for it is my deep conviction that democracy can not live without that true religion which gives a nation a sense of justice and of moral purpose .
above our political forums , above our market places stand the altars of our faith -- altars on which burn the fires of devotion that maintain all that is best in us and all that is best in our nation .
we have need of that devotion today .
it is that which makes it possible for government to persuade those who are mentally prepared to fight each other to go on instead , to work for and to sacrifice for each other .
that is why we need to say with the prophet : " what doth the lord require of thee -- but to do justly , to love mercy and to walk humbly with thy god . "
that is why the recovery we seek , the recovery we are winning , is more than economic .
in it are included justice and love and humility , not for ourselves as individuals alone , but for our nation .
that is the road to peace .

today i sent my annual message to the congress , as required by the constitution .
it has been my custom to deliver these annual messages in person , and they have been broadcast to the nation .
i intended to follow this same custom this year .
but , like a great many other people , i have had the " flu " and , although i am practically recovered , my doctor simply would not permit me to leave the white house to go up to the capitol .
only a few of the newspapers of the united states can print the message in full , and i am anxious that the american people be given an opportunity to hear what i have recommended to the congress for this very fateful year in our history -- and the reasons for those recommendations .
here is what i said : 
 this nation in the past two years has become an active partner in the world 's greatest war against human slavery .
we have joined with like - minded people in order to defend ourselves in a world that has been gravely threatened with gangster rule .
but i do not think that any of us americans can be content with mere survival .
sacrifices that we and our allies are making impose upon us all a sacred obligation to see to it that out of this war we and our children will gain something better than mere survival .
we are united in determination that this war shall not be followed by another interim which leads to new disaster -- that we shall not repeat the tragic errors of ostrich isolationism .
when mr. hull went to moscow in october , when i went to cairo and teheran in november , we knew that we were in agreement with our allies in our common determination to fight and win this war .
there were many vital questions concerning the future peace , and they were discussed in an atmosphere of complete candor and harmony .
in the last war such discussions , such meetings , did not even begin until the shooting had stopped and the delegates began to assemble at the peace table .
there had been no previous opportunities for man - to - man discussions which lead to meetings of minds .
and the result was a peace which was not a peace .
and right here i want to address a word or two to some suspicious souls who are fearful that mr. hull or i have made " commitments " for the future which might pledge this nation to secret treaties , or to enacting the role of a world santa claus .
of course , we made some commitments .
we most certainly committed ourselves to very large and very specific military plans which require the use of all allied forces to bring about the defeat of our enemies at the earliest possible time .
but there were no secret treaties or political or financial commitments .
the one supreme objective for the future , which we discussed for each nation individually , and for all the united nations , can be summed up in one word : security .
and that means not only physical security which provides safety from attacks by aggressors .
it means also economic security , social security , moral security -- in a family of nations .
in the plain down - to - earth talks that i had with the generalissimo and marshal stalin and prime minister churchill , it was abundantly clear that they are all most deeply interested in the resumption of peaceful progress by their own peoples -- progress toward a better life .
all our allies have learned by experience -- bitter experience that real development will not be possible if they are to be diverted from their purpose by repeated wars -- or even threats of war .
the best interests of each nation , large and small , demand that all freedom - loving nations shall join together in a just and durable system of peace .
in the present world situation , evidenced by the actions of germany , and italy and japan , unquestioned military control over the disturbers of the peace is as necessary among nations as it is among citizens in any community .
and an equally basic essential to peace -- permanent peace -- is a decent standard of living for all individual men and women and children in all nations .
freedom from fear is eternally linked with freedom from want .
there are people who burrow -- burrow through the nation like unseeing moles , and attempt to spread the suspicion that if other nations are encouraged to raise their standards of living , our own american standard of living must of necessity be depressed .
the fact is the very contrary .
it has been shown time and again that if the standard of living of any country goes up , so does its purchasing power -- and that such a rise encourages a better standard of living in neighboring countries with whom it trades .
that is just plain common sense -- and is the kind of plain common sense that provided the basis for our discussions at moscow , and cairo and teheran .
returning from my journeying , i must confess to a sense of being " let down " when i found many evidences of faulty perspectives here in washington .
the faulty perspective consists in over - emphasizing lesser problems and thereby under - emphasizing the first and greatest problem .
the overwhelming majority of our people have met the demands of this war with magnificent courage and a great deal of understanding .
they have accepted inconveniences ; they have accepted hardships ; they have accepted tragic sacrifices .
however , while the majority goes on about its great work without complaint , we all know that a noisy minority maintains an uproar , an uproar of demands for special favors for special groups .
there are pests who swarm through the lobbies of the congress and the cocktail bars of washington , representing these special groups as opposed to the basic interests of the nation as a whole .
they have come to look upon the war primarily as a chance to make profits for themselves at the expense of their neighbors -- profits in money or profits in terms of political or social preferment .
such selfish agitation can be and is highly dangerous in wartime .
it creates confusion .
it damages morale .
it hampers our national effort .
it prolongs the war .
in this war , we have been compelled to learn how interdependent upon each other are all groups and sections of the whole population of america .
increased food costs , for example , will bring new demands for wage increases from all war workers , which will in turn raise all prices of all things including those things which the farmers themselves have to buy .
increased wages or prices will each in turn produce the same results .
they all have a particularly disastrous result on all fixed income groups .
and i hope you will remember that all of us in this government , including myself , represent the fixed income group just as much as we represent business owners , or workers or farmers .
this group of fixed - income people include : teachers , and clergy , and policemen , and firemen , and widows and minors who are on fixed incomes , wives and dependents of our soldiers and sailors , and old age pensioners .
they and their families add up to more than a quarter of our 130 million people .
they have few or no high pressure representatives at the capitol .
and in a period of gross inflation they would be the worst sufferers .
let us give them an occasional thought .
if ever there was a time to subordinate individual or group selfishness for the national good , that time is now .
disunity at home , and bickering , self - seeking partisanship , stoppages of work , inflation , business as usual , politics as usual , luxury as usual -- and sometimes a failure to tell the whole truth -- these are the influences which can undermine the morale of the brave men ready to die at the front for us here .
those who are doing most of the complaining , i do not think that they are deliberately striving to sabotage the national war effort .
they are laboring under the delusion that the time is past when we must make prodigious sacrifices -- that the war is already won and we can begin to slacken off .
but the dangerous folly of that point of view can be measured by the distance that separates our troops from their ultimate objectives in berlin and tokyo -- and by the sum of all the perils that lie along the way .
over confidence and complacency are among our deadliest of all enemies .
and that attitude on the part of anyone -- government or management or labor -- can lengthen this war .
it can kill american boys .
let us remember the lessons of 1918 .
in the summer of that year the tide turned in favor of the allies .
but this government did not relax , nor did the american people .
in fact , our nation 's effort was stepped up .
in august , 1918 , the draft age limits were broadened from 21 to 31 all the way to 18 to 45 .
the president called for " force to the utmost , " and his call was heeded .
and in november , only three months later , germany surrendered .
that is the way to fight and win a war -- all out and not with half - an - eye on the battlefronts abroad and the other eye - and - a - half on personal selfish , or political interests here at home .
therefore , in order to concentrate all of our energies , all of our resources on winning this war , and to maintain a fair and stable economy at home , i recommend that the congress adopt : 
 first , a realistic and simplified tax law -- which will tax all unreasonable profits , both individual and corporate , and reduce the ultimate cost of the war to our sons and our daughters .
the tax bill now under consideration by the congress does not begin to meet this test .
secondly , a continuation of the law for the renegotiations of war contracts -- which will prevent exorbitant profits and assure fair prices to the government .
for two long years i have pleaded with the congress to take undue profits out of war .
third , a cost of food law -- which will enable the government to place a reasonable floor under the prices the farmer may expect for his production ; and to place a ceiling on the prices the consumer will have to pay for the necessary food he buys .
this should apply , as i have intimated , to necessities only ; and this will require public funds to carry it out .
it will cost in appropriations about one percent of the present annual cost of the war .
fourth , an early re - enactment of the stabilization statute of october 1942 .
this expires this year , june 30 , 1944 , and if it is not extended well in advance , the country might just as well expect price chaos by summertime .
we can not have stabilization by wishful thinking .
we must take positive action to maintain the integrity of the american dollar .
and fifth , a national service law -- which , for the duration of the war , will prevent strikes , and , with certain appropriate exceptions , will make available for war production or for any other essential services every able - bodied adult in this whole nation .
these five measures together form a just and equitable whole .
i would not recommend a national service law unless the other laws were passed to keep down the cost of living , to share equitably the burdens of taxation , to hold the stabilization line , and to prevent undue profits .
the federal government already has the basic power to draft capital and property of all kinds for war purposes on a basis of just compensation .
and , as you know , i have for three years hesitated to recommend a national service act .
today , however , with all the experience we have behind us and with us , i am convinced of its necessity .
although i believe that we and our allies can win the war without such a measure , i am certain that nothing less than total mobilization of all our resources of manpower and capital will guarantee an earlier victory , and reduce the toll of suffering and sorrow and blood .
as some of my advisers wrote me the other day : 
 " when the very life of the nation is in peril the responsibility for service is common to all men and women .
in such a time there can be no discrimination between the men and women who are assigned by the government to its defense at the battlefront and the men and women assigned to producing the vital materials that are essential to successful military operations .
a prompt enactment of a national service law would be merely an expression of the universality of this american responsibility . "
i believe the country will agree that those statements are the solemn truth .
national service is the most democratic way to wage a war .
like selective service for the armed forces , it rests on the obligation of each citizen to serve his nation to his utmost where he is best qualified .
it does not mean reduction in wages .
it does not mean loss of retirement and seniority rights and benefits .
it does not mean that any substantial numbers of war workers will be disturbed in their present jobs .
let this fact be wholly clear .
there are millions of american men and women who are not in this war at all .
that is not because they do not want to be in it .
but they want to know where they can best do their share .
national service provides that direction .
i know that all civilian war workers will be glad to be able to say many years hence to their grandchildren : " yes , i , too , was in service in the great war .
i was on duty in an airplane factory , and i helped to make hundreds of fighting planes .
the government told me that in doing that i was performing my most useful work in the service of my country . "
it is argued that we have passed the stage in the war where national service is necessary .
but our soldiers and sailors know that this is not true .
we are going forward on a long , rough road -- and , in all journeys , the last miles are the hardest .
and it is for that final effort -- for the total defeat of our enemies -- that we must mobilize our total resources .
the national war program calls for the employment of more people in 1944 than in 1943 .
and it is my conviction that the american people will welcome this win - the - war measure which is based on the eternally just principle of " fair for one , fair for all . "
it will give our people at home the assurance that they are standing four - square behind our soldiers and sailors .
and it will give our enemies demoralizing assurance that we mean business -- that we , 130 million americans , are on the march to rome , and berlin and tokyo .
i hope that the congress will recognize that , although this is a political year , national service is an issue which transcends politics .
great power must be used for great purposes .
as to the machinery for this measure , the congress itself should determine its nature -- as long as it is wholly non - partisan in its makeup .
several alleged reasons have prevented the enactment of legislation which would preserve for our soldiers and sailors and marines the fundamental prerogative of citizenship -- in other words , the right to vote .
no amount of legalistic argument can becloud this issue in the eyes of these ten million american citizens .
surely the signers of the constitution did not intend a document which , even in wartime , would be construed to take away the franchise of any of those who are fighting to preserve the constitution itself .
our soldiers and sailors and marines know that the overwhelming majority of them will be deprived of the opportunity to vote , if the voting machinery is left exclusively to the states under existing state laws -- and that there is no likelihood of these laws being changed in time to enable them to vote at the next election .
the army and navy have reported that it will be impossible effectively to administer 48 different soldier - voting laws .
it is the duty of the congress to remove this unjustifiable discrimination against the men and women in our armed forces -- and to do it just as quickly as possible .
it is our duty now to begin to lay the plans and determine the strategy .
more than the winning of the war , it is time to begin plans and determine the strategy for winning a lasting peace and the establishment of an american standard of living higher than ever known before .
this republic had its beginning , and grew to its present strength , under the protection of certain inalienable political rights -- among them the right of free speech , free press , free worship , trial by jury , freedom from unreasonable searches and seizures .
they were our rights to life and liberty .
we have come to a clear realization of the fact , however , that true individual freedom can not exist without economic security and independence . "
necessitous men are not free men . "
people who are hungry , people who are out of a job are the stuff of which dictatorships are made .
in our day these economic truths have become accepted as self - evident .
we have accepted , so to speak , a second bill of rights under which a new basis of security and prosperity can be established for all -- regardless of station , or race or creed .
among these are : 
 the right to a useful and remunerative job in the industries , or shops or farms or mines of the nation ; 
 the right to earn enough to provide adequate food and clothing and recreation ; 
 the right of farmers to raise and sell their products at a return which will give them and their families a decent living ; 
 the right of every business man , large and small , to trade in an atmosphere of freedom from unfair competition and domination by monopolies at home or abroad ; 
 the right of every family to a decent home ; 
 the right to adequate medical care and the opportunity to achieve and enjoy good health ; 
 the right to adequate protection from the economic fears of old age , and sickness , and accident and unemployment ; 
 and finally , the right to a good education .
all of these rights spell security .
and after this war is won we must be prepared to move forward , in the implementation of these rights , to new goals of human happiness and well - being .
america 's own rightful place in the world depends in large part upon how fully these and similar rights have been carried into practice for all our citizens .
for unless there is security here at home there can not be lasting peace in the world .
one of the great american industrialists of our day -- a man who has rendered yeoman service to his country in this crisis -- recently emphasized the grave dangers of " rightist reaction " in this nation .
any clear - thinking business men share that concern .
indeed , if such reaction should develop -- if history were to repeat itself and we were to return to the so - called " normalcy " of the 1920s -- then it is certain that even though we shall have conquered our enemies on the battlefields abroad , we shall have yielded to the spirit of fascism here at home .
i ask the congress to explore the means for implementing this economic bill of rights -- for it is definitely the responsibility of the congress so to do , and the country knows it .
many of these problems are already before committees of the congress in the form of proposed legislation .
i shall from time to time communicate with the congress with respect to these and further proposals .
in the event that no adequate program of progress is evolved , i am certain that the nation will be conscious of the fact .
our fighting men abroad -- and their families at home -- expect such a program and have the right to insist on it .
it is to their demands that this government should pay heed , rather than to the whining demands of selfish pressure groups who seek to feather their nests while young americans are dying .
i have often said that there are no two fronts for america in this war .
there is only one front .
there is one line of unity that extends from the hearts of people at home to the men of our attacking forces in our farthest outposts .
when we speak of our total effort , we speak of the factory and the field and the mine as well as the battlefield -- we speak of the soldier and the civilian , the citizen and his government .
each and every one of them has a solemn obligation under god to serve this nation in its most critical hour -- to keep this nation great -- to make this nation greater in a better world .

my fellow americans : washington 's birthday is a most appropriate occasion for us to talk with each other about things as they are today and things as we know they shall be in the future .
for eight years , general washington and his continental army were faced continually with formidable odds and recurring defeats .
supplies and equipment were lacking .
in a sense , every winter was a valley forge .
throughout the 13 states there existed fifth columnists -- and selfish men , jealous men , fearful men , who proclaimed that washington 's cause was hopeless , and that he should ask for a negotiated peace .
washington 's conduct in those hard times has provided the model for all americans ever since -- a model of moral stamina .
he held to his course , as it had been charted in the declaration of independence .
he and the brave men who served with him knew that no man 's life or fortune was secure without freedom and free institutions .
the present great struggle has taught us increasingly that freedom of person and security of property anywhere in the world depend upon the security of the rights and obligations of liberty and justice everywhere in the world .
this war is a new kind of war .
it is different from all other wars of the past , not only in its methods and weapons but also in its geography .
it is warfare in terms of every continent , every island , every sea , every air - lane in the world .
that is the reason why i have asked you to take out and spread before you ( the ) a map of the whole earth , and to follow with me in the references which i shall make to the world - encircling battle lines of this war .
many questions will , i fear , remain unanswered tonight , but i know you will realize that i can not cover everything in any one short report to the people .
the broad oceans which have been heralded in the past as our protection from attack have become endless battlefields on which we are constantly being challenged by our enemies .
we must all understand and face the hard fact that our job now is to fight at distances which extend all the way around the globe .
we fight at these vast distances because that is where our enemies are .
until our flow of supplies gives us clear superiority we must keep on striking our enemies wherever and whenever we can meet them , even if , for a while , we have to yield ground .
actually , though , we are taking a heavy toll of the enemy every day that goes by .
we must fight at these vast distances to protect our supply lines and our lines of communication with our allies -- protect these lines from the enemies who are bending every ounce of their strength , striving against time , to cut them .
the object of the nazis and the japanese is to of course separate the united states , britain , china and russia , and to isolate them one from another , so that each will be surrounded and cut off from sources of supplies and reinforcements .
it is the old familiar axis policy of " divide and conquer . "
there are those who still think , however , in terms of the days of sailing ships .
they advise us to pull our warships and our planes and our merchant ships into our own home waters and concentrate solely on last ditch defense .
but let me illustrate what would happen if we followed such foolish advice .
look at your map .
look at the vast area of china , with its millions of fighting men .
look at the vast area of russia , with its powerful armies and proven military might .
look at the ( british isles ) islands of britain , australia , new zealand , the dutch indies , india , the near east and the continent of africa , with their ( re)sources of raw materials -- their resources of raw materials , and of peoples determined to resist axis domination .
look too at north america , central america and south america .
it is obvious what would happen if all of these great reservoirs of power were cut off from each other either by enemy action or by self - imposed isolation : ( 1 . )
first , in such a case , we could no longer send aid of any kind to china -- to the brave people who , for nearly five years , have withstood japanese assault , destroyed hundreds of thousands of japanese soldiers and vast quantities of japanese war munitions .
it is essential that we help china in her magnificent defense and in her inevitable counteroffensive -- for that is one important element in the ultimate defeat of japan . (
2 . )
secondly , if we lost communication with the southwest pacific , all of that area , including australia and new zealand and the dutch indies , would fall under japanese domination .
japan in such a case could ( then ) release great numbers of ships and men to launch attacks on a large scale against the coasts of the western hemisphere -- south america and central america , and north america -- including alaska .
at the same time , she could immediately extend her conquests ( to ) in the other direction toward india , ( and ) through the indian ocean , to africa , ( and ) to the near east and try to join forces with germany and italy . (
3 . )
third , if we were to stop sending munitions to the british and the russians in the mediterranean area , ( and ) in the persian gulf and the red sea , ( areas ) we would be helping the nazis to overrun turkey , and syria , and iraq , and persia -- that is now called iran -- egypt and the suez canal , the whole coast of north africa itself and with that inevitably the whole coast of west africa -- putting germany within easy striking distance of south america -- 1,500 miles away . (
4 . )
fourth , if by such a fatuous policy , we ceased to protect the north atlantic supply line to britain and to russia , we would help to cripple the splendid counter - offensive by russia against the nazis , and we would help to deprive britain of essential food supplies and munitions .
those americans who believed that we could live under the illusion of isolationism wanted the american eagle to imitate the tactics of the ostrich .
now , many of those same people , afraid that we may be sticking our necks out , want our national bird to be turned into a turtle .
but we prefer to retain the eagle as it is -- flying high and striking hard .
i know ( that ) i speak for the mass of the american people when i say that we reject the turtle policy and will continue increasingly the policy of carrying the war to the enemy in distant lands and distant waters -- as far away as possible from our own home grounds .
there are four main lines of communication now being traveled by our ships : the north atlantic , the south atlantic , the indian ocean and the south pacific .
these routes are not one - way streets , for the ships ( which ) that carry our troops and munitions out - bound bring back essential raw materials which we require for our own use .
the maintenance of these vital lines is a very tough job .
it is a job which requires tremendous daring , tremendous resourcefulness , and , above all , tremendous production of planes and tanks and guns and also of the ships to carry them .
and i speak again for the american people when i say that we can and will do that job .
the defense of the world - wide lines of communication demands -- compel relatively safe use by us of the sea and of the air along the various routes ; and this , in turn , depends upon control by the united nations of ( the ) many strategic bases along those routes .
control of the air involves the simultaneous use of two types of planes -- first , the long - range heavy bomber ; and , second , the light bombers , the dive bombers , the torpedo planes , ( and ) the short - range pursuit planes , all of which are essential to ( the ) cooperate with and protect(ion ) ( of ) the bases and ( of ) the bombers themselves .
heavy bombers can fly under their own power from here to the southwest pacific , either way , but the smaller planes can not .
therefore , these lighter planes have to be packed in crates and sent on board cargo ships .
look at your map again ; and you will see that the route is long -- and at many places perilous -- either across the south atlantic all the way ( a)round south africa and the cape of good hope , or from california to the east indies direct .
a vessel can make a round trip by either route in about four months , or only three round trips in a whole year .
in spite of the length , ( and ) in spite of the difficulties of this transportation , i can tell you that in two and a half months we already have a large number of bombers and pursuit planes , manned by american pilots and crews , which are now in daily contact with the enemy in the southwest pacific .
and thousands of american troops are today in that area engaged in operations not only in the air but on the ground as well .
in this battle area , japan has had an obvious initial advantage .
for she could fly even her short - range planes to the points of attack by using many stepping stones open to -- her bases in a multitude of pacific islands and also bases on the china coast , indo - china coast , and in thailand and malaya ( coasts ) .
japanese troop transports could go south from japan and from china through the narrow china sea , which can be protected by japanese planes throughout its whole length .
i ask you to look at your maps again , particularly at that portion of the pacific ocean lying west of hawaii .
before this war even started , the philippine islands were already surrounded on three sides by japanese power .
on the west , the china side , the japanese were in possession of the coast of china and the coast of indo - china which had been yielded to them by the vichy french .
on the north are the islands of japan themselves , reaching down almost to northern luzon .
on the east , are the mandated islands -- which japan had occupied exclusively , and had fortified in absolute violation of her written word .
the islands that lie between hawaii and the philippines -- these islands , hundreds of them , appear only as small dots on most maps , but do not appear at all .
but they cover a large strategic area .
guam lies in the middle of them -- a lone outpost which we have never fortified .
under the washington treaty of 1921 we had solemnly agreed not to add to the fortification of the philippines ( islands ) .
we had no safe naval bases there , so we could not use the islands for extensive naval operations .
immediately after this war started , the japanese forces moved down on either side of the philippines to numerous points south of them -- thereby completely encircling the ( islands ) philippines from north , and south , and east and west .
it is that complete encirclement , with control of the air by japanese land - based aircraft , which has prevented us from sending substantial reinforcements of men and material to the gallant defenders of the philippines .
for forty years it has always been our strategy -- a strategy born of necessity -- that in the event of a full - scale attack on the islands by japan , we should fight a delaying action , attempting to retire slowly into bataan peninsula and corregidor .
we knew that the war as a whole would have to be fought and won by a process of attrition against japan itself .
we knew all along that , with our greater resources , we could ultimately out - build japan and ultimately overwhelm her on sea , and on land and in the air .
we knew that , to obtain our objective , many varieties of operations would be necessary in areas other than the philippines .
now nothing that has occurred in the past two months has caused us to revise this basic strategy of necessity -- except that the defense put up by general macarthur has magnificently exceeded the previous estimates of endurance , and he and his men are gaining eternal glory therefore .
macarthur 's army of filipinos and americans , and the forces of the united nations in china , in burma and the netherlands east indies , are all together fulfilling the same essential task .
they are making japan pay an increasingly terrible price for her ambitious attempts to seize control of the whole ( atlantic ) asiatic world .
every japanese transport sunk off java is one less transport that they can use to carry reinforcements to their army opposing general macarthur in luzon .
it has been said that japanese gains in the philippines were made possible only by the success of their surprise attack on pearl harbor .
i tell you that this is not so .
even if the attack had not been made your map will show that it would have been a hopeless operation for us to send the fleet to the philippines through thousands of miles of ocean , while all those island bases were under the sole control of the japanese .
the consequences of the attack on pearl harbor -- serious as they were -- have been wildly exaggerated in other ways .
and these exaggerations come originally from axis propagandists ; but they have been repeated , i regret to say , by americans in and out of public life .
you and i have the utmost contempt for americans who , since pearl harbor , have whispered or announced " off the record " that there was no longer any pacific fleet -- that the fleet was all sunk or destroyed on december 7th -- that more than a thousand of our planes were destroyed on the ground .
they have suggested slyly that the government has withheld the truth about casualties -- that 11,000 or 12,000 men were killed at pearl harbor instead of the figures as officially announced .
they have even served the enemy propagandists by spreading the incredible story that shiploads of bodies of our honored american dead were about to arrive in new york harbor to be put into a common grave .
almost every axis broadcast -- berlin , rome , tokyo -- directly quotes americans who , by speech or in the press , make damnable misstatements such as these .
the american people realize that in many cases details of military operations can not be disclosed until we are absolutely certain that the announcement will not give to the enemy military information which he does not already possess .
your government has unmistakable confidence in your ability to hear the worst , without flinching or losing heart .
you must , in turn , have complete confidence that your government is keeping nothing from you except information that will help the enemy in his attempt to destroy us .
in a democracy there is always a solemn pact of truth between government and the people , but there must also always be a full use of discretion , and that word " discretion " applies to the critics of government as well .
this is war .
the american people want to know , and will be told , the general trend of how the war is going .
but they do not wish to help the enemy any more than our fighting forces do , and they will pay little attention to the rumor - mongers and the poison peddlers in our midst .
to pass from the realm of rumor and poison to the field of facts : the number of our officers and men killed in the attack on pearl harbor on december 7th was 2,340 , and the number wounded was 940 .
of all of the combatant ships based on pearl harbor -- battleships , heavy cruisers , light cruisers , aircraft carriers , destroyers and submarines -- only three ( were ) are permanently put out of commission .
very many of the ships of the pacific fleet were not even in pearl harbor .
some of those that were there were hit very slightly , and others that were damaged have either rejoined the fleet by now or are still undergoing repairs .
and when those repairs are completed , the ships will be more efficient fighting machines than they were before .
the report that we lost more than a thousand ( air)planes at pearl harbor is as baseless as the other weird rumors .
the japanese do not know just how many planes they destroyed that day , and i am not going to tell them .
but i can say that to date -- and including pearl harbor -- we have destroyed considerably more japanese planes than they have destroyed of ours .
we have most certainly suffered losses -- from hitler 's u - boats in the atlantic as well as from the japanese in the pacific -- and we shall suffer more of them before the turn of the tide .
but , speaking for the united states of america , let me say once and for all to the people of the world : we americans have been compelled to yield ground , but we will regain it .
we and the other united nations are committed to the destruction of the militarism of japan and germany .
we are daily increasing our strength .
soon , we and not our enemies , will have the offensive ; we , not they , will win the final battles ; and we , not they , will make the final peace .
conquered nations in europe know what the yoke of the nazis is like .
and the people of korea and of manchuria know in their flesh the harsh despotism of japan .
all of the people of asia know that if there is to be an honorable and decent future for any of them or any of ( for ) us , that future depends on victory by the united nations over the forces of axis enslavement .
if a just and durable peace is to be attained , or even if all of us are merely to save our own skins , there is one thought for us here at home to keep uppermost -- the fulfillment of our special task of production -- uninterrupted production .
i stress that word " uninterrupted . "
germany , italy and japan are very close to their maximum output of planes , guns , tanks and ships .
the united nations are not -- especially the united states of america .
our first job then is to build up production -- uninterrupted production -- so that the united nations can maintain control of the seas and attain control of the air -- not merely a slight superiority , but an overwhelming superiority .
on january 6th of this year , i set certain definite goals of production for airplanes , tanks , guns and ships .
the axis propagandists called them fantastic .
tonight , nearly two months later , and after a careful survey of progress by donald nelson and others charged with responsibility for our production , i can tell you that those goals will be attained .
in every part of the country , experts in production and the men and women at work in the plants are giving loyal service .
with few exceptions , labor , capital and farming realize that this is no time either to make undue profits or to gain special advantages , one over the other .
we are calling for new plants and additions -- additions to old plants .
we are calling for plant conversion to war needs .
we are seeking more men and more women to run them .
we are working longer hours .
we are coming to realize that one extra plane or extra tank or extra gun or extra ship completed tomorrow may , in a few months , turn the tide on some distant battlefield ; it may make the difference between life and death for some of our own fighting men .
we know now that if we lose this war it will be generations or even centuries before our conception of democracy can live again .
and we can lose this war only if use slow up our effort or if we waste our ammunition sniping at each other .
here are three high purposes for every american : 1 .
we shall not stop work for a single day .
if any dispute arises we shall keep on working while the dispute is solved by mediation , or conciliation or arbitration -- until the war is won .
2 .
we shall not demand special gains or special privileges or special advantages for any one group or occupation .
3 .
we shall give up conveniences and modify the routine of our lives if our country asks us to do so .
we will do it cheerfully , remembering that the common enemy seeks to destroy every home and every freedom in every part of our land .
this generation of americans has come to realize , with a present and personal realization , that there is something larger and more important than the life of any individual or of any individual group -- something for which a man will sacrifice , and gladly sacrifice , not only his pleasures , not only his goods , not only his associations with those he loves , but his life itself .
in time of crisis when the future is in the balance , we come to understand , with full recognition and devotion , what this nation is and what we owe to it .
the axis propagandists have tried in various evil ways to destroy our determination and our morale .
failing in that , they are now trying to destroy our confidence in our own allies .
they say that the british are finished -- that the russians and the chinese are about to quit .
patriotic and sensible americans will reject these absurdities .
and instead of listening to any of this crude propaganda , they will recall some of the things that nazis and japanese have said and are still saying about us .
ever since this nation became the arsenal of democracy -- ever since enactment of lend - lease -- there has been one persistent theme through all axis propaganda .
this theme has been that americans are admittedly rich , ( and ) that americans have considerable industrial power -- but that americans are soft and decadent , that they can not and will not unite and work and fight .
from berlin , rome and tokyo we have been described as a nation of weaklings -- " playboys " -- who would hire british soldiers , or russian soldiers , or chinese soldiers to do our fighting for us .
let them repeat that now !
let them tell that to general macarthur and his men .
let them tell that to the sailors who today are hitting hard in the far waters of the pacific .
let them tell that to the boys in the flying fortresses .
let them tell that to the marines !
the united nations constitutes an association of independent peoples of equal dignity and equal importance .
the united nations are dedicated to a common cause .
we share equally and with equal zeal the anguish and the awful sacrifices of war .
in the partnership of our common enterprise , we must share in a unified plan in which all of us must play our several parts , each of us being equally indispensable and dependent one on the other .
we have unified command and cooperation and comradeship .
we americans will contribute unified production and unified acceptance of sacrifice and of effort .
that means a national unity that can know no limitations of race or creed or selfish politics .
the american people expect that much from themselves .
and the american people will find ways and means of expressing their determination to their enemies , including the japanese admiral who has said that he will dictate the terms of peace here in the white mouse .
we of the united nations are agreed on certain broad principles in the kind of peace we seek .
the atlantic charter applies not only to the parts of the world that border the atlantic but to the whole world ; disarmament of aggressors , self - determination of nations and peoples , and the four freedoms -- freedom of speech , freedom of religion , freedom from want , and freedom from fear .
the british and the russian people have known the full fury of nazi onslaught .
there have been times when the fate of london and moscow was in serious doubt .
but there was never the slightest question that either the british or the russians would yield .
and today all the united nations salutes the superb russian army as it celebrates the 24th anniversary of its first assembly .
though their homeland was overrun , the dutch people are still fighting stubbornly and powerfully overseas .
the great chinese people have suffered grievous losses ; chungking has been almost wiped out of existence -- yet it remains the capital of an unbeatable china .
that is the conquering spirit which prevails throughout the united nations in this war .
the task that we americans now face will test us to the uttermost .
never before have we been called upon for such a prodigious effort .
never before have we had so little time in which to do so much . "
these are the times that try men 's souls . "
tom paine wrote those words on a drumhead , by the light of a campfire .
that was when washington 's little army of ragged , rugged men was retreating across new jersey , having tasted ( nothing ) naught but defeat .
and general washington ordered that these great words written by tom paine be read to the men of every regiment in the continental army , and this was the assurance given to the first american armed forces : " the summer soldier and the sunshine patriot will , in this crisis , shrink from the service of their country ; but he that stands it now , deserves the love and thanks of man and woman .
tyranny , like hell , is not easily conquered , yet we have this consolation with us , that the harder the sacrifice , the more glorious the triumph . "
so spoke americans in the year 1776 .
so speak americans today !

