fellow - citizens : 
 i shall not attempt to describe the grateful emotions which the new and very distinguished proof of the confidence of my fellow - citizens , evinced by my reelection to this high trust , has excited in my bosom .
the approbation which it announces of my conduct in the preceding term affords me a consolation which i shall profoundly feel through life .
the general accord with which it has been expressed adds to the great and never - ceasing obligations which it imposes .
to merit the continuance of this good opinion , and to carry it with me into my retirement as the solace of advancing years , will be the object of my most zealous and unceasing efforts .
having no pretensions to the high and commanding claims of my predecessors , whose names are so much more conspicuously identified with our revolution , and who contributed so preeminently to promote its success , i consider myself rather as the instrument than the cause of the union which has prevailed in the late election .
in surmounting , in favor of my humble pretensions , the difficulties which so often produce division in like occurrences , it is obvious that other powerful causes , indicating the great strength and stability of our union , have essentially contributed to draw you together .
that these powerful causes exist , and that they are permanent , is my fixed opinion ; that they may produce a like accord in all questions touching , however remotely , the liberty , prosperity , and happiness of our country will always be the object of my most fervent prayers to the supreme author of all good .
in a government which is founded by the people , who possess exclusively the sovereignty , it seems proper that the person who may be placed by their suffrages in this high trust should declare on commencing its duties the principles on which he intends to conduct the administration .
if the person thus elected has served the preceding term , an opportunity is afforded him to review its principal occurrences and to give such further explanation respecting them as in his judgment may be useful to his constituents .
the events of one year have influence on those of another , and , in like manner , of a preceding on the succeeding administration .
the movements of a great nation are connected in all their parts .
if errors have been committed they ought to be corrected ; if the policy is sound it ought to be supported .
it is by a thorough knowledge of the whole subject that our fellow - citizens are enabled to judge correctly of the past and to give a proper direction to the future .
just before the commencement of the last term the united states had concluded a war with a very powerful nation on conditions equal and honorable to both parties .
the events of that war are too recent and too deeply impressed on the memory of all to require a development from me .
our commerce had been in a great measure driven from the sea , our atlantic and inland frontiers were invaded in almost every part ; the waste of life along our coast and on some parts of our inland frontiers , to the defense of which our gallant and patriotic citizens were called , was immense , in addition to which not less than $ 120,000,000 were added at its end to the public debt .
as soon as the war had terminated , the nation , admonished by its events , resolved to place itself in a situation which should be better calculated to prevent the recurrence of a like evil , and , in case it should recur , to mitigate its calamities .
with this view , after reducing our land force to the basis of a peace establishment , which has been further modified since , provision was made for the construction of fortifications at proper points through the whole extent of our coast and such an augmentation of our naval force as should be well adapted to both purposes .
the laws making this provision were passed in 1815 and 1816 , and it has been since the constant effort of the executive to carry them into effect .
the advantage of these fortifications and of an augmented naval force in the extent contemplated , in a point of economy , has been fully illustrated by a report of the board of engineers and naval commissioners lately communicated to congress , by which it appears that in an invasion by 20,000 men , with a correspondent naval force , in a campaign of six months only , the whole expense of the construction of the works would be defrayed by the difference in the sum necessary to maintain the force which would be adequate to our defense with the aid of those works and that which would be incurred without them .
the reason of this difference is obvious .
if fortifications are judiciously placed on our great inlets , as distant from our cities as circumstances will permit , they will form the only points of attack , and the enemy will be detained there by a small regular force a sufficient time to enable our militia to collect and repair to that on which the attack is made .
a force adequate to the enemy , collected at that single point , with suitable preparation for such others as might be menaced , is all that would be requisite .
but if there were no fortifications , then the enemy might go where he pleased , and , changing his position and sailing from place to place , our force must be called out and spread in vast numbers along the whole coast and on both sides of every bay and river as high up in each as it might be navigable for ships of war .
by these fortifications , supported by our navy , to which they would afford like support , we should present to other powers an armed front from st. croix to the sabine , which would protect in the event of war our whole coast and interior from invasion ; and even in the wars of other powers , in which we were neutral , they would be found eminently useful , as , by keeping their public ships at a distance from our cities , peace and order in them would be preserved and the government be protected from insult .
it need scarcely be remarked that these measures have not been resorted to in a spirit of hostility to other powers .
such a disposition does not exist toward any power .
peace and good will have been , and will hereafter be , cultivated with all , and by the most faithful regard to justice .
they have been dictated by a love of peace , of economy , and an earnest desire to save the lives of our fellow - citizens from that destruction and our country from that devastation which are inseparable from war when it finds us unprepared for it .
it is believed , and experience has shown , that such a preparation is the best expedient that can be resorted to prevent war .
i add with much pleasure that considerable progress has already been made in these measures of defense , and that they will be completed in a few years , considering the great extent and importance of the object , if the plan be zealously and steadily persevered in .
the conduct of the government in what relates to foreign powers is always an object of the highest importance to the nation .
its agriculture , commerce , manufactures , fisheries , revenue , in short , its peace , may all be affected by it .
attention is therefore due to this subject .
at the period adverted to the powers of europe , after having been engaged in long and destructive wars with each other , had concluded a peace , which happily still exists .
our peace with the power with whom we had been engaged had also been concluded .
the war between spain and the colonies in south america , which had commenced many years before , was then the only conflict that remained unsettled .
this being a contest between different parts of the same community , in which other powers had not interfered , was not affected by their accommodations .
this contest was considered at an early stage by my predecessor a civil war in which the parties were entitled to equal rights in our ports .
this decision , the first made by any power , being formed on great consideration of the comparative strength and resources of the parties , the length of time , and successful opposition made by the colonies , and of all other circumstances on which it ought to depend , was in strict accord with the law of nations .
congress has invariably acted on this principle , having made no change in our relations with either party .
our attitude has therefore been that of neutrality between them , which has been maintained by the government with the strictest impartiality .
no aid has been afforded to either , nor has any privilege been enjoyed by the one which has not been equally open to the other party , and every exertion has been made in its power to enforce the execution of the laws prohibiting illegal equipments with equal rigor against both .
by this equality between the parties their public vessels have been received in our ports on the same footing ; they have enjoyed an equal right to purchase and export arms , munitions of war , and every other supply , the exportation of all articles whatever being permitted under laws which were passed long before the commencement of the contest ; our citizens have traded equally with both , and their commerce with each has been alike protected by the government .
respecting the attitude which it may be proper for the united states to maintain hereafter between the parties , i have no hesitation in stating it as my opinion that the neutrality heretofore observed should still be adhered to .
from the change in the government of spain and the negotiation now depending , invited by the cortes and accepted by the colonies , it may be presumed , that their differences will be settled on the terms proposed by the colonies .
should the war be continued , the united states , regarding its occurrences , will always have it in their power to adopt such measures respecting it as their honor and interest may require .
shortly after the general peace a band of adventurers took advantage of this conflict and of the facility which it afforded to establish a system of buccaneering in the neighboring seas , to the great annoyance of the commerce of the united states , and , as was represented , of that of other powers .
of this spirit and of its injurious bearing on the united states strong proofs were afforded by the establishment at amelia island , and the purposes to which it was made instrumental by this band in 1817 , and by the occurrences which took place in other parts of florida in 1818 , the details of which in both instances are too well known to require to be now recited .
i am satisfied had a less decisive course been adopted that the worst consequences would have resulted from it .
we have seen that these checks , decisive as they were , were not sufficient to crush that piratical spirit .
many culprits brought within our limits have been condemned to suffer death , the punishment due to that atrocious crime .
the decisions of upright and enlightened tribunals fall equally on all whose crimes subject them , by a fair interpretation of the law , to its censure .
it belongs to the executive not to suffer the executions under these decisions to transcend the great purpose for which punishment is necessary .
the full benefit of example being secured , policy as well as humanity equally forbids that they should be carried further .
i have acted on this principle , pardoning those who appear to have been led astray by ignorance of the criminality of the acts they had committed , and suffering the law to take effect on those only in whose favor no extenuating circumstances could be urged .
great confidence is entertained that the late treaty with spain , which has been ratified by both the parties , and the ratifications whereof have been exchanged , has placed the relations of the two countries on a basis of permanent friendship .
the provision made by it for such of our citizens as have claims on spain of the character described will , it is presumed , be very satisfactory to them , and the boundary which is established between the territories of the parties westward of the mississippi , heretofore in dispute , has , it is thought , been settled on conditions just and advantageous to both .
but to the acquisition of florida too much importance can not be attached .
it secures to the united states a territory important in itself , and whose importance is much increased by its bearing on many of the highest interests of the union .
it opens to several of the neighboring states a free passage to the ocean , through the province ceded , by several rivers , having their sources high up within their limits .
it secures us against all future annoyance from powerful indian tribes .
it gives us several excellent harbors in the gulf of mexico for ships of war of the largest size .
it covers by its position in the gulf the mississippi and other great waters within our extended limits , and thereby enables the united states to afford complete protection to the vast and very valuable productions of our whole western country , which find a market through those streams .
by a treaty with the british government , bearing date on the 20th of october , 1818 , the convention regulating the commerce between the united states and great britain , concluded on the 3d of july , 1815 , which was about expiring , was revived and continued for the term of ten years from the time of its expiration .
by that treaty , also , the differences which had arisen under the treaty of ghent respecting the right claimed by the united states for their citizens to take and cure fish on the coast of his britannic majesty 's dominions in america , with other differences on important interests , were adjusted to the satisfaction of both parties .
no agreement has yet been entered into respecting the commerce between the united states and the british dominions in the west indies and on this continent .
the restraints imposed on that commerce by great britain , and reciprocated by the united states on a principle of defense , continue still in force .
the negotiation with france for the regulation of the commercial relations between the two countries , which in the course of the last summer had been commenced at paris , has since been transferred to this city , and will be pursued on the part of the united states in the spirit of conciliation , and with an earnest desire that it may terminate in an arrangement satisfactory to both parties .
our relations with the barbary powers are preserved in the same state and by the same means that were employed when i came into this office .
as early as 1801 it was found necessary to send a squadron into the mediterranean for the protection of our commerce , and no period has intervened , a short term excepted , when it was thought advisable to withdraw it .
the great interests which the united states have in the pacific , in commerce and in the fisheries , have also made it necessary to maintain a naval force there .
in disposing of this force in both instances the most effectual measures in our power have been taken , without interfering with its other duties , for the suppression of the slave trade and of piracy in the neighboring seas .
the situation of the united states in regard to their resources , the extent of their revenue , and the facility with which it is raised affords a most gratifying spectacle .
the payment of nearly $ 67,000,000 of the public debt , with the great progress made in measures of defense and in other improvements of various kinds since the late war , are conclusive proofs of this extraordinary prosperity , especially when it is recollected that these expenditures have been defrayed without a burthen on the people , the direct tax and excise having been repealed soon after the conclusion of the late war , and the revenue applied to these great objects having been raised in a manner not to be felt .
our great resources therefore remain untouched for any purpose which may affect the vital interests of the nation .
for all such purposes they are inexhaustible .
they are more especially to be found in the virtue , patriotism , and intelligence of our fellow - citizens , and in the devotion with which they would yield up by any just measure of taxation all their property in support of the rights and honor of their country .
under the present depression of prices , affecting all the productions of the country and every branch of industry , proceeding from causes explained on a former occasion , the revenue has considerably diminished , the effect of which has been to compel congress either to abandon these great measures of defense or to resort to loans or internal taxes to supply the deficiency .
on the presumption that this depression and the deficiency in the revenue arising from it would be temporary , loans were authorized for the demands of the last and present year .
anxious to relieve my fellow - citizens in 1817 from every burthen which could be dispensed with , and the state of the treasury permitting it , i recommended the repeal of the internal taxes , knowing that such relief was then peculiarly necessary in consequence of the great exertions made in the late war .
i made that recommendation under a pledge that should the public exigencies require a recurrence to them at any time while i remained in this trust , i would with equal promptitude perform the duty which would then be alike incumbent on me .
by the experiment now making it will be seen by the next session of congress whether the revenue shall have been so augmented as to be adequate to all these necessary purposes .
should the deficiency still continue , and especially should it be probable that it would be permanent , the course to be pursued appears to me to be obvious .
i am satisfied that under certain circumstances loans may be resorted to with great advantage .
i am equally well satisfied , as a general rule , that the demands of the current year , especially in time of peace , should be provided for by the revenue of that year .
i have never dreaded , nor have i ever shunned , in any situation in which i have been placed making appeals to the virtue and patriotism of my fellow - citizens , well knowing that they could never be made in vain , especially in times of great emergency or for purposes of high national importance .
independently of the exigency of the case , many considerations of great weight urge a policy having in view a provision of revenue to meet to a certain extent the demands of the nation , without relying altogether on the precarious resource of foreign commerce .
i am satisfied that internal duties and excises , with corresponding imposts on foreign articles of the same kind , would , without imposing any serious burdens on the people , enhance the price of produce , promote our manufactures , and augment the revenue , at the same time that they made it more secure and permanent .
the care of the indian tribes within our limits has long been an essential part of our system , but , unfortunately , it has not been executed in a manner to accomplish all the objects intended by it .
we have treated them as independent nations , without their having any substantial pretensions to that rank .
the distinction has flattered their pride , retarded their improvement , and in many instances paved the way to their destruction .
the progress of our settlements westward , supported as they are by a dense population , has constantly driven them back , with almost the total sacrifice of the lands which they have been compelled to abandon .
they have claims on the magnanimity and , i may add , on the justice of this nation which we must all feel .
we should become their real benefactors ; we should perform the office of their great father , the endearing title which they emphatically give to the chief magistrate of our union .
their sovereignty over vast territories should cease , in lieu of which the right of soil should be secured to each individual and his posterity in competent portions ; and for the territory thus ceded by each tribe some reasonable equivalent should be granted , to be vested in permanent funds for the support of civil government over them and for the education of their children , for their instruction in the arts of husbandry , and to provide sustenance for them until they could provide it for themselves .
my earnest hope is that congress will digest some plan , founded on these principles , with such improvements as their wisdom may suggest , and carry it into effect as soon as it may be practicable .
europe is again unsettled and the prospect of war increasing .
should the flame light up in any quarter , how far it may extend it is impossible to foresee .
it is our peculiar felicity to be altogether unconnected with the causes which produce this menacing aspect elsewhere .
with every power we are in perfect amity , and it is our interest to remain so if it be practicable on just conditions .
i see no reasonable cause to apprehend variance with any power , unless it proceed from a violation of our maritime rights .
in these contests , should they occur , and to whatever extent they may be carried , we shall be neutral ; but as a neutral power we have rights which it is our duty to maintain .
for like injuries it will be incumbent on us to seek redress in a spirit of amity , in full confidence that , injuring none , none would knowingly injure us .
for more imminent dangers we should be prepared , and it should always be recollected that such preparation adapted to the circumstances and sanctioned by the judgment and wishes of our constituents can not fail to have a good effect in averting dangers of every kind .
we should recollect also that the season of peace is best adapted to these preparations .
if we turn our attention , fellow - citizens , more immediately to the internal concerns of our country , and more especially to those on which its future welfare depends , we have every reason to anticipate the happiest results .
it is now rather more than forty - four years since we declared our independence , and thirty - seven since it was acknowledged .
the talents and virtues which were displayed in that great struggle were a sure presage of all that has since followed .
a people who were able to surmount in their infant state such great perils would be more competent as they rose into manhood to repel any which they might meet in their progress .
their physical strength would be more adequate to foreign danger , and the practice of self - government , aided by the light of experience , could not fail to produce an effect equally salutary on all those questions connected with the internal organization .
these favorable anticipations have been realized .
in our whole system , national and state , we have shunned all the defects which unceasingly preyed on the vitals and destroyed the ancient republics .
in them there were distinct orders , a nobility and a people , or the people governed in one assembly .
thus , in the one instance there was a perpetual conflict between the orders in society for the ascendency , in which the victory of either terminated in the overthrow of the government and the ruin of the state ; in the other , in which the people governed in a body , and whose dominions seldom exceeded the dimensions of a county in one of our states , a tumultuous and disorderly movement permitted only a transitory existence .
in this great nation there is but one order , that of the people , whose power , by a peculiarly happy improvement of the representative principle , is transferred from them , without impairing in the slightest degree their sovereignty , to bodies of their own creation , and to persons elected by themselves , in the full extent necessary for all the purposes of free , enlightened and efficient government .
the whole system is elective , the complete sovereignty being in the people , and every officer in every department deriving his authority from and being responsible to them for his conduct .
our career has corresponded with this great outline .
perfection in our organization could not have been expected in the outset either in the national or state governments or in tracing the line between their respective powers .
but no serious conflict has arisen , nor any contest but such as are managed by argument and by a fair appeal to the good sense of the people , and many of the defects which experience had clearly demonstrated in both governments have been remedied .
by steadily pursuing this course in this spirit there is every reason to believe that our system will soon attain the highest degree of perfection of which human institutions are capable , and that the movement in all its branches will exhibit such a degree of order and harmony as to command the admiration and respect of the civilized world .
our physical attainments have not been less eminent .
twenty - five years ago the river mississippi was shut up and our western brethren had no outlet for their commerce .
what has been the progress since that time ?
the river has not only become the property of the united states from its source to the ocean , with all its tributary streams ( with the exception of the upper part of the red river only ) , but louisiana , with a fair and liberal boundary on the western side and the floridas on the eastern , have been ceded to us .
the united states now enjoy the complete and uninterrupted sovereignty over the whole territory from st. croix to the sabine .
new states , settled from among ourselves in this and in other parts , have been admitted into our union in equal participation in the national sovereignty with the original states .
our population has augmented in an astonishing degree and extended in every direction .
we now , fellow - citizens , comprise within our limits the dimensions and faculties of a great power under a government possessing all the energies of any government ever known to the old world , with an utter incapacity to oppress the people .
entering with these views the office which i have just solemnly sworn to execute with fidelity and to the utmost of my ability , i derive great satisfaction from a knowledge that i shall be assisted in the several departments by the very enlightened and upright citizens from whom i have received so much aid in the preceding term .
with full confidence in the continuance of that candor and generous indulgence from my fellow - citizens at large which i have heretofore experienced , and with a firm reliance on the protection of almighty god , i shall forthwith commence the duties of the high trust to which you have called me .

fellow citizens of the senate and house of representatives : 
 many important subjects will claim your attention during the present session , of which i shall endeavor to give , in aid of your deliberations , a just idea in this communication .
i undertake this duty with diffidence , from the vast extent of the interests on which i have to treat and of their great importance to every portion of our union .
i enter on it with zeal from a thorough conviction that there never was a period since the establishment of our revolution when , regarding the condition of the civilized world and its bearing on us , there was greater necessity for devotion in the public servants to their respective duties , or for virtue , patriotism , and union in our constituents .
meeting in you a new congress , i deem it proper to present this view of public affairs in greater detail than might otherwise be necessary .
i do it , however , with peculiar satisfaction , from a knowledge that in this respect i shall comply more fully with the sound principles of our government .
the people being with us exclusively the sovereign , it is indispensable that full information be laid before them on all important subjects , to enable them to exercise that high power with complete effect .
if kept in the dark , they must be incompetent to it .
we are all liable to error , and those who are engaged in the management of public affairs are more subject to excitement and to be led astray by their particular interests and passions than the great body of our constituents , who , living at home in the pursuit of their ordinary avocations , are calm but deeply interested spectators of events and of the conduct of those who are parties to them .
to the people every department of the government and every individual in each are responsible , and the more full their information the better they can judge of the wisdom of the policy pursued and of the conduct of each in regard to it .
from their dispassionate judgment much aid may always be obtained , while their approbation will form the greatest incentive and most gratifying reward for virtuous actions , and the dread of their censure the best security against the abuse of their confidence .
their interests in all vital questions are the same , and the bond , by sentiment as well as by interest , will be proportionably strengthened as they are better informed of the real state of public affairs , especially in difficult conjunctures .
it is by such knowledge that local prejudices and jealousies are surmounted , and that a national policy extending its fostering care and protection to all the great interests of our union , is formed and steadily adhered to .
a precise knowledge of our relations with foreign powers as respects our negotiations and transactions with each is thought to be particularly necessary .
equally necessary is it that we should for a just estimate of our resources , revenue , and progress in every kind of improvement connected with the national prosperity and public defense .
it is by rendering justice to other nations that we may expect it from them .
it is by our ability to resent injuries and redress wrongs that we may avoid them .
the commissioners under the 5th article of the treaty of ghent , having disagreed in their opinions respecting that portion of the boundary between the territories of the united states and of great britain the establishment of which had been submitted to them , have made their respective reports in compliance with that article , that the same might be referred to the decision of a friendly power .
it being manifest , however , that it would be difficult , if not impossible , for any power to perform that office without great delay and much inconvenience to itself , a proposal has been made by this government , and acceded to by that of great britain , to endeavor to establish that boundary by amicable negotiation .
it appearing from long experience that no satisfactory arrangement could be formed of the commercial intercourse between the united states and the british colonies in this hemisphere by legislative acts while each party pursued its own course without agreement or concert with the other , a proposal has been made to the british government to regulate this commerce by treaty , as it has been to arrange in like manner the just claim of the citizens of the united states inhabiting the states and territories bordering on the lakes and rivers which empty into the st. lawrence to the navigation of that river to the ocean .
for these and other objects of high importance to the interests of both parties a negotiation has been opened with the british government which it is hoped will have a satisfactory result .
the commissioners under the 6th and 7th articles of the treaty of ghent having successfully closed their labors in relation to the 6th , have proceeded to the discharge of those relating to the 7th .
their progress in the extensive survey required for the performance of their duties justifies the presumption that it will be completed in the ensuing year .
the negotiation which had been long depending with the french government on several important subjects , and particularly for a just indemnity for losses sustained in the late wars by the citizens of the united states under unjustifiable seizures and confiscations of their property , has not as yet had the desired effect .
as this claim rests on the same principle with others which have been admitted by the french government , it is not perceived on what just ground it can be rejected .
a minister will be immediately appointed to proceed to france and resume the negotiation on this and other subjects which may arise between the two nations .
at the proposal of the russian imperial government , made through the minister of the emperor residing here , a full power and instructions have been transmitted to the minister of the united states at st. petersburg to arrange by amicable negotiation the respective rights and interests of the two nations on the north west coast of this continent .
a similar proposal had been made by his imperial majesty to the government of great britain , which has likewise been acceded to .
the government of the united states has been desirous by this friendly proceeding of manifesting the great value which they have invariably attached to the friendship of the emperor and their solicitude to cultivate the best understanding with his government .
in the discussions to which this interest has given rise and in the arrangements by which they may terminate the occasion has been judged proper for asserting , as a principle in which the rights and interests of the united states are involved , that the american continents , by the free and independent condition which they have assumed and maintain , are henceforth not to be considered as subjects for future colonization by any european powers .
since the close of the last session of congress the commissioners and arbitrators for ascertaining and determining the amount of indemnification which may be due to citizens of the united states under the decision of his imperial majesty the emperor of russia , in conformity to the convention concluded at st. petersburg on [ 1822 - 07 - 12 ] , have assembled in this city , and organized themselves as a board for the performance of the duties assigned to them by that treaty .
the commission constituted under the 11th article of the treaty of [ 1819 - 02 - 22 ] , between the united states and spain is also in session here , and as the term of three years limited by the treaty for the execution of the trust will expire before the period of the next regular meeting of congress , the attention of the legislature will be drawn to the measures which may be necessary to accomplish the objects for which the commission was instituted .
in compliance with a resolution of the house of representatives adopted at their last session , instructions have been given to all the ministers of the united states accredited to the powers of europe and america to propose the proscription of the african slave trade by classing it under the denomination , and inflicting on its perpetrators the punishment , of piracy .
should this proposal be acceded to , it is not doubted that this odious and criminal practice will be promptly and entirely suppressed .
it is earnestly hoped that it will be acceded to , from the firm belief that it is the most effectual expedient that can be adopted for the purpose .
at the commencement of the recent war between france and spain it was declared by the french government that it would grant no commissions to privateers , and that neither the commerce of spain herself nor of neutral nations should be molested by the naval force of france , except in the breach of a lawful blockade .
this declaration , which appears to have been faithfully carried into effect , concurring with principles proclaimed and cherished by the united states from the first establishment of their independence , suggested the hope that the time had arrived when the proposal for adopting it as a permanent and invariable rule in all future maritime wars might meet the favorable consideration of the great european powers .
instructions have accordingly been given to our ministers with france , russia , and great britain to make those proposals to their respective governments , and when the friends of humanity reflect on the essential amelioration to the condition of the human race which would result from the abolition of private war on the sea and on the great facility by which it might be accomplished , requiring only the consent of a few sovereigns , an earnest hope is indulged that these overtures will meet with an attention animated by the spirit in which they were made , and that they will ultimately be successful .
the ministers who were appointed to the republics of colombia and buenos ayres during the last session of congress proceeded shortly afterwards to their destinations .
of their arrival there official intelligence has not yet been received .
the minister appointed to the republic of chile will sail in a few days .
an early appointment will also be made to mexico .
a minister has been received from colombia , and the other governments have been informed that ministers , or diplomatic agents of inferior grade , would be received from each , accordingly as they might prefer the one or the other .
the minister appointed to spain proceeded soon after his appointment for cadiz , the residence of the sovereign to whom he was accredited .
in approaching that port the frigate which conveyed him was warned off by the commander of the french squadron by which it was blockaded and not permitted to enter , although apprised by the captain of the frigate of the public character of the person whom he had on board , the landing of whom was the sole object of his proposed entry .
this act , being considered an infringement of the rights of ambassadors and of nations , will form a just cause of complaint to the government of france against the officer by whom it was committed .
the actual condition of the public finances more than realizes the favorable anticipations that were entertained of it at the opening of the last session of congress .
on the first of january there was a balance in the treasury of $ 4,237,427.55 .
from that time to the 30th of september the receipts amounted to upward of $ 16.1 m , and the expenditures to $ 11.4m. during the 4th quarter of the year it is estimated that the receipts will at least equal the expenditures , and that there will remain in the treasury on the first day of january next a surplus of nearly $ 9m. 
 on [ 1825 - 01 - 01 ] , a large amount of the war debt and a part of the revolutionary debt become redeemable .
additional portions of the former will continue to become redeemable annually until the year 1835 .
it is believed , however , that if the united states remain at peace the whole of that debt may be redeemed by the ordinary revenue of those years during that period under the provision of the act of [ 1817 - 03 - 03 ] , creating the sinking fund , and in that case the only part of the debt that will remain after the year 1835 will be the $ 7 m of 5 % stock subscribed to the bank of the united states , and the 3 % revolutionary debt , amounting to $ 13,296,099.06 , both of which are redeemable at the pleasure of the government .
the state of the army in its organization and discipline has been gradually improving for several years , and has now attained a high degree of perfection .
the military disbursements have been regularly made and the accounts regularly and promptly rendered for settlement .
the supplies of various descriptions have been of good quality , and regularly issued at all of the posts .
a system of economy and accountability has been introduced into every branch of the service which admits of little additional improvement .
this desirable state has been attained by the act reorganizing the staff of the army , passed on [ 1818 - 04 - 14 ] .
the moneys appropriated for fortifications have been regularly and economically applied , and all the works advanced as rapidly as the amount appropriated would admit .
three important works will be completed in the course of this year -- that is , fort washington , fort delaware , and the fort at the rigolets , in louisiana .
the board of engineers and the topographical corps have been in constant and active service in surveying the coast and projecting the works necessary for its defense .
the military academy has attained a degree of perfection in its discipline and instruction equal , as is believed , to any institution of its kind in any country .
the money appropriated for the use of the ordnance department has been regularly and economically applied .
the fabrication of arms at the national armories and by contract with the department has been gradually improving in quality and cheapness .
it is believed that their quality is now such as to admit of but little improvement .
the completion of the fortifications renders it necessary that there should be a suitable appropriation for the purpose of fabricating the cannon and carriages necessary for those works .
under the appropriation of $ 5,000 for exploring the western waters for the location of a site for a western armory , a commission was constituted , consisting of colonel mcree , colonel lee , and captain talcott , who have been engaged in exploring the country .
they have not yet reported the result of their labors , but it is believed that they will be prepared to do it at an early part of the session of congress .
during the month of june last general ashley and his party , who were trading under a license from the government , were attacked by the ricarees while peaceably trading with the indians at their request .
several of the party were killed and wounded and their property taken or destroyed .
colonel leavenworth , who commanded fort atkinson , at the council bluffs , the most western post , apprehending that the hostile spirit of the ricarees would extend to other tribes in that quarter , and that thereby the lives of the traders on the missouri and the peace of the frontier would be endangered , took immediate measures to check the evil .
with a detachment of the regiment stationed at the bluffs he successfully attacked the ricaree village , and it is hoped that such an impression has been made on them as well as on the other tribes on the missouri as will prevent a recurrence of future hostility .
the report of the secretary of war , which is herewith transmitted , will exhibit in greater detail the condition of the department in its various branches , and the progress which has been made in its administration during the three first quarters of the year .
i transmit a return of the militia of the several states according to the last reports which have been made by the proper officers in each to the department of war .
by reference to this return it will be seen that it is not complete , although great exertions have been made to make it so .
as the defense and even the liberties of the country must depend in times of imminent danger on the militia , it is of the highest importance that it be well organized , armed , and disciplined throughout the union .
the report of the secretary of war shews the progress made during the three first quarters of the present year by the application of the fund appropriated for arming the militia .
much difficulty is found in distributing the arms according to the act of congress providing for it from the failure of the proper departments in many of the states to make regular returns .
the act of [ 1820 - 05 - 12 ] provides that the system of tactics and regulations of the various corps of the regular army shall be extended to the militia .
this act has been very imperfectly executed from the want of uniformity in the organization of the militia , proceeding from the defects of the system itself , and especially in its application to that main arm of the public defense .
it is thought that this important subject in all its branches merits the attention of congress .
the report of the secretary of the navy , which is now communicated , furnishes an account of the administration of that department for the three first quarters of the present year , with the progress made in augmenting the navy , and the manner in which the vessels in commission have been employed .
the usual force has been maintained in the mediterranean sea , the pacific ocean , and along the atlantic coast , and has afforded the necessary protection to our commerce in those seas .
in the west indies and the gulf of mexico our naval force has been augmented by the addition of several small vessels provided for by the " act authorizing an additional naval force for the suppression of piracy " , passed by congress at their last session .
that armament has been eminently successful in the accomplishment of its object .
the piracies by which our commerce in the neighborhood of the island of cuba had been afflicted have been repressed and the confidence of our merchants in a great measure restored .
the patriotic zeal and enterprise of commodore porter , to whom the command of the expedition was confided , has been fully seconded by the officers and men under his command .
and in reflecting with high satisfaction on the honorable manner in which they have sustained the reputation of their country and its navy , the sentiment is alloyed only by a concern that in the fulfillment of that arduous service the diseases incident to the season and to the climate in which it was discharged have deprived the nation of many useful lives , and among them of several officers of great promise .
in the month of august a very malignant fever made its appearance at thompsons island , which threatened the destruction of our station there .
many perished , and the commanding officer was severely attacked .
uncertain as to his fate and knowing that most of the medical officers had been rendered incapable of discharging their duties , it was thought expedient to send to that post an officer of rank and experience , with several skilled surgeons , to ascertain the origin of the fever and the probability of its recurrence there in future seasons ; to furnish every assistance to those who were suffering , and , if practicable , to avoid the necessity of abandoning so important a station .
commodore rodgers , with a promptitude which did him honor , cheerfully accepted that trust , and has discharged it in the manner anticipated from his skill and patriotism .
before his arrival commodore porter , with the greater part of the squadron , had removed from the island and returned to the united states in consequence of the prevailing sickness .
much useful information has , however , been obtained as to the state of the island and great relief afforded to those who had been necessarily left there .
although our expedition , cooperating with an invigorated administration of the government of the island of cuba , and with the corresponding active exertions of a british naval force in the same seas , have almost entirely destroyed the unlicensed piracies from that island , the success of our exertions has not been equally effectual to suppress the same crime , under other pretenses and colors , in the neighboring island of porto rico .
they have been committed there under the abusive issue of spanish commissions .
at an early period of the present year remonstrances were made to the governor of that island , by an agent who was sent for the purpose , against those outrages on the peaceful commerce of the united states , of which many had occurred .
that officer , professing his own want of authority to make satisfaction for our just complaints , answered only by a reference of them to the government of spain .
the minister of the united states to that court was specially instructed to urge the necessity of immediate and effectual interposition of that government , directing restitution and indemnity for wrongs already committed and interdicting the repetition of them .
the minister , as has been seen , was debarred access to the spanish government , and in the mean time several new cases of flagrant outrage have occurred , and citizens of the united states in the island of porto rico have suffered , and others been threatened with assassination for asserting their unquestionable rights even before the lawful tribunals of the country .
the usual orders have been given to all our public ships to seize american vessels in the slave trade and bring them in for adjudication , and i have the gratification to state that not one so employed has been discovered , and there is good reason to believe that our flag is now seldom , if at all , disgraced by that traffic .
it is a source of great satisfaction that we are always enabled to recur to the conduct of our navy with price and commendation .
as a means of national defense it enjoys the public confidence , and is steadily assuming additional importance .
it is submitted whether a more efficient and equally economical organization of it might not in several respects be effected .
it is supposed that higher grades than now exist by law would be useful .
they would afford well - merited rewards to those who have long and faithfully served their country , present the best incentives to good conduct , and the best means of insuring a proper discipline ; destroy the inequality in that respect between military and naval services , and relieve our officers from many inconveniences and mortifications which occur when our vessels meet those of other nations , ours being the only service in which such grades do not exist .
a report of the postmaster - general , which accompanies this communication , will shew the present state of the post - office department and its general operations for some years past .
there is established by law 88,600 miles of post roads , on which the mail is now transported 85,700 miles , and contracts have been made for its transportation on all the established routes , with one or 2 exceptions .
there are 5,240 post offices in the union , and as many post masters .
the gross amount of postage which accrued from [ 1822 - 07 - 01 ] to [ 1823 - 07 - 01 ] was $ 1,114,345.12 .
during the same period the expenditures of the post - office department amounted to $ 1,169,885.51 and consisted of the following items , viz : compensation to post masters , $ 353,995.98 ; incidental expenses , $ 30,866.37 ; transportation of the mail , $ 784,600.08 ; payments into the treasury , $ 423.08 .
on the first of july last there was due to the department from post masters $ 135,245.28 ; from late post masters and contractors , $ 256,749.31 ; making a total amount of balances due to the department of $ 391,994.59.these balances embrace all delinquencies of post masters and contractors which have taken place since the organization of the department .
there was due by the department to contractors on the first of july last $ 26,548.64 .
the transportation of the mail within five years past has been greatly extended , and the expenditures of the department proportionably increased .
although the postage which has accrued within the last three years has fallen short of the expenditures $ 262,821.46 , it appears that collections have been made from the outstanding balances to meet the principal part of the current demands .
it is estimated that not more than $ 250,000 of the above balances can be collected , and that a considerable part of this sum can only be realized by a resort to legal process .
some improvements in the receipts for postage is expected .
a prompt attention to the collection of moneys received by post masters , it is believed , will enable the department to continue its operations without aid from the treasury , unless the expenditures shall be increased by the establishment of new mail routes .
a revision of some parts of the post office law may be necessary ; and it is submitted whether it would not be proper to provide for the appointment of post masters , where the compensation exceeds a certain amount , by nomination to the senate , as other officers of the general government are appointed .
having communicated my views to congress at the commencement of the last session respecting the encouragement which ought to be given to our manufactures and the principle on which it should be founded , i have only to add that those views remain unchanged , and that the present state of those countries with which we have the most immediate political relations and greatest commercial intercourse tends to confirm them .
under this impression i recommend a review of the tariff for the purpose of affording such additional protection to those articles which we are prepared to manufacture , or which are more immediately connected with the defense and independence of the country .
the actual state of the public accounts furnishes additional evidence of the efficiency of the present system of accountability in relation to the public expenditure .
of the moneys drawn from the treasury since [ 1817 - 03 - 04 ] , the sum remaining unaccounted for on the 30th of september last is more than $ 1.5 m less than on the 30th of september preceding ; and during the same period a reduction of nearly $ 1 m has been made in the amount of the unsettled accounts for moneys advanced previously to [ 1817 - 03 - 04 ] .
it will be obvious that in proportion as the mass of accounts of the latter description is diminished by settlement the difficulty of settling the residue is increased from the consideration that in many instances it can be obtained only by legal process .
for more precise details on this subject i refer to a report from the first comptroller of the treasury .
the sum which was appropriated at the last session for the repairs of the cumberland road has been applied with good effect to that object .
a final report has not been received from the agent who was appointed to superintend it .
as soon as it is received it shall be communicated to congress .
many patriotic and enlightened citizens who have made the subject an object of particular investigation have suggested an improvement of still greater importance .
they are of the opinion that the waters of the chesapeake and ohio may be connected together by one continued canal , and at an expense far short of the value and importance of the object to be obtained .
if this could be accomplished it is impossible to calculate the beneficial consequences which would result from it .
a great portion of the produce of the very fertile country through which it would pass would find a market through that channel .
troops might be moved with great facility in war , with cannon and every kind of munition , and in either direction .
connecting the atlantic with the western country in a line passing through the seat of the national government , it would contribute essentially to strengthen the bond of union itself .
believing as i do that congress possess the right to appropriate money for such a national object ( the jurisdiction remaining to the states through which the canal would pass ) , i submit it to your consideration whether it may not be advisable to authorize by an adequate appropriation the employment of a suitable number of the officers of the corps of engineers to examine the unexplored ground during the next season and to report their opinion thereon .
it will likewise be proper to extend their examination to the several routes through which the waters of the ohio may be connected by canals with those of lake erie .
as the cumberland road will require annual repairs , and congress have not thought it expedient to recommend to the states an amendment to the constitution for the purpose of vesting in the united states a power to adopt and execute a system of internal improvement , it is also submitted to your consideration whether it may not be expedient to authorize the executive to enter into an arrangement with the several states through which the road passes to establish tolls , each within its limits , for the purpose of defraying the expense of future repairs and of providing also by suitable penalties for its protection against future injuries .
the act of congress of [ 1822 - 05 - 07 ] , appropriated the sum of $ 22,700 for the purpose of erecting two piers as a shelter for vessels from ice near cape henlopen , delaware bay .
to effect the object of the act the officers of the board of engineers , with commodore bainbridge , were directed to prepare plans and estimates of piers sufficient to answer the purpose intended by the act .
it appears by their report , which accompanies the documents from the war department , that the appropriation is not adequate to the purpose intended ; and as the piers would be of great service both to the navigation of the delaware bay and the protection of vessels on the adjacent parts of the coast , i submit for the consideration of congress whether additional and sufficient appropriations should not be made .
the board of engineers were also directed to examine and survey the entrance of the harbor of the port of presquille , in pa , in order to make an estimate of the expense of removing the obstructions to the entrance , with a plan of the best mode of effecting the same , under the appropriation for that purpose by act of congress passed 3rd of march last .
the report of the board accompanies the papers from the war department , and is submitted for the consideration of congress .
a strong hope has been long entertained , founded on the heroic struggle of the greeks , that they would succeed in their contest and resume their equal station among the nations of the earth .
it is believed that the whole civilized world take a deep interest in their welfare .
although no power has declared in their favor , yet none according to our information , has taken part against them .
their cause and their name have protected them from dangers which might ere this have overwhelmed any other people .
the ordinary calculations of interest and of acquisition with a view to aggrandizement , which mingles so much in the transactions of nations , seem to have had no effect in regard to them .
from the facts which have come to our knowledge there is good cause to believe that their enemy has lost forever all dominion over them ; that greece will become again an independent nation .
that she may obtain that rank is the object of our most ardent wishes .
it was stated at the commencement of the last session that a great effort was then making in spain and portugal to improve the condition of the people of those countries , and that it appeared to be conducted with extraordinary moderation .
it need scarcely be remarked that the result has been so far very different from what was then anticipated .
of events in that quarter of the globe , with which we have so much intercourse and from which we derive our origin , we have always been anxious and interested spectators .
the citizens of the united states cherish sentiments the most friendly in favor of the liberty and happiness of their fellow men on that side of the atlantic .
in the wars of the european powers in matters relating to themselves we have never taken any part , nor does it comport with our policy so to do .
it is only when our rights are invaded or seriously menaced that we resent injuries or make preparation for our defense .
with the movements in this hemisphere we are of necessity more immediately connected , and by causes which must be obvious to all enlightened and impartial observers .
the political system of the allied powers is essentially different in this respect from that of america .
this difference proceeds from that which exists in their respective governments ; and to the defense of our own , which has been achieved by the loss of so much blood and treasure , and matured by the wisdom of their most enlightened citizens , and under which we have enjoyed unexampled felicity , this whole nation is devoted .
we owe it , therefore , to candor and to the amicable relations existing between the united states and those powers to declare that we should consider any attempt on their part to extend their system to any portion of this hemisphere as dangerous to our peace and safety .
with the existing colonies or dependencies of any european power we have not interfered and shall not interfere , but with the governments who have declared their independence and maintained it , and whose independence we have , on great consideration and on just principles , acknowledged , we could not view any interposition for the purpose of oppressing them , or controlling in any other manner their destiny , by any european power in any other light than as the manifestation of an unfriendly disposition toward the united states .
in the war between those new governments and spain we declared our neutrality at the time of their recognition , and to this we have adhered , and shall continue to adhere , provided no change shall occur which , in the judgment of the competent authorities of this government , shall make a corresponding change on the part of the united states indispensable to their security .
the late events in spain and portugal shew that europe is still unsettled .
of this important fact no stronger proof can be adduced than that the allied powers should have thought it proper , on any principle satisfactory to themselves , to have interposed by force in the internal concerns of spain .
to what extent such interposition may be carried , on the same principle , is a question in which all independent powers whose governments differ from theirs are interested , even those most remote , and surely none more so than the united states .
our policy in regard to europe , which was adopted at an early stage of the wars which have so long agitated that quarter of the globe , nevertheless remains the same , which is , not to interfere in the internal concerns of any of its powers ; to consider the government de facto as the legitimate government for us ; to cultivate friendly relations with it , and to preserve those relations by a frank , firm , and manly policy , meeting in all instances the just claims of every power , submitting to injuries from none .
but in regard to those continents circumstances are eminently and conspicuously different .
it is impossible that the allied powers should extend their political system to any portion of either continent without endangering our peace and happiness ; nor can anyone believe that our southern brethren , if left to themselves , would adopt it of their own accord .
it is equally impossible , therefore , that we should behold such interposition in any form with indifference .
if we look to the comparative strength and resources of spain and those new governments , and their distance from each other , it must be obvious that she can never subdue them .
it is still the true policy of the united states to leave the parties to themselves , in the hope that other powers will pursue the same course .
if we compare the present condition of our union with its actual state at the close of our revolution , the history of the world furnishes no example of a progress in improvement in all the important circumstances which constitute the happiness of a nation which bears any resemblance to it .
at the first epoch our population did not exceed 3,000,000 .
by the last census it amounted to about 10,000,000 , and , what is more extraordinary , it is almost altogether native , for the immigration from other countries has been inconsiderable .
at the first epoch half the territory within our acknowledged limits was uninhabited and a wilderness .
since then new territory has been acquired of vast extent , comprising within it many rivers , particularly the mississippi , the navigation of which to the ocean was of the highest importance to the original states .
over this territory our population has expanded in every direction , and new states have been established almost equal in number to those which formed the first bond of our union .
this expansion of our population and accession of new states to our union have had the happiest effect on all its highest interests .
that it has eminently augmented our resources and added to our strength and respectability as a power is admitted by all , but it is not in these important circumstances only that this happy effect is felt .
it is manifest that by enlarging the basis of our system and increasing the number of states the system itself has been greatly strengthened in both its branches .
consolidation and disunion have thereby been rendered equally impracticable .
each government , confiding in its own strength , has less to apprehend from the other , and in consequence each , enjoying a greater freedom of action , is rendered more efficient for all the purposes for which it was instituted .
it is unnecessary to treat here of the vast improvement made in the system itself by the adoption of this constitution and of its happy effect in elevating the character and in protecting the rights of the nation as well as individuals .
to what , then , do we owe these blessings ?
it is known to all that we derive them from the excellence of our institutions .
ought we not , then , to adopt every measure which may be necessary to perpetuate them ?

fellow citizens of the senate and house of representatives : 
 the view which i have now to present to you of our affairs , foreign and domestic , realizes the most sanguine anticipations which have been entertained of the public prosperity .
if we look to the whole , our growth as a nation continues to be rapid beyond example ; if to the states which compose it , the same gratifying spectacle is exhibited .
our expansion over the vast territory within our limits has been great , without indicating any decline in those sections from which the emigration has been most conspicuous .
we have daily gained strength by a native population in every quarter -- a population devoted to our happy system of government and cherishing the bond of union with internal affection .
experience has already shewn that the difference of climate and of industry , proceeding from that cause , inseparable from such vast domains , and which under other systems might have a repulsive tendency , can not fail to produce with us under wise regulations the opposite effect .
what one portion wants the other may supply ; and this will be most sensibly felt by the parts most distant from each other , forming thereby a domestic market and an active intercourse between the extremes and throughout every portion of our union .
thus by a happy distribution of power between the national and state governments , governments which rest exclusively on the sovereignty of the people and are fully adequate to the great purposes for which they were respectively instituted , causes which might otherwise lead to dismemberment operate powerfully to draw us closer together .
in every other circumstance a correct view of the actual state of our union must be equally gratifying to our constituents .
our relations with foreign powers are of a friendly character , although certain interesting differences remain unsettled with some .
our revenue under the mild system of impost and tonnage continues to be adequate to all the purposes of the government .
our agriculture , commerce , manufactures , and navigation flourish .
our fortifications are advancing in the degree authorized by existing appropriations to maturity , and due progress is made in the augmentation of the navy to the limit prescribed for it by law .
for these blessings we owe to almighty god , from whom we derive them , and with profound reverence , our most grateful and unceasing acknowledgments .
in adverting to our relations with foreign powers , which are always an object of the highest importance , i have to remark that of the subjects which have been brought into discussion with them during the present administration some have been satisfactorily terminated , others have been suspended , to be resumed hereafter under circumstances more favorable to success , and others are still in negotiation , with the hope that they may be adjusted with mutual accommodation to the interests and to the satisfaction of the respective parties .
it has been the invariable object of this government to cherish the most friendly relations with every power , and on principles and conditions which might make them permanent .
a systematic effort has been made to place our commerce with each power on a footing of perfect reciprocity , to settle with each in a spirit of candor and liberality all existing differences , and to anticipate and remove so far as it might be practicable all causes of future variance .
it having been stipulated by the seventh article of the convention of navigation and commerce which was concluded on [ 1822 - 06 - 24 ] , between the united states and france , that the said convention should continue in force for two years from the first of october of that year , and for an indefinite term afterwards , unless one of the parties should declare its intention to renounce it , in which event it should cease to operate at the end of six months from such declaration , and no such intention having been announced , the convention having been found advantageous to both parties , it has since remained , and still remains , in force .
at the time when that convention was concluded many interesting subjects were left unsettled , and particularly our claim to indemnity for spoliations which were committed on our commerce in the late wars .
for these interests and claims it was in the contemplation of the parties to make provision at a subsequent day by a more comprehensive and definitive treaty .
the object has been duly attended to since by the executive , but as yet it has not been accomplished .
it is hoped that a favorable opportunity will present itself for opening a negotiation which may embrace and arrange all existing differences and every other concern in which they have a common interest upon the accession of the present king of france , an event which has occurred since the close of the last session of congress .
with great britain our commercial intercourse rests on the same footing that it did at the last session .
by the convention of 1815 , the commerce between the united states and the british dominions in europe and the east indies was arranged on a principle of reciprocity .
that convention was confirmed and continued in force , with slight exceptions , by a subsequent treaty for the term of 10 years from [ 1818 - 10 - 20 ] , the date of the latter .
the trade with the british colonies in the west indies has not as yet been arranged , by treaty or otherwise , to our satisfaction .
an approach to that result has been made by legislative acts , whereby many serious impediments which had been raised by the parties in defense of their respective claims were removed .
an earnest desire exists , and has been manifested on the part of this government , to place the commerce with the colonies , likewise , on a footing of reciprocal advantage , and it is hoped that the british government , seeing the justice of the proposal and its importance to the colonies , will ere long accede to it .
the commissioners who were appointed for the adjustment of the boundary between the territories of the united states and those of great britain , specified in the fifth article of the treaty of ghent , having disagreed in their decision , and both governments having agreed to establish that boundary by amicable negotiation between them , it is hoped that it may be satisfactorily adjusted in that mode .
the boundary specified by the sixth article has been established by the decision of the commissioners .
from the progress made in that provided for by the seventh , according to a report recently received , there is good cause to presume that it will be settled in the course of the ensuing year .
it is a cause of serious regret that no arrangement has yet been finally concluded between the two governments to secure by joint cooperation the suppression of the slave trade .
it was the object of the british government in the early stages of the negotiation to adopt a plan for the suppression which should include the concession of the mutual right of search by the ships of war of each party of the vessels of the other for suspected offenders .
this was objected to by this government on the principle that as the right of search was a right of war of a belligerent toward a neutral power it might have an ill effect to extend it by treaty , to an offense which had been made comparatively mild , to a time of peace .
anxious , however , for the suppression of this trade , it was thought advisable , in compliance with a resolution of the house of representatives , founded on an act of congress , to propose to the british government an expedient which should be free from that objection and more effectual for the object , by making it piratical .
in that mode the enormity of the crime would place the offenders out of the protection of their government , and involve no question of search or other question between the parties touching their respective rights .
it was believed , also , that it would completely suppress the trade in the vessels of both parties , and by their respective citizens and subjects in those of other powers , with whom it was hoped that the odium which would thereby be attached to it would produce a corresponding arrangement , and by means thereof its entire extirpation forever .
a convention to this effect was concluded and signed in london on [ 1824 - 03 - 13 ] , by plenipotentiaries duly authorized by both governments , to the ratification of which certain obstacles have arisen which are not yet entirely removed .
the difference between the parties still remaining has been reduced to a point not of sufficient magnitude , as is presumed , to be permitted to defeat an object so near to the heart of both nations and so desirable to the friends of humanity throughout the world .
as objections , however , to the principle recommended by the house of representatives , or at least to the consequences inseparable from it , and which are understood to apply to the law , have been raised , which may deserve a reconsideration of the whole subject , i have thought it proper to suspend the conclusion of a new convention until the definitive sentiments of congress may be ascertained .
the documents relating to the negotiation are with that intent submitted to your consideration .
our commerce with sweden has been placed on a footing of perfect reciprocity by treaty , and with russia , the netherlands , prussia , the free hanseatic cities , the dukedom of oldenburg , and sardinia by internal regulations on each side , founded on mutual agreement between the respective governments .
the principles upon which the commercial policy of the united states is founded are to be traced to an early period .
they are essentially connected with those upon which their independence was declared , and owe their origin to the enlightened men who took the lead in our affairs at that important epoch .
they are developed in their first treaty of commerce with france of [ 1778 - 02 - 06 ] , and by a formal commission which was instituted immediately after the conclusion of their revolutionary struggle , for the purpose of negotiating treaties of commerce with every european power .
the first treaty of the united states with prussia , which was negotiated by that commission , affords a signal illustration of those principles .
the act of congress of [ 1815 - 03 - 03 ] , adopted immediately after the return of a general peace , was a new overture to foreign nations to establish our commercial relations with them on the basis of free and equal reciprocity .
that principle has pervaded all the acts of congress and all the negotiations of the executive on the subject .
a convention for the settlement of important questions in relation to the north west coast of this continent and its adjoining seas was concluded and signed at st. petersburg on the 5th day of april last by the minister plenipotentiary of the united states and plenipotentiaries of the imperial government of russia .
it will immediately be laid before the senate for the exercise of the constitutional authority of that body with reference to its ratification .
it is proper to add that the manner in which this negotiation was invited and conducted on the part of the emperor has been very satisfactory .
the great and extraordinary changes which have happened in the governments of spain and portugal within the last two years , without seriously affecting the friendly relations which under all of them have been maintained with those powers by the united states , have been obstacles to the adjustment of the particular subjects of discussion which have arisen with each .
a resolution of the senate adopted at their last session called for information as to the effect produced upon our relations with spain by the recognition on the part of the united states of the independent south american governments .
the papers containing that information are now communicated to congress .
a charge ' d'affaires has been received from the independent government of brazil .
that country , heretofore a colonial possession of portugal , had some years since been proclaimed by the sovereign of portugal himself an independent kingdom .
since his return to lisbon a revolution in brazil has established a new government there with an imperial title , at the head of which is placed a prince , in whom the regency had been vested by the king at the time of his departure .
there is reason to expect that by amicable negotiation the independence of brazil will ere long be recognized by portugal herself .
with the remaining powers of europe , with those on the coast of barbary , and with all the new south american states our relations are of a friendly character .
we have ministers plenipotentiary residing with the republics of colombia and chile , and have received ministers of the same rank from columbia , guatemala , buenos aires , and mexico .
our commercial relations with all those states are mutually beneficial and increasing .
with the republic of colombia a treaty of commerce has been formed , of which a copy is received and the original daily expected .
a negotiation for a like treaty would have been commenced with buenos aires had it not been prevented by the indisposition and lamented decease of mr. rodney , our minister there , and to whose memory the most respectful attention has been shewn by the government of that republic .
an advantageous alteration in our treaty with tunis has been obtained by our consular agent residing there , the official document of which when received will be laid before the senate .
the attention of the government has been drawn with great solicitude to other subjects , and particularly to that relating to a state of maritime war , involving the relative rights of neutral and belligerent in such wars .
most of the difficulties which we have experienced and of the losses which we have sustained since the establishment of our independence have proceeded from the unsettled state of those rights and the extent to which the belligerent claim has been carried against the neutral party .
it is impossible to look back on the occurrences of the late wars in europe , and to behold the disregard which was paid to our rights as a neutral power , and the waste which was made of our commerce by the parties to those wars by various acts of their respective governments , and under the pretext by each that the other had set the example , without great mortification and a fixed purpose never to submit to the like in future .
an attempt to remove those causes of possible variance by friendly negotiation and on just principles which should be applicable to all parties could , it was presumed , be viewed by none other than as a proof of an earnest desire to preserve those relations with every power .
in the late war between france and spain a crisis occurred in which it seemed probable that all controvertible principles involved in such wars might be brought into discussion and settled to the satisfaction of all parties .
propositions having this object in view have been made to the governments of great britain , france , russia , and of other powers , which have been received in a friendly manner by all , but as yet no treaty has been formed with either for its accomplishment .
the policy will , it is presumed , be persevered in , and in the hope that it may be successful .
it will always be recollected that with one of the parties to those wars and from whom we received those injuries , we sought redress by war .
from the other , by whose then reigning government our vessels were seized in port as well as at sea and their cargoes confiscated , indemnity has been expected , but has not yet been rendered .
it was under the influence of the latter that our vessels were likewise seized by the governments of spain , holland , denmark , sweden , and naples , and from whom indemnity has been claimed and is still expected , with the exception of spain , by whom it has been rendered .
with both parties we had abundant cause of war , but we had no alternative but to resist that which was most powerful at sea and pressed us nearest at home .
with this all differences were settled by a treaty , founded on conditions fair and honorable to both , and which has been so far executed with perfect good faith .
it has been earnestly hoped that the other would of its own accord , and from a sentiment of justice and conciliation , make to our citizens the indemnity to which they are entitled , and thereby remove from our relations any just cause of discontent on our side .
it is estimated that the receipts into the treasury during the current year , exclusive of loans , will exceed $ 18.5 million , which , with the sum remaining in the treasury at the end of the last year , amounting to $ 9,463,922.81 will , after discharging the current disbursements of the year , the interest on the public debt , and upward of $ 11,633,011.52 of the principal , leave a balance of more than $ 3 million in the treasury on the first day of january next .
a larger amount of the debt contracted during the late war , bearing an interest of 6 percent , becoming redeemable in the course of the ensuing year than could be discharged by the ordinary revenue , the act of the 26th of may authorized a loan of $ 5 million at 4.5 percent to meet the same .
by this arrangement an annual saving will accrue to the public of $ 75,000 .
under the act of the 24th of may last a loan of $ 5 million was authorized , in order to meet the awards under the florida treaty , which was negotiated at par with the bank of the united states at 4.5 percent , the limit of interest fixed by the act .
by this provision the claims of our citizens who had sustained so great a loss by spoliations , and from whom indemnity had been so long withheld , were promptly paid .
for these advances the public will be amply repaid at no distant day by the sale of the lands in florida .
of the great advantages resulting from the acquisition of the territory in other respects too high an estimate can not be formed .
it is estimated that the receipts into the treasury during the year 1825 will be sufficient to meet the disbursements of the year , including the sum of $ 10 million , which is annually appropriated by the act of constituting the sinking fund to the payment of the principal and interest of the public debt .
the whole amount of the public debt on the first of january next may be estimated at $ 86 million , inclusive of $ 2.5 million of the loan authorized by the act of the 26th of may last .
in this estimate is included a stock of $ 7 million , issued for the purchase of that amount of the capital stock of the bank of the united states , and which , as the stock of the bank still held by the government will at least be fully equal to its reimbursement , ought not to be considered as constituting a part of the public debt .
estimating , then , the whole amount of the public debt at $ 79 million and regarding the annual receipts and expenditures of the government , a well - founded hope may be entertained that , should no unexpected event occur , the whole of the public debt may be discharged in the course of 10 years , and the government be left at liberty thereafter to apply such portion of the revenue as may not be necessary for current expenses to such other objects as may be most conducive to the public security and welfare .
that the sums applicable to these objects will be very considerable may be fairly concluded when it is recollected that a large amount of the public revenue has been applied since the late war to the construction of the public buildings in this city ; to the erection of fortifications along the coast and of arsenals in different parts of the union ; to the augmentation of the navy ; to the extinguishment of the indian title to large tracts of fertile territory ; to the acquisition of florida ; to pensions to revolutionary officers and soldiers , and to invalids of the late war .
on many of these objects the expense will annually be diminished and cease at no distant period on most of them .
on the [ 1917 - 01 - 01 ] , the public debt amounted to $ 123,491,965.16 , and , notwithstanding the large sums which have been applied to these objects , it has been reduced since that period $ 37,446,961.78 .
the last portion of the public debt will be redeemable on [ 1835 - 01 - 01 ] , and , while there is the best reason to believe that the resources of the government will be continually adequate to such portions of it as may become due in the interval , it is recommended to congress to seize every opportunity which may present itself to reduce the rate of interest on every part thereof .
the high state of the public credit and the great abundance of money are at this time very favorable to such a result .
it must be very gratifying to our fellow citizens to witness this flourishing state of the public finances when it is recollected that no burthen whatever has been imposed upon them .
the military establishment in all its branches , in the performance of the various duties assigned to each , justifies the favorable view which was presented of the efficiency of its organization at the last session .
all the appropriations have been regularly applied to the objects intended by congress , and so far as the disbursements have been made the accounts have been rendered and settled without loss to the public .
the condition of the army itself , as relates to the officers and men , in science and discipline is highly respectable .
the military academy , on which the army essentially rests , and to which it is much indebted for this state of improvement , has attained , in comparison with any other institution of a like kind , a high degree of perfection .
experience , however , has shewn that the dispersed condition of the corps of artillery is unfavorable to the discipline of that important branch of the military establishment .
to remedy this inconvenience , eleven companies have been assembled at the fortification erected at old point comfort as a school for artillery instruction , with intention as they shall be perfected in the various duties of that service to order them to other posts , and , to supply their places with other companies for instruction in like manner .
in this mode a complete knowledge of the science and duties of this arm will be extended throughout the whole corps of artillery .
but to carry this object fully into effect will require the aid of congress , to obtain which the subject is now submitted to your consideration .
of the progress which has been made in the construction of fortifications for the permanent defense of our maritime frontier , according to the plan decided on and to the extent of the existing appropriations , the report of the secretary of war , which is herewith communicated , will give a detailed account .
their final completion can not fail to give great additional security to that frontier , and to diminish proportionably the expense of defending it in the event of war .
the provisions in several acts of congress of the last session for the improvement of the navigation of the mississippi and the ohio , of the harbor of presqu'isle , on lake erie , and the repair of the plymouth beach are in a course of regular execution ; and there is reason to believe that the appropriation in each instance will be adequate to the object .
to carry these improvements fully into effect , the superintendence of them has been assigned to officers of the corps of engineers .
under the act of 30th april last , authorizing the president to cause a survey to be made , with the necessary plans and estimates , of such roads and canals as he might deem of national importance in a commercial or military point of view , or for the transportation of the mail , a board has been instituted , consisting of two distinguished officers of the corps of engineers and a distinguished civil engineer , with assistants , who have been actively employed in carrying into effect the object of the act .
they have carefully examined the route between the potomac and the ohio rivers ; between the latter and lake erie ; between the alleghany and the susquehannah ; and the routes between the delaware and the raritan , barnstable and buzzards bay , and between boston harbor and narraganset bay .
such portion of the corps of topographical engineers as could be spared from the survey of the coast has been employed in surveying the very important route between the potomac and the ohio .
considerable progress has been made in it , but the survey can not be completed until the next season .
it is gratifying to add , from the view already taken , that there is good cause to believe that this great national object may be fully accomplished .
it is contemplated to commence early in the next season the execution of the other branch of the act -- that which relates to roads -- and with the survey of a route from this city , through the southern states , to new orleans , the importance of which can not be too highly estimated .
all the officers of both the corps of engineers who could be spared from other services have been employed in exploring and surveying the routes for canals .
to digest a plan for both objects for the great purposes specified will require a thorough knowledge of every part of our union and of the relation of each part to the others and of all to the seat of the general government .
for such a digest it will be necessary that the information be full , minute , and precise .
with a view to these important objects , i submit to the consideration of the congress the propriety of enlarging both the corps of engineers -- the military and topographical .
it need scarcely be remarked that the more extensively these corps are engaged in the improvement of their country , in the execution of the powers of congress , and in aid of the states in such improvements as lie beyond that limit , when such aid is desired , the happier the effect will be in many views of which the subject is perceptible .
by profiting of their science the works will always be well executed , and by giving to the officers such employment our union will derive all the advantage , in peace as well as in war , from their talents and services which they can afford .
in this mode , also , the military will be incorporated with the civil , and unfounded and injurious distinctions and prejudices of every kind be done away .
to the corps themselves this service can not fail to be equally useful , since by the knowledge they would thus acquire they would be eminently better qualified in the event of war for the great purposes for which they were instituted .
our relations with the indian tribes within our limits have not been materially changed during the year .
the hostile disposition evinced by certain tribes on the missouri during the last year still continues , and has extended in some degree to those on the upper mississippi and the upper lakes .
several parties of our citizens have been plundered and murdered by those tribes .
in order to establish relations of friendship with them , congress at the last session made an appropriation for treaties with them and for the employment of a suitable military escort to accompany and attend the commissioners at the places appointed for the negotiations .
this object has not been effected .
the season was too far advanced when the appropriation was made and the distance too great to permit it , but measures have been taken , and all the preparations will be completed to accomplish it at an early period in the next season .
believing that the hostility of the tribes , particularly on the upper mississippi and the lakes , is in no small degree owing to the wars which are carried on between the tribes residing in that quarter , measures have been taken to bring about a general peace among them , which , if successful , will not only tend to the security of our citizens , but be of great advantage to the indians themselves .
with the exception of the tribes referred to , our relations with all the others are on the same friendly footing , and it affords me great satisfaction to add that they are making steady advances in civilization and the improvement of their condition .
many of the tribes have already made great progress in the arts of civilized life .
this desirable result has been brought about by the humane and persevering policy of the government , and particularly by means of the appropriation for the civilization of the indians .
there have been established under the provisions of this act 32 schools , containing 916 scholars , who are well instructed in several branches of literature , and likewise in agriculture and the ordinary arts of life .
under the appropriation to authorize treaties with the creeks and quaupaw indians commissioners have been appointed and negotiations are now pending , but the result is not yet known .
for more full information respecting the principle which has been adopted for carrying into effect the act of congress authorizing surveys , with plans and estimates for canals and roads , and on every other branch of duty incident to the department of war , i refer you to the report of the secretary .
the squadron in the mediterranean has been maintained in the extent which was proposed in the report of the secretary of the navy of the last year , and has afforded to our commerce the necessary protection in that sea .
apprehending , however , that the unfriendly relations which have existed between algiers and some of the powers of europe might be extended to us , it has been thought expedient to augment the force there , and in consequence the north carolina , a ship of the line , has been prepared , and will sail in a few days to join it .
the force employed in the gulf of mexico and in the neighboring seas for the suppression of piracy has likewise been preserved essentially in the state in which it was during the last year .
a persevering effort has been made for the accomplishment of that object , and much protection has thereby been afforded to our commerce , but still the practice is far from being suppressed .
from every view which has been taken of the subject it is thought that it will be necessary rather to augment than to diminish our force in that quarter .
there is reason to believe that the piracies now complained of are committed by bands of robbers who inhabit the land , and who , by preserving good intelligence with the towns and seizing favorable opportunities , rush forth and fall on unprotected merchant vessels , of which they make an easy prey .
the pillage thus taken they carry to their lurking places , and dispose of afterwards at prices tending to seduce the neighboring population .
this combination is understood to be of great extent , and is the more to be deprecated because the crime of piracy is often attended with the murder of the crews , these robbers knowing if any survived their lurking places would be exposed and they be caught and punished .
that this atrocious practice should be carried to such extent is cause of equal surprise and regret .
it is presumed that it must be attributed to the relaxed and feeble state of the local governments , since it is not doubted , from the high character of the governor of cuba , who is well known and much respected here , that if he had the power he would promptly suppress it .
whether those robbers should be pursued on the land , the local authorities be made responsible for these atrocities , or any other measure be resorted to to suppress them , is submitted to the consideration of congress .
in execution of the laws for the suppression of the slave trade a vessel has been occasionally sent from that squadron to the coast of africa with orders to return thence by the usual track of the slave ships , and to seize any of our vessels which might be engaged in that trade .
none have been found , and it is believed that none are thus employed .
it is well known , however , that the trade still exists under other flags .
the health of our squadron while at thompsons island has been much better during the present than it was the last season .
some improvements have been made and others are contemplated there which , it is believed , will have a very salutary effect .
on the pacific , our commerce has much increased , and on that coast , as well as on that sea , the united states have many important interests which require attention and protection .
it is thought that all the considerations which suggested the expediency of placing a squadron on that sea operate with augmented force for maintaining it there , at least in equal extent .
for detailed information respecting the state of our maritime force on each sea , the improvement necessary to be made on either in the organization of the naval establishment generally , and of the laws for its better government i refer you to the report of the secretary of the navy , which is herewith communicated .
the revenue of the post office department has received a considerable augmentation in the present year .
the current receipts will exceed the expenditures , although the transportation of the mail within the year has been much increased .
a report of the postmaster general , which is transmitted , will furnish in detail the necessary information respecting the administration and present state of this department .
in conformity with a resolution of congress of the last session , an invitation was given to general lafayette to visit the united states , with an assurance that a ship of war should attend at any port of france which he might designate , to receive and convey him across the atlantic , whenever it might be convenient for him to sail .
he declined the offer of the public ship from motives of delicacy , but assured me that he had long intended and would certainly visit our union in the course of the present year .
in august last he arrived at new york , where he was received with the warmth of affection and gratitude to which his very important and disinterested services and sacrifices in our revolutionary struggle so eminently entitled him .
a corresponding sentiment has since been manifested in his favor throughout every portion of our union , and affectionate invitations have been given him to extend his visits to them .
to these he has yielded all the accommodation in his power .
at every designated point of rendezvous the whole population of the neighboring country has been assembled to greet him , among whom it has excited in a peculiar manner the sensibility of all to behold the surviving members of our revolutionary contest , civil and military , who had shared with him in the toils and dangers of the war , many of them in a decrepit state .
a more interesting spectacle , it is believed , was never witnessed , because none could be founded on purer principles , none proceed from higher or more disinterested motives .
that the feelings of those who had fought and bled with him in a common cause should have been much excited was natural .
there are , however , circumstances attending these interviews which pervaded the whole community and touched the breasts of every age , even the youngest among us .
there was not an individual present who had not some relative who had not partaken in those scenes , nor an infant who had not heard the relation of them .
but the circumstance which was most sensibly felt , and which his presence brought forcibly to the recollection of all , was the great cause in which we were engaged and the blessings which we have derived from our success in it .
the struggle was for independence and liberty , public and personal , and in this we succeeded .
the meeting with one who had borne so distinguished a part in that great struggle , and from such lofty and disinterested motives , could not fail to affect profoundly every individual and of every age .
it is natural that we should all take a deep interest in his future welfare , as we do .
his high claims on our union are felt , and the sentiment universal that they should be met in a generous spirit .
under these impressions i invite your attention to the subject , with a view that , regarding his very important services , losses , and sacrifices , a provision may be made and tendered to him which shall correspond with the sentiments and be worthy the character of the american people .
in turning our attention to the condition of the civilized world , in which the united states have always taken a deep interest , it is gratifying to see how large a portion of it is blessed with peace .
the only wars which now exist within that limit are those between turkey and greece , in europe , and between spain and the new governments , our neighbors , in this hemisphere .
in both these wars the cause of independence , of liberty and humanity , continues to prevail .
the success of greece , when the relative population of the contending parties is considered , commands our admiration and applause , and that it has had a similar effect with the neighboring powers is obvious .
the feeling of the whole civilized world is excited in a high degree in their favor .
may we not hope that these sentiments , winning on the hearts of their respective governments , may lead to a more decisive result ; that they may produce an accord among them to replace greece on the ground which she formerly held , and to which her heroic exertions at this day so eminently entitle her ?
with respect to the contest to which our neighbors are a party , it is evident that spain as a power is scarcely felt in it .
these new states had completely achieved their independence before it was acknowledged by the united states , and they have since maintained it with little foreign pressure .
the disturbances which have appeared in certain portions of that vast territory have proceeded from internal causes , which had their origin in their former governments and have not yet been thoroughly removed .
it is manifest that these causes are daily losing their effect , and that these new states are settling down under governments elective and representative in every branch , similar to our own .
in this course we ardently wish them to persevere , under a firm conviction that it will promote their happiness .
in this , their career , however , we have not interfered , believing that every people have a right to institute for themselves the government which , in their judgment , may suit them best .
our example is before them , of the good effect of which , being our neighbors , they are competent judges , and to their judgment we leave it , in the expectation that other powers will pursue the same policy .
the deep interest which we take in their independence , which we have acknowledged , and in their enjoyment of all the rights incident thereto , especially in the very important one of instituting their own governments , has been declared , and is known to the world .
separated as we are from europe by the great atlantic ocean , we can have no concern in the wars of the european governments nor in the causes which produce them .
the balance of power between them , into whichever scale it may turn in its various vibrations , can not affect us .
it is the interest of the united states to preserve the most friendly relations with every power and on conditions fair , equal , and applicable to all .
but in regard to our neighbors our situation is different .
it is impossible for the european governments to interfere in their concerns , especially in those alluded to , which are vital , without affecting us ; indeed , the motive which might induce such interference in the present state of the war between the parties , if a war it may be called , would appear to be equally applicable to us .
it is gratifying to know that some of the powers with whom we enjoy a very friendly intercourse , and to whom these views have been communicated , have appeared to acquiesce in them .
the augmentation of our population with the expansion of our union and increased number of states have produced effects in certain branches of our system which merit the attention of congress .
some of our arrangements , and particularly the judiciary establishment , were made with a view to the original 13 states only .
since then the united states have acquired a vast extent of territory ; eleven new states have been admitted into the union , and territories have been laid off for three others , which will likewise be admitted at no distant day .
an organization of the supreme court which assigns the judges any portion of the duties which belong to the inferior , requiring their passage over so vast a space under any distribution of the states that may now be made , if not impracticable in the execution , must render it impossible for them to discharge the duties of either branch with advantage to the union .
the duties of the supreme court would be of great importance if its decisions were confined to the ordinary limits of other tribunals , but when it is considered that this court decides , and in the last resort , on all the great questions which arise under our constitution , involving those between the united states individually , between the states and the united states , and between the latter and foreign powers , too high an estimate of their importance can not be formed .
the great interests of the nation seem to require that the judges of the supreme court should be exempted from every other duty than those which are incident to that high trust .
the organization of the inferior courts would of course be adapted to circumstances .
it is presumed that such an one might be formed as would secure an able and faithful discharge of their duties , and without any material augmentation of expense .
the condition of the aborigines within our limits , and especially those who are within the limits of any of the states , merits likewise particular attention .
experience has shown that unless the tribes be civilized they can never be incorporated into our system in any form whatever .
it has likewise shown that in the regular augmentation of our population with the extension of our settlements their situation will become deplorable , if their extinction is not menaced .
some well - digested plan which will rescue them from such calamities is due to their rights , to the rights of humanity , and to the honor of the nation .
their civilization is indispensable to their safety , and this can be accomplished only by degrees .
the process must commence with the infant state , through whom some effect may be wrought on the parental .
difficulties of the most serious character present themselves to the attainment of this very desirable result on the territory on which they now reside .
to remove them from it by force , even with a view to their own security and happiness , would be revolting to humanity and utterly unjustifiable .
between the limits of our present states and territories and the rocky mountains and mexico there is a vast territory to which they might be invited with inducements which might be successful .
it is thought if that territory should be divided into districts by previous agreement with the tribes now residing there and civil governments be established in each , with schools for every branch of instruction in literature and the arts of civilized life , that all the tribes now within our limits might gradually be drawn there .
the execution of this plan would necessarily be attended with expense , and that not inconsiderable , but it is doubted whether any other can be devised which would be less liable to that objection or more likely to succeed .
in looking to the interests which the united states have on the pacific ocean and on the western coast of this continent , the propriety of establishing a military post at the mouth of the columbia river , or at some other point in that quarter within our acknowledged limits , is submitted to the consideration of congress .
our commerce and fisheries on that sea and along the coast have much increased and are increasing .
it is thought that a military post , to which our ships of war might resort , would afford protection to every interest , and have a tendency to conciliate the tribes to the northwest , with whom our trade is extensive .
it is thought also that by the establishment of such a post the intercourse between our western states and territories and the pacific and our trade with the tribes residing in the interior on each side of the rocky mountains would be essentially promoted .
to carry this object into effect the appropriation of an adequate sum to authorize the employment of a frigate , with an officer of the corps of engineers , to explore the mouth of the columbia river and the coast contiguous thereto , to enable the executive to make such establishment at the most suitable point , is recommended to congress .
it is thought that attention is also due to the improvement of this city .
the communication between the public buildings and in various other parts and the grounds around those buildings require it .
it is presumed also that the completion of the canal from the tiber to the eastern branch would have a very salutary effect .
great exertions have been made and expenses incurred by the citizens in improvements of various kinds ; but those which are suggested belong exclusively to the government , or are of a nature to require expenditures beyond their resources .
the public lots which are still for sale would , it is not doubted , be more than adequate for these purposes .
from the view above presented it is manifest that the situation of the united states is in the highest degree prosperous and happy .
there is no object which as a people we can desire which we do not possess or which is not within our reach .
blessed with governments the happiest which the world ever knew , with no distinct orders in society or divided interests in any portion of the vast territory over which their dominion extends , we have every motive to cling together which can animate a virtuous and enlightened people .
the great object is to preserve these blessings , and to hand them down to the latest posterity .
our experience ought to satisfy us that our progress under the most correct and provident policy will not be exempt from danger .
our institutions form an important epoch in the history of the civilized world .
on their preservation and in their utmost purity everything will depend .
extending as our interests do to every part of the inhabited globe and to every sea to which our citizens are carried by their industry and enterprise , to which they are invited by the wants of others , and have a right to go , we must either protect them in the enjoyment of their rights or abandon them in certain events to waste and desolation .
our attitude is highly interesting as relates to other powers , and particularly to our southern neighbors .
we have duties to perform wrt all to which we must be faithful .
to every kind of danger we should pay the most vigilant and unceasing attention , remove the cause where it may be practicable , and be prepared to meet it when inevitable .
against foreign danger the policy of the government seems to be already settled .
the events of the late war admonished us to make our maritime frontier impregnable by a well - digested chain of fortifications , and to give efficient protection to our commerce by augmenting our navy to a certain extent , which has been steadily pursued , and which it is incumbent upon us to complete as soon as circumstances will permit .
in the event of war it is on the maritime frontier that we shall be assailed .
it is in that quarter , therefore , that we should be prepared to meet the attack .
it is there that our whole force will be called into action to prevent the destruction of our towns and the desolation and pillage of the interior .
to give full effect to this policy great improvements will be indispensable .
access to those works by every practicable communication should be made easy and in every direction .
the intercourse between every part of our union should also be promoted and facilitated by the exercise of those powers which may comport with a faithful regard to the great principles of our constitution .
with respect to internal causes , those great principles point out with equal certainty the policy to be pursued .
resting on the people as our governments do , state and national , with well - defined powers , it is of the highest importance that they severally keep within the limits prescribed to them .
fulfilling that sacred duty , it is of equal importance that the movement between them be harmonious , and in case of any disagreement , should any such occur , a calm appeal be made to the people , and that their voice be heard and promptly obeyed .
both governments being instituted for the common good , we can not fail to prosper while those who made them are attentive to the conduct of their representatives and control their measures .
in the pursuit of these great objects let a generous spirit and national views and feelings be indulged , and let every part recollect that by cherishing that spirit and improving the condition of the others in what relates to their welfare the general interest will not only be promoted , but the local advantage be reciprocated by all .
i can not conclude this communication , the last of the kind which i shall have to make , without recollecting with great sensibility and heart felt gratitude the many instances of the public confidence and the generous support which i have received from my fellow citizens in the various trusts with which i have been honored .
having commenced my service in early youth , and continued it since with few and short intervals , i have witnessed the great difficulties to which our union has been surmounted .
from the present prosperous and happy state i derive a gratification which i can not express .
that these blessings may be preserved and perpetuated will be the object of my fervent and unceasing prayers to the supreme ruler of the universe .

fellow citizens of the senate and house of representatives : 
 many causes unite to make your present meeting peculiarly interesting to out constituents .
the operation of our laws on the various subjects to which they apply , with the amendments which they occasionally require , imposes annually an important duty on the representatives of a free people .
our system has happily advanced to such maturity that i am not aware that your cares in that respect will be augmented .
other causes exist which are highly interesting to the whole civilized world and to no portion of it more so , in certain views , than to the united states .
of these causes and of their bearing on the interests of our union i shall communicate the sentiments which i have formed with that freedom which a sense of duty dictates .
it is proper , however , to invite your attention in the first instance to those concerns respecting which legislative provision is thought to be particularly urgent .
on the 24th of june last a convention of navigation and commerce was concluded in this city between the united states and france by ministers duly authorized for the purpose .
the sanction of the executive having been given to this convention under a conviction that , taking all its stipulations into view , it rested essentially on a basis of reciprocal and equal advantage , i deemed it my duty , in compliance with the authority vested in the executive by the second section of the act of the last session of the 6th of may , concerning navigation , to suspend by proclamation until the end of the next session of congress the operation of the act entitled " an act to impose a new tonnage duty on french ships and vessels , and for other purposes , " and to suspend likewise all other duties on french vessels or the goods imported in them which exceeded the duties on american vessels and on similar goods imported in them .
i shall submit this convention forthwith to the senate for its advice and consent as to the ratification .
since your last session the prohibition which had been imposed on the commerce between the united states and the british colonies in the west indies and on this continent has likewise been removed .
satisfactory evidence having been adduced that the ports of those colonies had been opened to the vessels of the united states by an act of the british parliament bearing date on the 24th of june last , on the conditions specified therein , i deemed it proper , in compliance with the provision of the first section of the act of the last session above recited , to declare , by proclamation bearing date on the 24th of august last , that the ports of the united states should thenceforward and until the end of the next session of congress be opened to the vessels of great britain employed in that trade , under the limitation specified in that proclamation .
a doubt was entertained whether the act of congress applied to the british colonies on this continent as well as to those in the west indies , but as the act of parliament opened the intercourse equally with both , and it was the manifest intention of congress , as well as the obvious policy of the united states , that the provisions of the act of parliament should be met in equal extent on the part of the united states , and as also the act of congress was supposed to vest in the president some discretion in the execution of it , i thought it advisable to give it a corresponding construction .
should the constitutional sanction of the senate be given to the ratification of the convention with france , legislative provisions will be necessary to carry it fully into effect , as it likewise will be to continue in force , on such conditions as may be deemed just and proper , the intercourse which has been opened between the united states and the british colonies .
every light in the possession of the executive will in due time be communicated on both subjects .
resting essentially on a basis of reciprocal and equal advantage , it has been the object of the executive in transactions with other powers to meet the propositions of each with a liberal spirit , believing that thereby the interest of our country would be most effectually promoted .
this course has been systematically pursued in the late occurrences with france and great britain , and in strict accord with the views of the legislature .
a confident hope is entertained that by the arrangement thus commenced with each all differences respecting navigation and commerce with the dominions in question will be adjusted , and a solid foundation be laid for an active and permanent intercourse which will prove equally advantageous to both parties .
the decision of his imperial majesty the emperor of russia on the question submitted to him by the united states and great britain , concerning the construction of the first article of the treaty of ghent , has been received .
a convention has since been concluded between the parties , under the mediation of his imperial majesty , to prescribe the mode by which that article shall be carried into effect in conformity with that decision .
i shall submit this convention to the senate for its advice and consent as to the ratification , and , if obtained , shall immediately bring the subject before congress for such provisions as may require the interposition of the legislature .
in compliance with an act of the last session a territorial government has been established in florida on the principles of our system .
by this act the inhabitants are secured in the full enjoyment of their rights and liberties , and to admission into the union , with equal participation in the government with the original states on the conditions heretofore prescribed to other territories .
by a clause in the ninth article of the treaty with spain , by which that territory was ceded to the united states , it is stipulated that satisfaction shall be made for the injuries , if any , which by process of law shall be established to have been suffered by the spanish officers and individual spanish inhabitants by the late operations of our troops in florida .
no provision having yet been made to carry that stipulation into effect , it is submitted to the consideration of congress whether it will not be proper to vest the competent power in the district court at pensacola , or in some tribunal to be specially organized for the purpose .
the fiscal operations of the year have been more successful than had been anticipated at the commencement of the last session of congress .
the receipts into the treasury during the three first quarters of the year have exceeded the sum of $ 14.745 million .
the payments made at the treasury during the same period have exceeded $ 12.279 million , leaving the treasury on the 30th day of september last , including $ 1,168,592.24 which were in the treasury on the first day of january last , a sum exceeding $ 4.128 million .
besides discharging all demands for the current service of the year , including the interest and reimbursement of the public debt , the 6 percent stock of 1796 , amounting to $ 80,000 , has been redeemed .
it is estimated that , after defraying the current expenses of the present quarter and redeeming the $ 2 million of 6 percent stock of 1820 , there will remain in the treasury on the first of january next nearly $ 3 million .
it is estimated that the gross amount of duties which have been secured from the first of january to the 30th of september last has exceeded $ 19.5 million , and the amount for the whole year will probably not fall short of $ 23 million .
of the actual force in service under the present military establishment , the posts at which it is stationed , and the condition of each post , a report from the secretary of war which is now communicated will give a distinct idea .
by like reports the state of the academy at west point will be seen , as will be the progress which has been made on the fortifications along the coast and at the national armories and arsenals .
the organization of the several corps composing the army is such as to admit its expansion to a great extent in case of emergency , the officers carrying with them all the light which they possess to the new corps to which they might be appointed .
with the organization of the staff there is equal cause to be satisfied .
by the concentration of every branch with its chief in this city , in the presence of the department , and with a grade in the chief military station to keep alive and cherish a military spirit , the greatest promptitude in the execution of orders , with the greatest economy and efficiency , are secured .
the same view is taken of the military academy .
good order is preserved in it , and the youth are well instructed in every science connected with the great objects of the institution .
they are also well trained and disciplined in the practical parts of the profession .
it has been always found difficult to control the ardor inseparable from that early age in such manner as to give it a proper direction .
the rights of manhood are too often claimed prematurely , in pressing which too far the respect which is due to age and the obedience necessary to a course of study and instruction in every such institution are sometimes lost sight of .
the great object to be accomplished is the restraint of that ardor by such wise regulations and government as , by directing all the energies of the youthful mind to the attainment of useful knowledge , will keep it within a just subordination and at the same time elevate it to the highest purposes .
this object seems to be essentially obtained in this institution , and with great advantage to the union .
the military academy forms the basis , in regard to science , on which the military establishment rests .
it furnishes annually , after due examination and on the report of the academic staff , many well - informed youths to fill the vacancies which occur in the several corps of the army , while others who retire to private life carry with them such attainments as , under the right reserved to the several states to appoint the officers and to train the militia , will enable them , by affording a wider field for selection , to promote the great object of the power vested in congress of providing for the organizing , arming , and disciplining the militia .
thus by the mutual and harmonious cooperation of the two governments in the execution of a power divided between them , an object always to be cherished , the attainment of a great result , on which our liberties may depend , can not fail to be secured .
i have to add that in proportion as our regular force is small should the instruction and discipline of the militia , the great resource on which we rely , be pushed to the utmost extent that circumstances will admit .
a report from the secretary of the navy will communicate the progress which has been made in the construction of vessels of war , with other interesting details respecting the actual state of the affairs of that department .
it has been found necessary for the protection of our commerce to maintain the usual squadrons on the mediterranean , the pacific , and along the atlantic coast , extending the cruises of the latter into the west indies , where piracy , organized into a system , has preyed on the commerce of every country trading thither .
a cruise has also been maintained on the coast of africa , when the season would permit , for the suppression of the slave trade , and orders have been given to the commanders of all our public ships to seize our own vessels , should they find any engaging in that trade , and to bring them in for adjudication .
in the west indies piracy is of recent date , which may explain the cause why other powers have not combined against it .
by the documents communicated it will be seen that the efforts of the united states to suppress it have had a very salutary effect .
the benevolent provision of the act under which the protection has been extended alike to the commerce of other nations can not fail to be duly appreciated by them .
in compliance with the act of the last session entitled " an act to abolish the united states trading establishments , " agents were immediately appointed and instructed , under the direction of the secretary of the treasury , to close the business of the trading houses among the indian tribes and to settle the accounts of the factors and subfactors engaged in that trade , and to execute in all other respects the injunction of that act in the mode prescribed therein .
a final report of their proceedings shall be communicated to congress as soon as it is received .
it is with great regret i have to state that a serious malady has deprived us of many valuable citizens of pensacola and checked the progress of some of those arrangements which are important to the territory .
this effect has been sensibly felt in respect to the indians who inhabit that territory , consisting of the remnants of the several tribes who occupy the middle ground between st. augustine and pensacola , with extensive claims but undefined boundaries .
although peace is preserved with those indians , yet their position and claims tend essentially to interrupt the intercourse between the eastern and western parts of the territory , on which our inhabitants are principally settled .
it is essential to the growth and prosperity of the territory , as well as to the interests of the union , that those indians should be removed , by special compact with them , to some other position or concentration within narrower limits where they are .
with the limited means in the power of the executive , instructions were given to the governor to accomplish this object so far as it might be practicable , which was prevented by the distressing malady referred to .
to carry it fully into effect in either mode additional funds will be necessary , to the provision of which the powers of congress are competent .
with a view to such provision as may be deemed proper , the subject is submitted to your consideration , and in the interim further proceedings are suspended .
it appearing that so much of the act entitled " an act regulating the staff of the army , " which passed on [ 1818 - 04 - 14 ] , as relates to the commissariat will expire in april next , and the practical operation of that department having evinced its great utility , the propriety of its renewal is submitted to your consideration .
the view which has been taken of the probable productiveness of the lead mines , connected with the importance of the material to the public defense , makes it expedient that they should be managed with peculiar care .
it is therefore suggested whether it will not comport with the public interest to provide by law for the appointment of an agent skilled in mineralogy to superintend them , under the direction of the proper department .
it is understood that the cumberland road , which was constructed at great expense , has already suffered from the want of that regular superintendence and of those repairs which are indispensable to the preservation of such a work .
this road is of incalculable advantage in facilitating the intercourse between the western and the atlantic states .
through the whole country from the northern extremity of lake erie to the mississippi , and from all the waters which empty into each , finds and easy and direct communication to the seat of government , and thence to the atlantic .
the facility which it affords to all military and commercial operations , and also to those of the post office department , can not be estimated too highly .
this great work is likewise an ornament and an honor to the nation .
believing that a competent power to adopt and execute a system of internal improvement has not been granted to congress , but that such a power , confined to great national purposes and with proper limitations , would be productive of eminent advantage to our union , i have thought it advisable that an amendment of the constitution to that effect should be recommended to the several states .
a bill which assumed the right to adopt and execute such a system having been presented for my signature at the last session , i was compelled , from the view which i had taken of the powers of the general government , to negative it , on which occasion i thought it proper to communicate the sentiments which i had formed , on mature consideration , on the whole subject .
to that communication , in all the views in which the great interest to which it relates may be supposed to merit your attention , i have now to refer .
should congress , however , deem it improper to recommend such an amendment , they have , according to my judgment , the right to keep the road in repair by providing for the superintendence of it and appropriating the money necessary for repairs .
surely if they had the right to appropriate money to make the road they have a right to appropriate it to preserve the road from ruin .
from the exercise of this power no danger is to be apprehended .
under our happy system the people are the sole and exclusive fountain of power .
each government originates from them , and to them alone , each to its proper constituents , are they respectively and solely responsible for the faithful discharge of their duties within their constitutional limits ; and that the people will confine their public agents of every station to the strict line of their constitutional duties there is no cause of doubt .
having , however , communicated my sentiments to congress at the last session fully in the document to which i have referred , respecting the right of appropriation as distinct from the right of jurisdiction and sovereignty over the territory in question , i deem it improper to enlarge on the subject here .
from the best information i have been able to obtain it appears that our manufactures , though depressed immediately after the peace , have considerably increased , and are still increasing , under the encouragement given them by the tariff of 1816 and by subsequent laws .
satisfied i am , whatever may be the abstract doctrine in favor of unrestricted commerce , provided all nations would concur in it and it was not liable to be interrupted by war , which has never occurred and can not be expected , that there are other strong reasons applicable to our situation and relations with other countries which impose on us the obligation to cherish and sustain our manufactures .
satisfied , however , i likewise am that the interest of every part of our union , even of those most benefitted by manufactures , requires that this subject should be touched with the greatest caution , and a critical knowledge of the effect to be produced by the slightest change .
on full consideration of the subject in all its relations i am persuaded that a further augmentation may now be made of the duties on certain foreign articles in favor of our own and without affecting injuriously any other interest .
for more precise details i refer you to the communications which were made to congress during the last session .
so great was the amount of accounts for moneys advanced during the late war , in addition to others of a previous date which in the regular operations of the government necessarily remained unsettled , that it required a considerable length of time for their adjustment .
by a report from the first comptroller of the treasury it appears that on [ 1817 - 03 - 04 ] , the accounts then unsettled amounted to $ 103,068,876.41 , of which on [ 1922 - 09 - 30 ] , $ 93,175,396.56 had been settled , leaving on that day a balance unsettled of $ 9,893,479.85 .
that there have been drawn from the treasury , in paying the public debt and sustaining the government in all its operations and disbursements , since [ 1817 - 03 - 04 ] , $ 157,199,380.96 , the accounts for which have been settled to the amount of $ 137,501,451.12 , leaving a balance unsettled of $ 19,697,929.84 .
for precise details respecting each of these balances i refer to the report of the comptroller and the documents which accompany it .
from this view it appears that our commercial differences with france and great britain have been placed in a train of amicable arrangement on conditions fair and honorable in both instances to each party ; that our finances are in a very productive state , our revenue being at present fully competent to all the demands upon it ; that our military force is well organized in all its branches and capable of rendering the most important service in case of emergency that its number will admit of ; that due progress has been made , under existing appropriations , in the construction of fortifications and in the operations of the ordnance department ; that due progress has in like manner been made in the construction of ships of war ; that our navy is in the best condition , felt and respected in every sea in which it is employed for the protection of our commerce ; that our manufactures have augmented in amount and improved in quality ; that great progress has been made in the settlement of accounts and in the recovery of the balances due by individuals , and that the utmost economy is secured and observed in every department of the administration .
other objects will likewise claim your attention , because from the station which the united states hold as a member of the great community of nations they have rights to maintain , duties to perform , and dangers to encounter .
a strong hope was entertained that peace would ere this have been concluded between spain and the independent governments south of the united states in this hemisphere .
long experience having evinced the competency of those governments to maintain the independence which they had declared , it was presumed that the considerations which induced their recognition by the united states would have had equal weight with other powers , and that spain herself , yielding to those magnanimous feelings of which her history furnishes so many examples , would have terminated on that basis a controversy so unavailing and at the same time so destructive .
we still cherish the hope that this result will not long be postponed .
sustaining our neutral position and allowing to each party while the war continues equal rights , it is incumbent on the united states to claim of each with equal rigor the faithful observance of our rights according to the well - known law of nations .
from each , therefore , a like cooperation is expected in the suppression of the piratical practice which has grown out of this war and of blockades of extensive coasts on both seas , which , considering the small force employed to sustain them , have not the slightest foundation to rest on .
europe is still unsettled , and although the war long menaced between russia and turkey has not broken out , there is no certainty that the differences between those powers will be amicably adjusted .
it is impossible to look to the oppressions of the country respecting which those differences arose without being deeply affected .
the mention of greece fills the mind with the most exalted sentiments and arouses in our bosoms the best feelings of which our nature is susceptible .
superior skill and refinement in the arts , heroic gallantry in action , disinterested patriotism , enthusiastic zeal and devotion in favor of public and personal liberty are associated with our recollections of ancient greece .
that such a country should have been overwhelmed and so long hidden , as it were , from the world under a gloomy despotism has been a cause of unceasing and deep regret to generous minds for ages past .
it was natural , therefore , that the reappearance of those people in their original character , contending in favor of their liberties , should produce that great excitement and sympathy in their favor which have been so signally displayed throughout the united states .
a strong hope is entertained that these people will recover their independence and resume their equal station among the nations of the earth .
a great effort has been made in spain and portugal to improve the condition of the people , and it must be very consoling to all benevolent minds to see the extraordinary moderation with which it has been conducted .
that it may promote the happiness of both nations is the ardent wish of this whole people , to the expression of which we confine ourselves ; for whatever may be the feelings or sentiments which every individual under our government has a right to indulge and express , it is nevertheless a sacred maxim , equally with the government and people , that the destiny of every independent nation in what relates to such improvements of right belongs and ought to be left exclusively to themselves .
whether we reason from the late wars or from those menacing symptoms which now appear in europe , it is manifest that if a convulsion should take place in any of those countries it will proceed from causes which have no existence and are utterly unknown in these states , in which there is but one order , that of the people , to whom the sovereignty exclusively belongs .
should war break out in any of those countries who can foretell the extent to which it may be carried or the desolation which it may spread ?
exempt as we are from these causes , our internal tranquillity is secure ; and distant as we are from the troubled scene , and faithful to first principles in regard to other powers , we might reasonably presume that we should not be molested by them .
this , however , ought not to be calculated on as certain .
unprovoked injuries are often inflicted and even the peculiar felicity of our situation might with some be a cause for excitement and aggression .
the history of the late wars in europe furnishes a complete demonstration that no system of conduct , however correct in principle , can protect neutral powers from injury from any party ; that a defenseless position and distinguished love of peace are the surest invitations to war , and that there is no way to avoid it other than by being always prepared and willing for just cause to meet it .
if there be a people on earth whose more especial duty it is to be at all times prepared to defend the rights with which they are blessed , and to surpass all others in sustaining the necessary burthens , and in submitting to sacrifices to make such preparations , it is undoubtedly the people of these states .
when we see that a civil war of the most frightful character rages from the adriatic to the black sea ; that strong symptoms of war appear in other parts , proceeding from causes which , should it break out , may become general and be of long duration ; that the war still continues between spain and the independent governments , her late provinces , in this hemisphere ; that it is likewise menaced between portugal and brazil , in consequence of the attempt of the latter to dismember itself from the former , and that a system of piracy of great extent is maintained in the neighboring seas , which will require equal vigilance and decision to suppress it , the reasons for sustaining the attitude which we now hold and for pushing forward all our measures of defense with the utmost vigor appear to me to acquire new force .
the united states owe to the world a great example , and , by means thereof , to the cause of liberty and humanity a generous support .
they have so far succeeded to the satisfaction of the virtuous and enlightened of every country .
there is no reason to doubt that their whole movement will be regulated by a sacred regard to principle , all our institutions being founded on that basis .
the ability to support our own cause under any trial to which it may be exposed is the great point on which the public solicitude rests .
it has been often charged against free governments that they have neither the foresight nor the virtue to provide at the proper season for great emergencies ; that their course is improvident and expensive ; that war will always find them unprepared , and , whatever may be its calamities , that its terrible warnings will be disregarded and forgotten as soon as peace returns .
i have full confidence that this charge so far as relates to the united states will be shewn to be utterly destitute of truth .

fellow citizens of the senate and of the house of representatives : 
 in communicating to you a just view of public affairs at the commencement of your present labors , i do it with great satisfaction , because , taking all circumstances into consideration which claim attention , i see much cause to rejoice in the felicity of our situation .
in making this remark i do not wish to be understood to imply that an unvaried prosperity is to be seen in every interest of this great community .
in the progress of a nation inhabiting a territory of such vast extent and great variety of climate , every portion of which is engaged in foreign commerce and liable to be affected in some degree by the changes which occur in the condition and regulations of foreign countries , it would be strange if the produce of our soil and the industry and enterprise of our fellow citizens received at all times and in every quarter an uniform and equal encouragement .
this would be more than we would have a right to expect under circumstances the most favorable .
pressures on certain interests , it is admitted , have been felt ; but allowing to these their greatest extent , they detract but little from the force of the remarks already made .
in forming a just estimate of our present situation it is proper to look at the whole in the outline as well as in the detail .
a free , virtuous , and enlightened people know well the great principles and causes on which their happiness depends , and even those who suffer most occasionally in their transitory concerns find great relief under their sufferings from the blessings which they otherwise enjoy and in the consoling and animating hope which they administer .
from whence do these pressures come ?
not from a government which is founded by , administered for , and supported by the people .
we trace them to the peculiar character of the epoch in which we live , and to the extraordinary occurrences which have signalized it .
the convulsions with which several of the powers of europe have been shaken and the long and destructive wars in which all were engaged , with their sudden transition to a state of peace , presenting in the 1st instance unusual encouragement to our commerce and withdrawing it in the second even within its wonted limit , could not fail to be sensibly felt here .
the station , too , which we had to support through this long conflict , compelled as we were finally to become a party to it with a principal power , and to make great exertions , suffer heavy losses , and to contract considerable debts , disturbing the ordinary course of affairs by augmenting to a vast amount the circulating medium , and thereby elevating at one time the price of every article above a just standard and depressing it at another below it , had likewise its due effect .
it is manifest that the pressures of which we complain have proceeded in a great measure from these causes .
when , then , we take into view the prosperous and happy condition of our country in all the great circumstances which constitute the felicity of a nation - every individual in the full enjoyment of all his rights , the union blessed with plenty and rapidly rising to greatness under a national government which operates with complete effect in every part without being felt in any except by the ample protection which it affords , and under state governments which perform their equal share , according to a wise distribution of power between them , in promoting the public happiness - it is impossible to behold so gratifying , so glorious a spectacle without being penetrated with the most profound and grateful acknowledgments to the supreme author of all good for such manifold and inestimable blessings .
deeply impressed with these sentiments , i can not regard the pressures to which i have adverted otherwise than in the light of mild and instructive admonitions , warning us of dangers to be shunned in future , teaching us lessons of economy corresponding with the simplicity and purity of our institutions and best adapted to their support , evincing the connection and dependence which the various parts of our happy union have on each other , thereby augmenting daily our social incorporation and adding by its strong ties new strength and vigor to the political ; opening a wider range , and with new encouragement , to the industry and enterprise of our fellow citizens at home and abroad , and more especially by the multiplied proofs which it has accumulated of the great perfection of our most excellent system of government , the powerful instrument in the hands of our all - merciful creator in securing to us these blessings .
happy as our situation is , it does not exempt us from solicitude and care for the future .
on the contrary , as the blessings which we enjoy are great , proportionably great should be our vigilance , zeal , and activity to preserve them .
foreign wars may again expose us to new wrongs , which would impose on us new duties for which we ought to be prepared .
the state of europe is unsettled , and how long peace may be preserved is altogether uncertain ; in addition to which we have interests of our own to adjust which will require particular attention .
a correct view of our relations with each power will enable you to form a just idea of existing difficulties , and of the measures of precaution best adapted to them .
respecting our relations with spain nothing explicit can now be communicated .
on the adjournment of congress in may last the minister plenipotentiary of the united states at madrid was instructed to inform the government of spain that if his catholic majesty should then ratify the treaty this government would accept the ratification so far as to submit to the decision of the senate the question whether such ratification should be received in exchange for that of the united states heretofore given .
by letters from the minister of the united states to the secretary of state it appears that a communication in conformity with his instructions had been made to the government of spain , and that the cortes had the subject under consideration .
the result of the deliberations of that body , which is daily expected , will be made known to congress as soon as it is received .
the friendly sentiment which was expressed on the part of the united states in the message of the 9th of may last is still entertained for spain .
among the causes of regret , however , which are inseparable from the delay attending this transaction it is proper to state that satisfactory information has been received that measures have been recently adopted by designing persons to convert certain parts of the province of east florida into depots for the reception of foreign goods , from whence to smuggle them into the united states .
by opening a port within the limits of florida , immediately on our boundary where there was no settlement , the object could not be misunderstood .
an early accommodation of differences will , it is hoped , prevent all such fraudulent and pernicious practices , and place the relations of the two countries on a very amicable and permanent basis .
the commercial relations between the united states and the british colonies in the west indies and on this continent have undergone no change , the british government still preferring to leave that commerce under the restriction heretofore imposed on it on each side .
it is satisfactory to recollect that the restraints resorted to by the united states were defensive only , intended to prevent a monopoly under british regulations in favor of great britain , as it likewise is to know that the experiment is advancing in a spirit of amity between the parties .
the question depending between the united states and great britain respecting the construction of the first article of the treaty of ghent has been referred by both governments to the decision of the emperor of russia , who has accepted the umpirage .
an attempt has been made with the government of france to regulate by treaty the commerce between the two countries on the principle of reciprocity and equality .
by the last communication from the minister plenipotentiary of the united states at paris , to whom full power had been given , we learn that the negotiation has been commenced there ; but serious difficulties having occurred , the french government had resolved to transfer it to the united states , for which purpose the minister plenipotentiary of france had been ordered to repair to this city , and whose arrival might soon be expected .
it is hoped that this important interest may be arranged on just conditions and in a manner equally satisfactory to both parties .
it is submitted to congress to decide , until such arrangement is made , how far it may be proper , on the principle of the act of the last session which augmented the tonnage duty on french vessels , to adopt other measures for carrying more completely into effect the policy of that act .
the act referred to , which imposed new tonnage on french vessels , having been in force from and after the first day of july , it has happened that several vessels of that nation which had been dispatched from france before its existence was known have entered the ports of the united states , and been subject to its operation , without that previous notice which the general spirit of our laws gives to individuals in similar cases .
the object of that law having been merely to countervail the inequalities which existed to the disadvantage of the united states in their commercial intercourse with france , it is submitted also to the consideration of congress whether , in the spirit of amity and conciliation which it is no less the inclination than the policy of the united states to preserve in their intercourse with other powers , it may not be proper to extend relief to the individuals interested in those cases by exempting from the operation of the law all those vessels which have entered our ports without having had the means of previously knowing the existence of the additional duty .
the contest between spain and the colonies , according to the most authentic information , is maintained by the latter with improved success .
the unfortunate divisions which were known to exist some time since at buenos ayres it is understood still prevail .
in no part of south america has spain made any impression on the colonies , while in many parts , and particularly in venezuela and new grenada , the colonies have gained strength and acquired reputation , both for the management of the war in which they have been successful and for the order of the internal administration .
the late change in the government of spain , by the reestablishment of the constitution of 1812 , is an event which promises to be favorable to the revolution .
under the authority of the cortes the congress of angostura was invited to open a negotiation for the settlement of differences between the parties , to which it was replied that they would willingly open the negotiation provided the acknowledgment of their independence was made its basis , but not otherwise .
no facts are known to this government to warrant the belief that any of the powers of europe will take part in the contest , whence it may be inferred , considering all circumstances which must have weight in producing the result , that an adjustment will finally take place on the basis proposed by the colonies .
to promote that result by friendly counsels with other powers , including spain herself , has been the uniform policy of this government .
in looking to the internal concerns of our country you will , i am persuaded , derive much satisfaction from a view of the several objects to which , in the discharge of your official duties , your attention will be drawn .
among these none holds a more important place than the public revenue , from the direct operation of the power by which it is raised on the people , and by its influence in giving effect to every other power of the government .
the revenue depends on the resources of the country , and the facility by which the amount required is raised is a strong proof of the extent of the resources and of the efficiency of the government .
a few prominent facts will place this great interest in a just light before you .
on [ 1815 - 09 - 30 ] , the funded and floating debt of the united states was estimated at $ 119,635,558 .
if to this sum be added the amount of 5 % stock subscribed to the bank of the united states , the amount of mississippi stock and of the stock which was issued subsequently to that date , and as afterwards liquidated , to $ 158,713,049 .
on [ 1820 - 09 - 30 ] , it amounted to $ 91,993,883 , having been reduced in that interval by payments $ 66,879,165 .
during this term the expenses of the government of the united states were likewise defrayed in every branch of the civil , military , and naval establishments ; the public edifices in this city have been rebuilt with considerable additions ; extensive fortifications have been commenced , and are in a train of execution ; permanent arsenals and magazines have been erected in various parts of the union ; our navy has been considerably augmented , and the ordnance , munitions of war , and stores of the army and navy , which were much exhausted during the war , have been replenished .
by the discharge of so large a proportion of the public debt and the execution of such extensive and important operations in so short a time a just estimate may be formed of the great extent of our national resources .
the demonstration is the more complete and gratifying when it is recollected that the direct tax and excise were repealed soon after the termination of the late war , and that the revenue applied to these purposes has been derived almost wholly from other sources .
the receipts into the treasury from every source to the 30th of september last have amounted to $ 16,794,107.66 , whilst the public expenditures to the same period amounted to $ 16,871,534.72 , leaving in the treasury on that day a sum estimated at $ 1.95m. for the probable receipts of the following year i refer you to the statement which will be transmitted from the treasury .
the sum of $ 3 m authorized to be raised by loan by an act of the last session of congress has been obtained upon terms advantageous to the government , indicating not only an increased confidence in the faith of the nation , but the existence of a large amount of capital seeking that mode of investment at a rate of interest not exceeding 5 % per annum .
it is proper to add that there is now due to the treasury for the sale of public lands $ 22,996,545 .
in bringing this subject to view i consider it my duty to submit to congress whether it may not be advisable to extend to the purchasers of these lands , in consideration of the unfavorable change which has occurred since the sales , a reasonable indulgence .
it is known that the purchases were made when the price of every article had risen to its greatest height , and the installments are becoming due at a period of great depression .
it is presumed that some plan may be devised by the wisdom of congress , compatible with the public interest , which would afford great relief to these purchasers .
considerable progress has been made during the present season in examining the coast and its various bays and other inlets , in the collection of materials , and in the construction of fortifications for the defense of the union at several of the positions at which it has been decided to erect such works .
at mobile point and dauphin island , and at the rigolets , leading to lake pontchartrain , materials to a considerable amount have been collected , and all the necessary preparations made for the commencement of the works .
at old point comfort , at the mouth of the james river , and at the rip - rap , on the opposite shore in the chesapeake bay , materials to a vast amount have been collected ; and at the old point some progress has been made in the construction of the fortification , which is on a very extensive scale .
the work at fort washington , on this river , will be completed early in the next spring , and that on the pea patch , in the delaware , in the course of the next season .
fort diamond , at the narrows , in the harbor of ny , will be finished this year .
the works at boston , ny , baltimore , norfolk , charleston , and niagara have been in part repaired , and the coast of nc , extending south to cape fear , has been examined , as have likewise other parts of the coast eastward of boston .
great exertions have been made to push forward these works with the utmost dispatch possible ; but when their extent is considered , with the important purposes for which they are intended - the defense of the whole coast , and , in consequence , of the whole interior - and that they are to last for ages , it will be manifest that a well- digested plan , founded on military principles , connecting the whole together , combining security with economy , could not be prepared without repeated examinations of the most exposed and difficult parts , and that it would also take considerable time to collect the materials at the several points where they would be required .
from all the light that has been shed on this subject i am satisfied that every favorable anticipation which has been formed of this great undertaking will be verified , and that when completed it will afford very great if not complete protection to our atlantic frontier in the event of another war - protection sufficient to counterbalance in a single campaign with an enemy powerful at sea the expense of all these works , without taking into the estimate the saving of the lives of so many of our citizens , the protection of our towns and other property , or the tendency of such works to prevent war .
our military positions have been maintained at belle point , on the arkansas , at council bluffs , on the missouri , at st. peters , on the mississippi , and at green bay , on the upper lakes .
commodious barracks have already been erected at most of these posts , with such works as were necessary for their defense .
progress has also been made in opening communications between them and in raising supplies at each for the support of the troops by their own labor , particularly those most remote .
with the indians peace has been preserved and a progress made in carrying into effect the act of congress making an appropriation for their civilization , with the prospect of favorable results .
as connected equally with both these objects , our trade with those tribes is thought to merit the attention of congress .
in their original state game is their sustenance and war their occupation , and if they find no employment from civilized powers they destroy each other .
left to themselves their extirpation is inevitable .
by a judicious regulation of our trade with them we supply their wants , administer to their comforts , and gradually , as the game retires , draw them to us .
by maintaining posts far in the interior we acquire a more thorough and direct control over them , without which it is confidently believed that a complete change in their manners can never be accomplished .
by such posts , aided by a proper regulation of our trade with them and a judicious civil administration over them , to be provided for by law , we shall , it is presumed , be enabled not only to protect our own settlements from their savage incursions and preserve peace among the several tribes , but accomplish also the great purpose of their civilization .
considerable progress has also been made in the construction of ships of war , some of which have been launched in the course of the present year .
our peace with the powers on the coast of barbary has been preserved , but we owe it altogether to the presence of our squadron in the mediterranean .
it has been found equally necessary to employ some of our vessels for the protection of our commerce in the indian sea , the pacific , and along the atlantic coast .
the interests which we have depending in those quarters , which have been much improved of late , are of great extent and of high importance to the nation as well as to the parties concerned , and would undoubtedly suffer if such protection was not extended to them .
in execution of the law of the last session for the suppression of the slave trade some of our public ships have also been employed on the coast of africa , where several captures have already been made of vessels engaged in that disgraceful traffic .

fellow citizens of the senate and of the house of representatives : 
 the public buildings being advanced to a stage to afford accommodation for congress , i offer you my sincere congratulations on the recommencement of your duties in the capitol .
in bringing you to view the incidents most deserving attention which have occurred since your last session , i regret to have to state that several of our principal cities have suffered by sickness , that an unusual drought has prevailed in the middle and western states , and that a derangement has been felt in some of our moneyed institutions which has proportionably affected their credit .
i am happy , however , to have it in my power to assure you that the health of our cities is now completely restored ; that the produce of the year , though less abundant than usual , will not only be amply sufficient for home consumption , but afford a large surplus for the supply of the wants of other nations , and that the derangement in the circulating paper medium , by being left to those remedies which its obvious causes suggested and the good sense and virtue of our fellow citizens supplied , has diminished .
having informed congress , on the 27th of february last , that a treaty of amity , settlement , and limits had been concluded in this city between the united states and spain , and ratified by the competent authorities of the former , full confidence was entertained that it would have been ratified by his catholic majesty with equal promptitude and a like earnest desire to terminate on the conditions of that treaty the differences which had so long existed between the two countries .
every view which the subject admitted of was thought to have justified this conclusion .
great losses had been sustained by citizens of the united states from spanish cruisers more than 20 years before , which had not been redressed .
these losses had been acknowledged and provided for by a treaty as far back as the year 1802 , which , although concluded at madrid , was not then ratified by the government of spain , nor since , until the last year , when it was suspended by the late treaty , a more satisfactory provision to both parties , as was presumed , having been made for them .
other differences had arisen in this long interval , affecting their highest interests , which were likewise provided for by this last treaty .
the treaty itself was formed on great consideration and a thorough knowledge of all circumstances , the subject matter of every article having been for years under discussion and repeated references having been made by the minister of spain to his government on the points respecting which the greatest difference of opinion prevailed .
it was formed by a minister duly authorized for the purpose , who had represented his government in the united states and been employed in this long- protracted negotiation several years , and who , it is not denied , kept strictly within the letter of his instructions .
the faith of spain was therefore pledged , under circumstances of peculiar force and solemnity , for its ratification .
on the part of the united states this treaty was evidently acceded to in a spirit of conciliation and concession .
the indemnity for injuries and losses so long before sustained , and now again acknowledged and provided for , was to be paid by them without becoming a charge on the treasury of spain .
for territory ceded by spain other territory of great value , to which our claim was believed to be well founded , was ceded by the united states , and in a quarter more interesting to her .
this cession was nevertheless received as the means of indemnifying our citizens in a considerable sum , the presumed amount of their losses .
other considerations of great weight urged the cession of this territory by spain .
it was surrounded by the territories of the united states on every side except on that of the ocean .
spain had lost her authority over it , and , falling into the hands of adventurers connected with the savages , it was made the means of unceasing annoyance and injury to our union in many of its most essential interests .
by this cession , then , spain ceded a territory in reality of no value to her and obtained concessions of the highest importance by the settlement of long- standing differences with the united states affecting their respective claims and limits , and likewise relieved herself from the obligation of a treaty relating to it which she had failed to fulfill , and also from the responsibility incident to the most flagrant and pernicious abuses of her rights where she could not support her authority .
it being known that the treaty was formed under these circumstances , not a doubt was entertained that his catholic majesty would have ratified it without delay .
i regret to have to state that this reasonable expectation has been disappointed ; that the treaty was not ratified within the time stipulated and has not since been ratified .
as it is important that the nature and character of this unexpected occurrence should be distinctly understood , i think it my duty to communicate to you all the facts and circumstances in my possession relating to it .
anxious to prevent all future disagreement with spain by giving the most prompt effect to the treaty which had been thus concluded , and particularly by the establishment of a government in florida which should preserve order there , the minister of the united states who had been recently appointed to his catholic majesty , and to whom the ratification by his government had been committed to be exchanged for that of spain , was instructed to transmit the latter to the department of state as soon as obtained , by a public ship subjected to his order for the purpose .
unexpected delay occurring in the ratification by spain , he requested to be informed of the cause .
it was stated in reply that the great importance of the subject , and a desire to obtain explanations on certain points which were not specified , had produced the delay , and that an envoy would be dispatched to the united states to obtain such explanations of this government .
the minister of the united states offered to give full explanation on any point on which it might be desired , which proposal was declined .
having communicated this result to the department of state in august last , he was instructed , notwithstanding the disappointment and surprise which it produced , to inform the government of spain that if the treaty should be ratified and transmitted here at any time before the meeting of congress it would be received and have the same effect as if it had been ratified in due time .
this order was executed , the authorized communication was made to the government of spain , and by its answer , which has just been received , we are officially made acquainted for the first time with the causes which have prevented the ratification of the treaty by his catholic majesty .
it is alleged by the minister of spain that his government had attempted to alter one of the principal articles of the treaty by a declaration which the minister of the united states had been ordered to present when he should deliver the ratification by his government in exchange for that of spain , and of which he gave notice , explanatory of the sense in which that article was understood .
it is further alleged that this government had recently tolerated or protected an expedition from the united states against the province of texas .
these two imputed acts are stated as the reasons which have induced his catholic majesty to withhold his ratification from the treaty , to obtain explanations respecting which it is repeated that an envoy would be forthwith dispatched to the united states .
how far these allegations will justify the conduct of the government of spain will appear on a view of the following facts and the evidence which supports them : 
 it will be seen by the documents transmitted herewith that the declaration mentioned relates to a clause in the 8th article concerning certain grants of land recently made by his catholic majesty in florida , which it was understood had conveyed all the lands which until then had been ungranted ; it was the intention of the parties to annul these latter grants , and that clause was drawn for that express purpose and for none other .
the date of these grants was unknown , but it was understood to be posterior to that inserted in the article ; indeed , it must be obvious to all that if that provision in the treaty had not the effect of annulling these grants , it would be altogether nugatory .
immediately after the treaty was concluded and ratified by this government an intimation was received that these grants were of anterior date to that fixed on by the treaty and that they would not , of course , be affected by it .
the mere possibility of such a case , so inconsistent with the intention of the parties and the meaning of the article , induced this government to demand an explanation on the subject , which was immediately granted , and which corresponds with this statement .
wrt the other act alleged , that this government had tolerated or protected an expedition against texas , it is utterly without foundation .
every discountenance has invariably been given to any such attempt within the limits of the united states , as is fully evinced by the acts of the government and the proceedings of the courts .
there being cause , however , to apprehend , in the course of the last summer , that some adventurers entertained views of the kind suggested , the attention of the constituted authorities in that quarter was immediately drawn to them , and it is known that the project , whatever it might be , has utterly failed .
these facts will , it is presumed , satisfy every impartial mind that the government of spain had no justifiable cause for declining to ratify the treaty .
a treaty concluded in conformity with instructions is obligatory , in good faith , in all its stipulations , according to the true intent and meaning of the parties .
each party is bound to ratify it .
if either could set it aside without the consent of the other , there would be no longer any rules applicable to such transactions between nations .
by this proceeding the government of spain has rendered to the united states a new and very serious injury .
it has been stated that a minister would be sent to ask certain explanations of this government ; but if such were desired , why were they not asked within the time limited for the ratification ?
is it contemplated to open a new negotiation respecting any of the articles or conditions of the treaty ?
if that were done , to what consequences might it not lead ?
at what time and in what manner would a new negotiation terminate ?
by this proceeding spain has formed a relation between the two countries which will justify any measures on the part of the united states which a strong sense of injury and a proper regard for the rights and interests of the nation may dictate .
in the course to be pursued these objects should be constantly held in view and have their due weight .
our national honor must be maintained , and a new and a distinguished proof be afforded of that regard for justice and moderation which has invariably governed the councils of this free people .
it must be obvious to all that if the united states had been desirous of making conquests , or had been even willing to aggrandize themselves in that way , they could have had no inducement to form this treaty .
they would have much cause for gratulation at the course which has been pursued by spain .
an ample field for ambition is open before them , but such a career is not consistent with the principles of their government nor the interests of the nation .
from a full view of all circumstances , it is submitted to the consideration of congress whether it will not be proper for the united states to carry the conditions of the treaty into effect in the same manner as if it had been ratified by spain , claiming on their part all its advantages and yielding to spain those secured to her .
by pursuing this course we shall rest on the sacred ground of right , sanctioned in the most solemn manner by spain herself by a treaty which she was bound to ratify , for refusing to do which she must incur the censure of other nations , even those most friendly to her , while by confining ourselves within that limit we can not fail to obtain their well - merited approbation .
we must have peace on a frontier where we have been so long disturbed ; our citizens must be indemnified for losses so long since sustained , and for which indemnity has been so unjustly withheld from them .
accomplishing these great objects , we obtain all that is desirable .
but his catholic majesty has twice declared his determination to send a minister to the united states to ask explanations on certain points and to give them respecting his delay to ratify the treaty .
shall we act by taking the ceded territory and proceeding to execute the other conditions of the treaty before this minister arrives and is heard ?
this is a case which forms a strong appeal to the candor , the magnanimity , and the honor of this people .
much is due to courtesy between nations .
by a short delay we shall lose nothing , for , resting on the ground of immutable truth and justice , we can not be diverted from our purpose .
it ought to be presumed that the explanations which may be given to the minister of spain will be satisfactory , and produce the desired result .
in any event , the delay for the purpose mentioned , being a further manifestation of the sincere desire to terminate in the most friendly manner all differences with spain , can not fail to be duly appreciated by his catholic majesty as well as by other powers .
it is submitted , therefore , whether it will not be proper to make the law proposed for carrying the conditions of the treaty into effect , should it be adopted , contingent ; to suspend its operation , upon the responsibility of the executive , in such manner as to afford an opportunity for such friendly explanations as may be desired during the present session of congress .
i communicate to congress a copy of the treaty and of the instructions to the minister of the united states at madrid respecting it ; of his correspondence with the minister of spain , and of such other documents as may be necessary to give a full view of the subject .
in the course which the spanish government have on this occasion thought proper to pursue it is satisfactory to know that they have not been countenanced by any other european power .
on the contrary , the opinion and wishes both of france and great britain have not been withheld either from the united states or from spain , and have been unequivocal in favor of the ratification .
there is also reason to believe that the sentiments of the imperial government of russia have been the same , and that they have also been made known to the cabinet of madrid .
in the civil war existing between spain and the spanish provinces in this hemisphere the greatest care has been taken to enforce the laws intended to preserve an impartial neutrality .
our ports have continued to be equally open to both parties and on the same conditions , and our citizens have been equally restrained from interfering in favor of either to the prejudice of the other .
the progress of the war , however has operated manifestly in favor of the colonies .
buenos ayres still maintains unshaken the independence which it declared in 1816 , and has enjoyed since 1810 .
like success has also lately attended chili and the provinces north of the la plata bordering on it , and likewise venezuela .
this contest has from its commencement been very interesting to other powers , and to none more so than to the united states .
a virtuous people may and will confine themselves within the limit of a strict neutrality ; but it is not in their power to behold a conflict so vitally important to their neighbors without the sensibility and sympathy which naturally belong to such a case .
it has been the steady purpose of this government to prevent that feeling leading to excess , and it is very gratifying to have it in my power to state that so strong has been the sense throughout the whole community of what was due to the character and obligations of the nation that very few examples of a contrary kind have occurred .
the distance of the colonies from the parent country and the great extent of their population and resources gave them advantages which it was anticipated at a very early period would be difficult for spain to surmount .
the steadiness , consistency , and success with which they have pursued their object , as evinced more particularly by the undisturbed sovereignty which buenos ayres has so long enjoyed , evidently give them a strong claim to the favorable consideration of other nations .
these sentiments on the part of the united states have not been withheld from other powers , with whom it is desirable to act in concert .
should it become manifest to the world that the efforts of spain to subdue these provinces will be fruitless , it may be presumed that the spanish government itself will give up the contest .
in producing such a determination it can not be doubted that the opinion of friendly powers who have taken no part in the controversy will have their merited influence .
it is of the highest importance to our national character and indispensable to the morality of our citizens that all violations of our neutrality should be prevented .
no door should be left open for the evasion of our laws , no opportunity afforded to any who may be disposed to take advantage of it to compromit the interest or the honor of the nation .
it is submitted , therefore , to the consideration of congress whether it may not be advisable to revise the laws with a view to this desirable result .
it is submitted also whether it may not be proper to designate by law the several ports or places along the coast at which only foreign ships of war and privateers may be admitted .
the difficulty of sustaining the regulations of our commerce and of other important interests from abuse without such designation furnishes a strong motive for this measure .
at the time of the negotiation for the renewal of the commercial convention between the united states and great britain a hope had been entertained that an article might have been agreed upon mutually satisfactory to both countries , regulating upon principles of justice and reciprocity the commercial intercourse between the united states and the british possessions as well in the west indies as upon the continent of north america .
the plenipotentiaries of the two governments not having been able to come to an agreement on this important interest , those of the united states reserved for the consideration of this government the proposals which had been presented to them as the ultimate offer on the part of the british government , and which they were not authorized to accept .
on their transmission here they were examined with due deliberation , the result of which was a new effort to meet the views of the british government .
the minister of the united states was instructed to make a further proposal , which has not been accepted .
it was , however , declined in an amicable manner .
i recommend to the consideration of congress whether further prohibitory provisions in the laws relating to this intercourse may not be expedient .
it is seen with interest that although it has not been practicable as yet to agree in any arrangement of this important branch of their commerce , such is the disposition of the parties that each will view any regulations which the other may make respecting it in the most friendly light .
by the 5th article of the convention concluded on [ 1818 - 10 - 20 ] , it was stipulated that the differences which have arisen between the two governments with respect to the true intent and meaning of the 5th article of the treaty of ghent , in relation to the carrying away by british officers of slaves from the united states after the exchange of the ratifications of the treaty of peace , should be referred to the decision of some friendly sovereign or state to be named for that purpose .
the minister of the united states has been instructed to name to the british government a foreign sovereign , the common friend to both parties , for the decision of this question .
the answer of that government to the proposal when received will indicate the further measures to be pursued on the part of the united states .
although the pecuniary embarrassments which affected various parts of the union during the latter part of the preceding year have during the present been considerably augmented , and still continue to exist , the receipts into the treasury to the 30th of september last have amounted to $ 19m. after defraying the current expenses of the government , including the interest and reimbursement of the public debt payable to that period , amounting to $ 18.2 m , there remained in the treasury on that day more than $ 2.5 m , which , with the sums receivable during the remainder of the year , will exceed the current demands upon the treasury for the same period .
the causes which have tended to diminish the public receipts could not fail to have a corresponding effect upon the revenue which has accrued upon imposts and tonnage during the three first quarters of the present year .
it is , however , ascertained that the duties which have been secured during that period exceed $ 18 m , and those of the whole year will probably amount to $ 23m. 
 for the probably receipts of the next year i refer you to the statements which will be transmitted from the treasury , which will enable you to judge whether further provision be necessary .
the great reduction in the price of the principal articles of domestic growth which has occurred during the present year , and the consequent fall in the price of labor , apparently so favorable to the success of domestic manufactures , have not shielded them against other causes adverse to their prosperity .
the pecuniary embarrassments which have so deeply affected the commercial interests of the nation have been no less adverse to our manufacturing establishments in several sections of the union .
the great reduction of the currency which the banks have been constrained to make in order to continue specie payments , and the vitiated character of it where such reductions have not been attempted , instead of placing within the reach of these establishments the pecuniary aid necessary to avail themselves of the advantages resulting from the reduction in the prices of the raw materials and of labor , have compelled the banks to withdraw from them a portion of the capital heretofore advanced to them .
that aid which has been refused by the banks has not been obtained from other sources , owing to the loss of individual confidence from the frequent failures which have recently occurred in some of our principal commercial cities .
an additional cause for the depression of these establishments may probably be found in the pecuniary embarrassments which have recently affected those countries with which our commerce has been principally prosecuted .
their manufactures , for the want of a ready or profitable market at home , have been shipped by the manufacturers to the united states , and in many instances sold at a price below their current value at the place of manufacture .
although this practice may from its nature be considered temporary or contingent , it is not on that account less injurious in its effects .
uniformity in the demand and price of an article is highly desirable to the domestic manufacturer .
it is deemed of great importance to give encouragement to our domestic manufacturers .
in what manner the evils which have been adverted to may be remedied , and how far it may be practicable in other respects to afford to them further encouragement , paying due regard to the other great interests of the nation , is submitted to the wisdom of congress .
the survey of the coast for the establishment of fortifications is now nearly completed , and considerable progress has been made in the collection of materials for the construction of fortifications in the gulf of mexico and in the chesapeake bay .
the works on the eastern bank of the potomac below alexandria and on the pea patch , in the delaware , are much advanced , and it is expected that the fortifications at the narrows , in the harbor of ny , will be completed the present year .
to derive all the advantages contemplated from these fortifications it was necessary that they should be judiciously posted , and constructed with a view to permanence .
the progress hitherto has therefore been slow ; but as the difficulties in parts heretofore the least explored and known are surmounted , it will in future be more rapid .
as soon as the survey of the coast is completed , which it is expected will be done early in the next spring , the engineers employed in it will proceed to examine for like purposes the northern and northwestern frontiers .
the troops intended to occupy a station at the mouth of the st. peters , on the mississippi , have established themselves there , and those who were ordered to the mouth of the yellow stone , on the missouri , have ascended that river to the council bluff , where they will remain until the next spring , when they will proceed to the place of their destination .
i have the satisfaction to state that this measure has been executed in amity with the indian tribes , and that it promises to produce , in regard to them , all the advantages which were contemplated by it .
much progress has likewise been made in the construction of ships of war and in the collection of timber and other materials for ship building .
it is not doubted that our navy will soon be augmented to the number and placed in all respects on the footing provided for by law .
the board , consisting of engineers and naval officers , have not yet made their final report of sites for two naval depots , as instructed according to the resolutions of [ 1818 - 03 - 18 ] and [ 1818 - 04 - 20 ] , but they have examined the coast therein designated , and their report is expected in the next month .
for the protection of our commerce in the mediterranean , along the southern atlantic coast , in the pacific and indian oceans , it has been found necessary to maintain a strong naval force , which it seems proper for the present to continue .
there is much reason to believe that if any portion of the squadron heretofore stationed in the mediterranean should be withdrawn our intercourse with the powers bordering on that sea would be much interrupted , if not altogether destroyed .
such , too , has been the growth of a spirit of piracy in the other quarters mentioned , by adventurers from every country , in abuse of the friendly flags which they have assumed , that not to protect our commerce there would be to abandon it has a prey to their rapacity .
due attention has likewise been paid to the suppression of the slave trade , in compliance with a law of the last session .
orders have been given to the commanders of all our public ships to seize all vessels navigated under our flag engaged in that trade , and to bring them in to be proceeded against in the manner prescribed by the law .
it is hoped that these vigorous measures , supported by like acts by other nations , will soon terminate a commerce so disgraceful to the civilized world .
in the execution of the duty imposed by these acts , and of a high trust connected with it , it is with deep regret i have to state the loss which has been sustained by the death of commodore perry .
his gallantry in a brilliant exploit in the late war added to the renown of his country .
his death is deplored as a national misfortune .

fellow citizens of the senate and of the house of representatives : 
 the auspicious circumstances under which you will commence the duties of the present session will lighten the burdens inseparable from the high trust committed to you .
the fruits of the earth have been unusually abundant , commerce has flourished , the revenue has exceeded the most favorable anticipation , and peace and amity are preserved with foreign nations on conditions just and honorable to our country .
for these inestimable blessings we can not but be grateful to that providence which watches over the destiny of nations .
as the term limited for the operation of the commercial convention with great britain will expire early in the month of july next , and it was deemed important that there should be no interval during which that portion of our commerce which was provided for by that convention should not be regulated , either by arrangement between the two governments or by the authority of congress , the minister of the united states at london was instructed early in the last summer to invite the attention of the british government to the subject , with a view to that object .
he was instructed to propose also that the negotiation which it was wished to open might extend to the general commerce of the two countries , and to every other interest and unsettled difference between them in the hope that an arrangement might be made on principles of reciprocal advantage which might comprehend and provide in a satisfactory manner for all these high concerns .
i have the satisfaction to state that the proposal was received by the british government in the spirit which prompted it , and that a negotiation has been opened at london embracing all these objects .
on full consideration of the great extent and magnitude of the trust it was thought proper to commit it to not less than two of our distinguished citizens , and in consequence the envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary of the united states at paris has been associated with our envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary at london , to both of whom corresponding instructions have been given , and they are now engaged in the discharge of its duties .
it is proper to add that to prevent any inconvenience resulting from the delay incident to a negotiation on so many important subjects it was agreed before entering on it that the existing convention should be continued for a term not less than eight years .
our relations with spain remain nearly in the state in which they were at the close of the last session .
the convention of 1802 , providing for the adjustment of a certain portion of the claims of our citizens for injuries sustained by spoliation , and so long suspended by the spanish government , has at length been ratified by it , but no arrangement has yet been made for the payment of another portion of like claims , not less extensive or well founded , or for other classes of claims , or for the settlement of boundaries .
these subjects have again been brought under consideration in both countries , but no agreement has been entered into respecting them .
in the mean time events have occurred which clearly prove the ill effect of the policy which that government has so long pursued on the friendly relations of the two countries , which it is presumed is at least of as much importance to spain as to the united states to maintain .
a state of things has existed in the floridas the tendency of which has been obvious to all who have paid the slightest attention to the progress of affairs in that quarter .
throughout the whole of those provinces to which the spanish title extends the government of spain has scarcely been felt .
its authority has been confined almost exclusively to the walls of pensacola and st. augustine , within which only small garrisons have been maintained .
adventurers from every country , fugitives from justice , and absconding slaves have found an asylum there .
several tribes of indians , strong in the # of their warriors , remarkable for their ferocity , and whose settlements extend to our limits , inhabit those provinces .
these different hordes of people , connected together , disregarding on the one side the authority of spain , and protected on the other by an imaginary line which separates florida from the united states , have violated our laws prohibiting the introduction of slaves , have practiced various frauds on our revenue , and committed every kind of outrage on our peaceable citizens which their proximity to us enabled them to perpetrate .
the invasion of amelia island last year by a small band of adventurers , not exceeding 150 in number , who wrested it from the inconsiderable spanish force stationed there , and held it several months , during which a single feeble effort only was made to recover it , which failed , clearly proves how completely extinct the spanish authority had become , as the conduct of those adventurers while in possession of the island as distinctly shows the pernicious purposes for which their combination had been formed .
this country had , in fact , become the theater of every species of lawless adventure .
with little population of its own , the spanish authority almost extinct , and the colonial governments in a state of revolution , having no pretension to it , and sufficiently employed in their own concerns , it was in great measure derelict , and the object of cupidity to every adventurer .
a system of buccaneering was rapidly organizing over it which menaced in its consequences the lawful commerce of every nation , and particularly the united states , while it presented a temptation to every people , on whose seduction its success principally depended .
in regard to the united states , the pernicious effect of this unlawful combination was not confined to the ocean ; the indian tribes have constituted the effective force in florida .
with these tribes these adventurers had formed at an early period a connection with a view to avail themselves of that force to promote their own projects of accumulation and aggrandizement .
it is to the interference of some of these adventurers , in misrepresenting the claims and titles of the indians to land and in practicing on their savage propensities , that the seminole war is principally to be traced .
men who thus connect themselves with savage communities and stimulate them to war , which is always attended on their part with acts of barbarity the most shocking , deserve to be viewed in a worse light than the savages .
they would certainly have no claim to an immunity from the punishment which , according to the rules of warfare practiced by the savages , might justly be inflicted on the savages themselves .
if the embarrassments of spain prevented her from making an indemnity to our citizens for so long a time from her treasury for their losses by spoliation and otherwise , it was always in her power to have provided it by the cession of this territory .
of this her government has been repeatedly apprised , and the cession was the more to have been anticipated as spain must have known that in ceding it she would likewise relieve herself from the important obligation secured by the treaty of 1795 and all other compromitments respecting it .
if the united states , from consideration of these embarrassments , declined pressing their claims in a spirit of hostility , the motive ought at least to have been duly appreciated by the government of spain .
it is well known to her government that other powers have made to the united states an indemnity for like losses sustained by their citizens at the same epoch .
there is nevertheless a limit beyond which this spirit of amity and forbearance can in no instance be justified .
if it was proper to rely on amicable negotiation for an indemnity for losses , it would not have been so to have permitted the inability of spain to fulfill her engagements and to sustain her authority in the floridas to be perverted by foreign adventurers and savages to purposes so destructive to the lives of our fellow citizens and the highest interests of the united states .
the right of self defense never ceases .
it is among the most sacred , and alike necessary to nations and to individuals , and whether the attack be made by spain herself or by those who abuse her power , its obligation is not the less strong .
the invaders of amelia island had assumed a popular and respected title under which they might approach and wound us .
as their object was distinctly seen , and the duty imposed on the executive by an existing law was profoundly felt , that mask was not permitted to protect them .
it was thought incumbent on the united states to suppress the establishment , and it was accordingly done .
the combination in florida for the unlawful purposes stated , the acts perpetrated by that combination , and , above all , the incitement of the indians to massacre our fellow citizens of every age and of both sexes , merited a like treatment and received it .
in pursuing these savages to an imaginary line in the woods it would have been the height of folly to have suffered that line to protect them .
had that been done the war could never cease .
even if the territory had been exclusively that of spain and her power complete over it , we had a right by the law of nations to follow the enemy on it and to subdue him there .
but the territory belonged , in a certain sense at least , to the savage enemy who inhabited it ; the power of spain had ceased to exist over it , and protection was sought under her title by those who had committed on our citizens hostilities which she was bound by treaty to have prevented , but had not the power to prevent .
to have stopped at that line would have given new encouragement to these savages and new vigor to the whole combination existing there in the prosecution of all its pernicious purposes .
in suppressing the establishment at amelia island no unfriendliness was manifested toward spain , because the post was taken from a force which had wrested it from her .
the measure , it is true , was not adopted in concert with the spanish government or those in authority under it , because in transactions connected with the war in which spain and the colonies are engaged it was thought proper in doing justice to the united states to maintain a strict impartiality toward both the belligerent parties without consulting or acting in concert with either .
it gives me pleasure to state that the governments of buenos ayres and venezuela , whose names were assumed , have explicitly disclaimed all participation in those measures , and even the knowledge of them until communicated by this government , and have also expressed their satisfaction that a course of proceedings had been suppressed which if justly imputable to them would dishonor their cause .
in authorizing major - general jackson to enter florida in pursuit of the seminoles care was taken not to encroach on the rights of spain .
i regret to have to add that in executing this order facts were disclosed respecting the conduct of the officers of spain in authority there in encouraging the war , furnishing munitions of war and other supplies to carry it on , and in other acts not less marked which evinced their participation in the hostile purposes of that combination and justified the confidence with which it inspired the savages that by those officers they would be protected .
a conduct so incompatible with the friendly relations existing between the two countries , particularly with the positive obligations of the 5th article of the treaty of 1795 , by which spain was bound to restrain , even by force , those savages from acts of hostility against the united states , could not fail to excite surprise .
the commanding general was convinced that he should fail in his object , that he should in effect accomplish nothing , if he did not deprive those savages of the resource on which they had calculated and of the protection on which they had relied in making the war .
as all the documents relating to this occurrence will be laid before congress , it is not necessary to enter into further detail respecting it .
although the reasons which induced major - general jackson to take these posts were duly appreciated , there was nevertheless no hesitation in deciding on the course which it became the government to pursue .
as there was reason to believe that the commanders of these posts had violated their instructions , there was no disposition to impute to their government a conduct so unprovoked and hostile .
an order was in consequence issued to the general in command there to deliver the posts - pensacola unconditionally to any person duly authorized to receive it , and st. marks , which is in the heart of the indian country , on the arrival of a competent force to defend it against those savages and their associates .
in entering florida to suppress this combination no idea was entertained of hostility to spain , and however justifiable the commanding general was , in consequence of the misconduct of the spanish officers , in entering st. marks and pensacola to terminate it by proving to the savages and their associates that they should not be protected even there , yet the amicable relations existing between the united states and spain could not be altered by that act alone .
by ordering the restitution of the posts those relations were preserved .
to a change of them the power of the executive is deemed incompetent ; it is vested in congress only .
by this measure , so promptly taken , due respect was shown to the government of spain .
the misconduct of her officers has not been imputed to her .
she was enabled to review with candor her relations with the united states and her own situation , particularly in respect to the territory in question , with the dangers inseparable from it , and regarding the losses we have sustained for which indemnity has been so long withheld , and the injuries we have suffered through that territory , and her means of redress , she was likewise enabled to take with honor the course best calculated to do justice to the united states and to promote her own welfare .
copies of the instructions to the commanding general , of his correspondence with the secretary of war , explaining his motives and justifying his conduct , with a copy of the proceedings of the courts- martial in the trial of arbuthnot and ambristie , and of the correspondence between the secretary of state and the minister plenipotentiary of spain near this government , and of the minister plenipotentiary of the united states at madrid with the government of spain , will be laid before congress .
the civil war which has so long prevailed between spain and the provinces in south america still continues , without any prospect of its speedy termination .
the information respecting the condition of those countries which has been collected by the commissioners recently returned from thence will be laid before congress in copies of their reports , with such other information as has been received from other agents of the united states .
it appears from these communications that the government at buenos ayres declared itself independent in 1816 july , having previously exercised the power of an independent government , though in the name of the king of spain , from the year 1810 ; that the banda oriental , entre rios , and paraguay , with the city of santa fee , all of which are also independent , are unconnected with the present government of buenos ayres ; that chili has declared itself independent and is closely connected with buenos ayres ; that venezuela has also declared itself independent , and now maintains the conflict with various success ; and that the remaining parts of south america , except monte video and such other portions of the eastern bank of the la plata as are held by portugal , are still in the possession of spain or in a certain degree under her influence .
by a circular note addressed by the ministers of spain to the allied powers , with whom they are respectively accredited , it appears that the allies have undertaken to mediate between spain and the south american provinces , and that the manner and extent of their interposition would be settled by a congress which was to have met at aix - la - chapelle in september last .
from the general policy and course of proceeding observed by the allied powers in regard to this contest it is inferred that they will confine their interposition to the expression of their sentiments , abstaining from the application of force .
i state this impression that force will not be applied with the greater satisfaction because it is a course more consistent with justice and likewise authorizes a hope that the calamities of the war will be confined to the parties only , and will be of shorter duration .
from the view taken of this subject , founded on all the information that we have been able to obtain , there is good cause to be satisfied with the course heretofore pursued by the united states in regard to this contest , and to conclude that it is proper to adhere to it , especially in the present state of affairs .
i have great satisfaction in stating that our relations with france , russia , and other powers continue on the most friendly basis .
in our domestic concerns we have ample cause of satisfaction .
the receipts into the treasury during the three first quarters of the year have exceeded $ 17m. 
 after satisfying all the demands which have been made under existing appropriations , including the final extinction of the old 6 % stock and the redemption of a moiety of the louisiana debt , it is estimated that there will remain in the treasury on the 1st day of january next more than $ 2m. 
 it is ascertained that the gross revenue which has accrued from the customs during the same period amounts to $ 21 m , and that the revenue of the whole year may be estimated at not less than $ 26m. the sale of the public lands during the year has also greatly exceeded , both in quantity and price , that of any former year , and there is just reason to expect a progressive improvement in that source of revenue .
it is gratifying to know that although the annual expenditure has been increased by the act of the last session of congress providing for revolutionary pensions to an amount about equal to the proceeds of the internal duties which were then repealed , the revenue for the ensuing year will be proportionally augmented , and that whilst the public expenditure will probably remain stationary , each successive year will add to the national resources by the ordinary increase of our population and by the gradual development of our latent sources of national prosperity .
the strict execution of the revenue laws , resulting principally from the salutary provisions of the act of the 20th of april last amending the several collection laws , has , it is presumed , secured to domestic manufactures all the relief that can be derived from the duties which have been imposed upon foreign merchandise for their protection .
under the influence of this relief several branches of this important national interest have assumed greater activity , and although it is hoped that others will gradually revive and ultimately triumph over every obstacle , yet the expediency of granting further protection is submitted to your consideration .
the measures of defense authorized by existing laws have been pursued with the zeal and activity due to so important an object , and with all the dispatch practicable in so extensive and great an undertaking .
the survey of our maritime and inland frontiers has been continued , and at the points where it was decided to erect fortifications the work has been commenced , and in some instances considerable progress has been made .
in compliance with resolutions of the last session , the board of commissioners were directed to examine in a particular manner the parts of the coast therein designated and to report their opinion of the most suitable sites for two naval depots .
this work is in a train of execution .
the opinion of the board on this subject , with a plan of all the works necessary to a general system of defense so far as it has been formed , will be laid before congress in a report from the proper department as soon as it can be prepared .
in conformity with the appropriations of the last session , treaties have been formed with the quapaw tribe of indians , inhabiting the country on the arkansaw , and the great and little osages north of the white river ; with the tribes in the state of indiana ; with the several tribes within the state of ohio and the michigan territory , and with the chickasaws , by which very extensive cessions of territory have been made to the united states .
negotiations are now depending with the tribes in the illinois territory and with the choctaws , by which it is expected that other extensive cessions will be made .
i take great interest in stating that the cessions already made , which are considered so important to the united states , have been obtained on conditions very satisfactory to the indians .
with a view to the security of our inland frontiers , it has been thought expedient to establish strong posts at the mouth of yellow stone river and at the mandan village on the missouri , and at the mouth of st. peters on the mississippi , at no great distance from our northern boundaries .
it can hardly be presumed while such posts are maintained in the rear of the indian tribes that they will venture to attack our peaceable inhabitants .
a strong hope is entertained that this measure will likewise be productive of much good to the tribes themselves , especially in promoting the great object of their civilization .
experience has clearly demonstrated that independent savage communities can not long exist within the limits of a civilized population .
the progress of the latter has almost invariably terminated in the extinction of the former , especially of the tribes belonging to our portion of this hemisphere , among whom loftiness of sentiment and gallantry in action have been conspicuous .
to civilize them , and even to prevent their extinction , it seems to be indispensable that their independence as communities should cease , and that the control of the united states over them should be complete and undisputed .
the hunter state will then be more easily abandoned , and recourse will be had to the acquisition and culture of land and to other pursuits tending to dissolve the ties which connect them together as a savage community and to give a new character to every individual .
i present this subject to the consideration of congress on the presumption that it may be found expedient and practicable to adopt some benevolent provisions , having these objects in view , relative to the tribes within our settlements .
it has been necessary during the present year to maintain , a strong naval force in the mediterranean and in the gulf of mexico , and to send some public ships along the southern coast and to the pacific ocean .
by these means amicable relations with the barbary powers have been preserved , our commerce has been protected , and our rights respected .
the augmentation of our navy is advancing with a steady progress toward the limit contemplated by law .
i communicate with great satisfaction the accession of another state ( illinois ) to our union , because i perceive from the proof afforded by the additions already made the regular progress and sure consummation of a policy of which history affords no example , and of which the good effect can not be too highly estimated .
by extending our government on the principles of our constitution over the vast territory within our limits , on the lakes and the mississippi and its numerous streams , new life and vigor are infused into every part of our system .
by increasing the number of the states the confidence of the state governments in their own security is increased and their jealousy of the national government proportionally diminished .
the impracticability of one consolidated government for this great and growing nation will be more apparent and will be universally admitted .
incapable of exercising local authority except for general purposes , the general government will no longer be dreaded .
in those cases of a local nature and for all the great purposes for which it was instituted its authority will be cherished .
each government will acquire new force and a greater freedom of action within its proper sphere .
other inestimable advantages will follow .
our produce will be augmented to an incalculable amount in articles of the greatest value for domestic use and foreign commerce .
our navigation will in like degree be increased , and as the shipping of the atlantic states will be employed in the transportation of the vast produce of the western country , even those parts of the united states which are most remote from each other will be further bound together by the strongest ties which mutual interest can create .
the situation of this district , it is thought , requires the attention of congress .
by the constitution the power of legislation is exclusively vested in the congress of the united states .
in the exercise of this power , in which the people have no participation , congress legislate in all cases directly on the local concerns of the district .
as this is a departure , for a special purpose , from the general principles of our system , it may merit consideration whether an arrangement better adapted to the principles of our government and to the particular interests of the people may not be devised which will neither infringe the constitution nor affect the object which the provision in question was intended to secure .
the growing population , already considerable , and the increasing business of the district , which it is believed already interferes with the deliberations of congress on great national concerns , furnish additional motives for recommending this subject to your consideration .
when we view the great blessings with which our country has been favored , those which we now enjoy , and the means which we possess of handing them down unimpaired to our latest posterity , our attention is irresistibly drawn to the source from whence they flow .
let us , then , unite in offering our most grateful acknowledgments for these blessings to the divine author of all good .

fellow citizens of the senate and of the house of representatives : 
 at no period of our political existence had we so much cause to felicitate ourselves at the prosperous and happy condition of our country .
the abundant fruits of the earth have filled it with plenty .
an extensive and profitable commerce has greatly augmented our revenue .
the public credit has attained an extraordinary elevation .
our preparations for defense in case of future wars , from which , by the experience of all nations , we ought not to expect to be exempted , are advancing under a well - digested system with all the dispatch which so important a work will admit .
our free government , founded on the interest and affections of the people , has gained and is daily gaining strength .
local jealousies are rapidly yielding to more generous , enlarged , and enlightened views of national policy .
for advantages so numerous and highly important it is our duty to unite in grateful acknowledgements to that omnipotent being from whom they are derived , and in unceasing prayer that he will endow us with virtue and strength to maintain and hand them down in their utmost purity to our latest posterity .
i have the satisfaction to inform you that an arrangement which had been commenced by my predecessor with the british government for the reduction of the naval force by great britain and the united states on the lakes has been concluded , by which it is provided that neither party shall keep in service on lake champlain more than one vessel , on lake ontario more than one , and on lake erie and the upper lakes more than two , to be armed each with one cannon only , and that all the other armed vessels of both parties , of which an exact list is interchanged , shall be dismantled .
it is also agreed that the force retained shall be restricted in its duty to the internal purposes of each party , and that the arrangement shall remain in force until six months shall have expired after notice given by one of the parties to the other of its desire that it should terminate .
by this arrangement useless expense on both sides and , what is of still greater importance , the danger of collision between armed vessels in those inland waters , which was great , is prevented .
i have the satisfaction also to state that the commissioners under the fourth article of the treaty of ghent , to whom it was referred to decide to which party the several islands in the bay of passamaquoddy belonged under the treaty of 1783 , have agreed in a report , by which all the islands in the possession of each party before the late war have been decreed to it .
the commissioners acting under the other articles of the treaty of ghent for the settlement of boundaries have also been engaged in the discharge of their respective duties , but have not yet completed them .
the difference which arose between the two governments under that treaty respecting the right of the u. s. to take and cure fish on the coast of the british provinces north of our limits , which had been secured by the treaty of 1783 , is still in negotiation .
the proposition made by this government to extend to the colonies of gb the principle of the convention of london , by which the commerce between the ports of the united states and british ports in europe had been placed on a footing of equality , has been declined by the british government .
this subject having been thus amicably discussed between the two governments , and it appearing that the british government is unwilling to depart from its present regulations , it remains for congress to decide whether they will make any other regulations in consequence thereof for the protection and improvement of our navigation .
the negotiation with spain for spoliations on our commerce and the settlement of boundaries remains essentially in the state it held by the communications that were made to congress by my predecessor .
it has been evidently the policy of the spanish government to keep the negotiation suspended , and in this the united states have acquiesced , from an amicable disposition toward spain and in the expectation that her government would , from a sense of justice , finally accede to such an arrangement as would be equal between the parties .
a disposition has been lately shown by the spanish government to move in the negotiation , which has been met by this government , and should the conciliatory and friendly policy which has invariably guided our councils be reciprocated , a just and satisfactory arrangement may be expected .
it is proper , however , to remark that no proposition has yet been made from which such a result can be presumed .
it was anticipated at an early stage that the contest between spain and the colonies would become highly interesting to the united states .
it was natural that our citizens should sympathize in events which affected their neighbors .
it seemed probable also that the prosecution of the conflict along our coast and in contiguous countries would occasionally interrupt our commerce and otherwise affect the persons and property of our citizens .
these anticipations have been realized .
such injuries have been received from persons acting under authority of both the parties , and for which redress has in most instances been withheld .
through every stage of the conflict the united states have maintained an impartial neutrality , giving aid to neither of the parties in men , money , ships , or munitions of war .
they have regarded the contest not in the light of an ordinary insurrection or rebellion , but as a civil war between parties nearly equal , having as to neutral powers equal rights .
our ports have been open to both , and every article the fruit of our soil or of the industry of our citizens which either was permitted to take has been equally free to the other .
should the colonies establish their independence , it is proper now to state that this government neither seeks nor would accept from them any advantage in commerce or otherwise which will not be equally open to all other nations .
the colonies will in that event become independent states , free from any obligation to or connection with us which it may not then be their interest to form on the basis of a fair reciprocity .
in the summer of the present year an expedition was set on foot against east florida by persons claiming to act under the authority of some of the colonies , who took possession of amelia island , at the mouth of the st. marys river , near the boundary of the state of georgia .
as this province lies eastward of the mississippi , and is bounded by the united states and the ocean on every side , and has been a subject of negotiation with the government of spain as an indemnity for losses by spoliation or in exchange for territory of equal value westward of the mississippi , a fact well known to the world , it excited surprise that any countenance should be given to this measure by any of the colonies .
as it would be difficult to reconcile it with the friendly relations existing between the united states and the colonies , a doubt was entertained whether it had been authorized by them , or any of them .
this doubt has gained strength by the circumstances which have unfolded themselves in the prosecution of the enterprise , which have marked it as a mere private , unauthorized adventure .
projected and commenced with an incompetent force , reliance seems to have been placed on what might be drawn , in defiance of our laws , from within our limits ; and of late , as their resources have failed , it has assumed a more marked character of unfriendliness to us , the island being made a channel for the illicit introduction of slaves from africa into the united states , an asylum for fugitive slaves from the neighboring states , and a port for smuggling of every kind .
a similar establishment was made at an earlier period by persons of the same description in the gulf of mexico at a place called galvezton , within the limits of the united states , as we contend , under the cession of louisiana .
this enterprise has been marked in a more signal manner by all the objectionable circumstances which characterized the other , and more particularly by the equipment of privateers which have annoyed our commerce , and by smuggling .
these establishments , if ever sanctioned by any authority whatever , which is not believed , have abused their trust and forfeited all claim to consideration .
a just regard for the rights and interests of the united states required that they should be suppressed , and orders have been accordingly issued to that effect .
the imperious considerations which produced this measure will be explained to the parties whom it may in any degree concern .
to obtain correct information on every subject in which the united states are interested ; to inspire just sentiments in all persons in authority , on either side , of our friendly disposition so far as it may comport with an impartial neutrality , and to secure proper respect to our commerce in every port and from every flag , it has been thought proper to send a ship of war with three distinguished citizens along the southern coast with these purpose .
with the existing authorities , with those in the possession of and exercising the sovereignty , must the communication be held ; from them alone can redress for past injuries committed by persons acting under them be obtained ; by them alone can the commission of the like in future be prevented .
our relations with the other powers of europe have experienced no essential change since the last session .
in our intercourse with each due attention continues to be paid to the protection of our commerce , and to every other object in which the united states are interested .
a strong hope is entertained that , by adhering to the maxims of a just , a candid , and friendly policy , we may long preserve amicable relations with all the powers of europe on conditions advantageous and honorable to our country .
with the barbary states and the indian tribes our pacific relations have been preserved .
in calling your attention to the internal concerns of our country the view which they exhibit is peculiarly gratifying .
the payments which have been made into the treasury show the very productive state of the public revenue .
after satisfying the appropriations made by law for the support of the civil government and of the military and naval establishments , embracing suitable provision for fortifications and for the gradual increase of the navy , paying the interest of the public debt , and extinguishing more than $ 18 million of the principal , within the present year , it is estimated that a balance of more than $ 6 million will remain in the treasury on the first day of january applicable to the current service of the ensuing year .
the payments into the treasury during the year 1818 on account of imposts and tonnage , resulting principally from duties which have accrued in the present year , may be fairly estimated at $ 20 million ; the internal revenues at $ 2.5 million ; the public lands at $ 1.5 million ; bank dividends and incidental receipts at $ 500,000 ; making in the whole $ 24.5 million .
the annual permanent expenditure for the support of the civil government and of the army and navy , as now established by law , amounts to $ 11.8 million , and for the sinking fund to $ 10 million , making in the whole $ 21.8 million , leaving an annual excess of revenue beyond the expenditure of $ 2.7 million , exclusive of the balance estimated to be in the treasury on the first day of january , 1818 .
in the present state of the treasury the whole of the louisiana debt may be redeemed in the year 1819 , after which , if the public debt continues as it now is , above par , there will be annually about $ 5 million of the sinking fund unexpended until the year 1825 , when the loan of 1812 and the stock created by funding treasury notes will be redeemable .
it is also estimated that the mississippi stock will be discharged during the year 1819 from the proceeds of the public lands assigned to that object , after which the receipts from those lands will annually add to the public revenue the sum of $ 1.5 million , making the permanent annual revenue amount to $ 26 million , and leaving an annual excess of revenue after the year 1819 beyond the permanent authorized expenditure of more than $ 4 million .
by the last returns to the department of war the militia force of the several states may be estimated at 800,000 men -- infantry , artillery , and cavalry .
great part of this force is armed , and measures are taken to arm the whole .
an improvement in the organization and discipline of the militia is one of the great objects which claims the unremitted attention of congress .
the regular force amounts nearly to the number required by law , and is stationed along the atlantic and inland frontiers .
of the naval force it has been necessary to maintain strong squadrons in the mediterranean and in the gulf of mexico .
from several of the indian tribes inhabiting the country bordering on lake erie purchases have been made of lands on conditions very favorable to the united states , and , as it is presumed , not less so to the tribes themselves .
by these purchases the indian title , with moderate reservations , has been extinguished to the whole of the land within the limits of the state of ohio , and to a part of that in the michigan territory and of the state of indiana .
from the cherokee tribe a tract has been purchased in the state of georgia and an arrangement made by which , in exchange for lands beyond the mississippi , a great part , if not the whole , of the land belonging to that tribe eastward of that river in the states of north carolina , georgia , and tennessee , and in the alabama territory will soon be acquired .
by these acquisitions , and others that may reasonably be expected soon to follow , we shall be enabled to extend our settlements from the inhabited parts of the state of ohio along lake erie into the michigan territory , and to connect our settlements by degrees through the state of indiana and the illinois territory to that of missouri .
a similar and equally advantageous effect will soon be produced to the south , through the whole extent of the states and territory which border on the waters emptying into the mississippi and the mobile .
in this progress , which the rights of nature demand and nothing can prevent , marking a growth rapid and gigantic , it is our duty to make new efforts for the preservation , improvement , and civilization of the native inhabitants .
the hunter state can exist only in the vast uncultivated desert .
it yields to the more dense and compact form and greater force of civilized population ; and of right it ought to yield , for the earth was given to mankind to support the greatest number of which it is capable , and no tribe or people have a right to withhold from the wants of others more than is necessary for their own support and comfort .
it is gratifying to know that the reservations of land made by the treaties with the tribes on lake erie were made with a view to individual ownership among them and to the cultivation of the soil by all , and that an annual stipend has been pledged to supply their other wants .
it will merit the consideration of congress whether other provision not stipulated by treaty ought to be made for these tribes and for the advancement of the liberal and humane policy of the united states toward all the tribes within our limits , and more particularly for their improvement in the arts of civilized life .
among the advantages incident to these purchases , and to those which have preceded , the security which may thereby be afforded to our inland frontiers is peculiarly important .
with a strong barrier , consisting of our own people , thus planted on the lakes , the mississippi , and the mobile , with the protection to be derived from the regular force , indian hostilities , if they do not altogether cease , will henceforth lose their terror .
fortifications in those quarters to any extent will not be necessary , and the expense of attending them may be saved .
a people accustomed to the use of firearms only , as the indian tribes are , will shun even moderate works which are defended by cannon .
great fortifications will therefore be requisite only in future along the coast and at some points in the interior connected with it .
on these will the safety of our towns and the commerce of our great rivers , from the bay of fundy to the mississippi , depend .
on these , therefore , should the utmost attention , skill , and labor be bestowed .
a considerable and rapid augmentation in the value of all the public lands , proceeding from these and other obvious cases , may henceforward be expected .
the difficulties attending early emigrations will be dissipated even in the most remote parts .
several new states have been admitted into our union to the west and south , and territorial governments , happily organized , established over every other portion in which there is vacant land for sale .
in terminating indian hostilities , as must soon be done , in a formidable shape at least , the emigration , which has heretofore been great , will probably increase , and the demand for land and the augmentation in its value be in like proportion .
the great increase of our population throughout the union will alone produce an important effect , and in no quarter will it be so sensibly felt as in those in contemplation .
the public lands are a public stock , which ought to be disposed of to the best advantage for the nation .
the nation should therefore derive the profit proceeding from the continual rise in their value .
every encouragement should be given to the emigrants consistent with a fair competition between them , but that competition should operate in the first sale to the advantage of the nation rather than of individuals .
great capitalists will derive the benefit incident to their superior wealth under any mode of sale which may be adopted , but if , looking forward to the rise in the value of the public lands , they should have the opportunity of amassing at a low price vast bodies in their hands , the profit will accrue to them and not to the public .
they would also have the power in that degree to control the emigration and settlement in such a manner as their opinion of their respective interests might dictate .
i submit this subject to the consideration of congress , that such further provision may be made in the sale of the public lands , with a view to the public interest , should any be deemed expedient , as in their judgment may be best adapted to the object .
when we consider the vast extent of territory within the united states , the great amount and value of its productions , the connection of its parts , and other circumstances on which their prosperity and happiness depend , we can not fail to entertain a high sense of the advantage to be derived from the facility which may be afforded in the intercourse between them by means of good roads and canals .
never did a country of such vast extent offer equal inducements to improvements of this kind , nor ever were consequences of such magnitude involved in them .
as this subject was acted on by congress at the last session , and there may be a disposition to revive it at the present , i have brought it into view for the purpose of communicating my sentiments on a very important circumstance connected with it with that freedom and candor which a regard for the public interest and a proper respect for congress require .
a difference of opinion has existed from the first formation of our constitution to the present time among our most enlightened and virtuous citizens respecting the right of congress to establish such a system of improvement .
taking into view the trust with which i am now honored , it would be improper after what has passed that this discussion should be revived with an uncertainty of my opinion respecting the right .
disregarding early impressions i have bestowed on the subject all the deliberation which its great importance and a just sense of my duty required , and the result is a settled conviction in my mind that congress do not possess the right .
it is not contained in any of the specified powers granted to congress , nor can i consider it incidental to or a necessary means , viewed on the most liberal scale , for carrying into effect any of the powers which are specifically granted .
in communicating this result i can not resist the obligation which i feel to suggest to congress the propriety of recommending to the states the adoption of an amendment to the constitution which shall give to congress the right in question .
in cases of doubtful construction , especially of such vital interest , it comports with the nature and origin of our institutions , and will contribute much to preserve them , to apply to our constituents for an explicit grant of the power .
we may confidently rely that if it appears to their satisfaction that the power is necessary , it will always be granted .
in this case i am happy to observe that experience has afforded the most ample proof of its utility , and that the benign spirit of conciliation and harmony which now manifests itself throughout our union promises to such a recommendation the most prompt and favorable result .
i think proper to suggest also , in case this measure is adopted , that it be recommended to the states to include in the amendment sought a right in congress to institute likewise seminaries of learning , for the all - important purpose of diffusing knowledge among our fellow citizens throughout the united states .
our manufactories will require the continued attention of congress .
the capital employed in them is considerable , and the knowledge acquired in the machinery and fabric of all the most useful manufactures is of great value .
their preservation , which depends on due encouragement , is connected with the high interests of the nation .
although the progress of the public buildings has been as favorable as circumstances have permitted , it is to be regretted that the capitol is not yet in a state to receive you .
there is good cause to presume that the two wings , the only parts as yet commenced , will be prepared for that purpose at the next session .
the time seems now to have arrived when this subject may be deemed worthy the attention of congress on a scale adequate to national purposes .
the completion of the middle building will be necessary to the convenient accommodation of congress , of the committees , and various offices belonging to it .
it is evident that the other public buildings are altogether insufficient for the accommodation of the several executive departments , some of whom are much crowded and even subjected to the necessity of obtaining it in private buildings at some distance from the head of the department , and with inconvenience to the management of the public business .
most nations have taken an interest and a pride in the improvement and ornament of their metropolis , and none were more conspicuous in that respect than the ancient republics .
the policy which dictated the establishment of a permanent residence for the national government and the spirit in which it was commenced and has been prosecuted show that such improvement was thought worthy the attention of this nation .
its central position , between the northern and southern extremes of our union , and its approach to the west at the head of a great navigable river which interlocks with the western waters , prove the wisdom of the councils which established it .
nothing appears to be more reasonable and proper than that convenient accommodation should be provided on a well - digested plan for the heads of the several departments and for the attorney general , and it is believed that the public ground in the city applied to these objects will be found amply sufficient .
i submit this subject to the consideration of congress , that such further provision may be made in it as to them may seem proper .
it is contemplating the happy situation of the united states , our attention is drawn with peculiar interest to the surviving officers and soldiers of our revolutionary army , who so eminently contributed by their services to lay its foundation .
most of those very meritorious citizens have paid the debt of nature and gone to repose .
it is believed that among the survivors there are some not provided for by existing laws , who are reduced to indigence and even to real distress .
these man have a claim on the gratitude of their country , and it will do honor to their country to provide for them .
the lapse of a few years more and the opportunity will be forever lost ; indeed , so long already has been the interval that the number to be benefitted by any provision which may be made will not be great .
it appearing in a satisfactory manner that the revenue arising from imposts and tonnage and from the sale of the public lands will be fully adequate to the support of the civil government , of the present military and naval establishments , including the annual augmentation of the latter to the extent provided for , to the payment of the interest of the public debt , and to the extinguishment of it at the times authorized , without the aid of the internal taxes , i consider it my duty to recommend to congress their repeal .
to impose taxes when the public exigencies require them is an obligation of the most sacred character , especially with a free people .
the faithful fulfillment of it is among the highest proofs of their value and capacity for self - government .
to dispense with taxes when it may be done with perfect safety is equally the duty of their representatives .
in this instance we have the satisfaction to know that they were imposed when the demand was imperious , and have been sustained with exemplary fidelity .
i have to add that however gratifying it may be to me regarding the prosperous and happy condition of our country to recommend the repeal of these taxes at this time , i shall nevertheless be attentive to events , and , should any future emergency occur , be not less prompt to suggest such measures and burdens as may then be requisite and proper .

i should be destitute of feeling if i was not deeply affected by the strong proof which my fellow - citizens have given me of their confidence in calling me to the high office whose functions i am about to assume .
as the expression of their good opinion of my conduct in the public service , i derive from it a gratification which those who are conscious of having done all that they could to merit it can alone feel .
my sensibility is increased by a just estimate of the importance of the trust and of the nature and extent of its duties , with the proper discharge of which the highest interests of a great and free people are intimately connected .
conscious of my own deficiency , i can not enter on these duties without great anxiety for the result .
from a just responsibility i will never shrink , calculating with confidence that in my best efforts to promote the public welfare my motives will always be duly appreciated and my conduct be viewed with that candor and indulgence which i have experienced in other stations .
in commencing the duties of the chief executive office it has been the practice of the distinguished men who have gone before me to explain the principles which would govern them in their respective administrations .
in following their venerated example my attention is naturally drawn to the great causes which have contributed in a principal degree to produce the present happy condition of the united states .
they will best explain the nature of our duties and shed much light on the policy which ought to be pursued in future .
from the commencement of our revolution to the present day almost forty years have elapsed , and from the establishment of this constitution twenty - eight .
through this whole term the government has been what may emphatically be called self - government .
and what has been the effect ?
to whatever object we turn our attention , whether it relates to our foreign or domestic concerns , we find abundant cause to felicitate ourselves in the excellence of our institutions .
during a period fraught with difficulties and marked by very extraordinary events the united states have flourished beyond example .
their citizens individually have been happy and the nation prosperous .
under this constitution our commerce has been wisely regulated with foreign nations and between the states ; new states have been admitted into our union ; our territory has been enlarged by fair and honorable treaty , and with great advantage to the original states ; the states , respectively protected by the national government under a mild , parental system against foreign dangers , and enjoying within their separate spheres , by a wise partition of power , a just proportion of the sovereignty , have improved their police , extended their settlements , and attained a strength and maturity which are the best proofs of wholesome laws well administered .
and if we look to the condition of individuals what a proud spectacle does it exhibit !
on whom has oppression fallen in any quarter of our union ?
who has been deprived of any right of person or property ?
who restrained from offering his vows in the mode which he prefers to the divine author of his being ?
it is well known that all these blessings have been enjoyed in their fullest extent ; and i add with peculiar satisfaction that there has been no example of a capital punishment being inflicted on anyone for the crime of high treason .
some who might admit the competency of our government to these beneficent duties might doubt it in trials which put to the test its strength and efficiency as a member of the great community of nations .
here too experience has afforded us the most satisfactory proof in its favor .
just as this constitution was put into action several of the principal states of europe had become much agitated and some of them seriously convulsed .
destructive wars ensued , which have of late only been terminated .
in the course of these conflicts the united states received great injury from several of the parties .
it was their interest to stand aloof from the contest , to demand justice from the party committing the injury , and to cultivate by a fair and honorable conduct the friendship of all .
war became at length inevitable , and the result has shown that our government is equal to that , the greatest of trials , under the most unfavorable circumstances .
of the virtue of the people and of the heroic exploits of the army , the navy , and the militia i need not speak .
such , then , is the happy government under which we live -- a government adequate to every purpose for which the social compact is formed ; a government elective in all its branches , under which every citizen may by his merit obtain the highest trust recognized by the constitution ; which contains within it no cause of discord , none to put at variance one portion of the community with another ; a government which protects every citizen in the full enjoyment of his rights , and is able to protect the nation against injustice from foreign powers .
other considerations of the highest importance admonish us to cherish our union and to cling to the government which supports it .
fortunate as we are in our political institutions , we have not been less so in other circumstances on which our prosperity and happiness essentially depend .
situated within the temperate zone , and extending through many degrees of latitude along the atlantic , the united states enjoy all the varieties of climate , and every production incident to that portion of the globe .
penetrating internally to the great lakes and beyond the sources of the great rivers which communicate through our whole interior , no country was ever happier with respect to its domain .
blessed , too , with a fertile soil , our produce has always been very abundant , leaving , even in years the least favorable , a surplus for the wants of our fellow - men in other countries .
such is our peculiar felicity that there is not a part of our union that is not particularly interested in preserving it .
the great agricultural interest of the nation prospers under its protection .
local interests are not less fostered by it .
our fellow - citizens of the north engaged in navigation find great encouragement in being made the favored carriers of the vast productions of the other portions of the united states , while the inhabitants of these are amply recompensed , in their turn , by the nursery for seamen and naval force thus formed and reared up for the support of our common rights .
our manufactures find a generous encouragement by the policy which patronizes domestic industry , and the surplus of our produce a steady and profitable market by local wants in less - favored parts at home .
such , then , being the highly favored condition of our country , it is the interest of every citizen to maintain it .
what are the dangers which menace us ?
if any exist they ought to be ascertained and guarded against .
in explaining my sentiments on this subject it may be asked , what raised us to the present happy state ?
how did we accomplish the revolution ?
how remedy the defects of the first instrument of our union , by infusing into the national government sufficient power for national purposes , without impairing the just rights of the states or affecting those of individuals ?
how sustain and pass with glory through the late war ?
the government has been in the hands of the people .
to the people , therefore , and to the faithful and able depositaries of their trust is the credit due .
had the people of the united states been educated in different principles , had they been less intelligent , less independent , or less virtuous , can it be believed that we should have maintained the same steady and consistent career or been blessed with the same success ?
while , then , the constituent body retains its present sound and healthful state everything will be safe .
they will choose competent and faithful representatives for every department .
it is only when the people become ignorant and corrupt , when they degenerate into a populace , that they are incapable of exercising the sovereignty .
usurpation is then an easy attainment , and an usurper soon found .
the people themselves become the willing instruments of their own debasement and ruin .
let us , then , look to the great cause , and endeavor to preserve it in full force .
let us by all wise and constitutional measures promote intelligence among the people as the best means of preserving our liberties .
dangers from abroad are not less deserving of attention .
experiencing the fortune of other nations , the united states may be again involved in war , and it may in that event be the object of the adverse party to overset our government , to break our union , and demolish us as a nation .
our distance from europe and the just , moderate , and pacific policy of our government may form some security against these dangers , but they ought to be anticipated and guarded against .
many of our citizens are engaged in commerce and navigation , and all of them are in a certain degree dependent on their prosperous state .
many are engaged in the fisheries .
these interests are exposed to invasion in the wars between other powers , and we should disregard the faithful admonition of experience if we did not expect it .
we must support our rights or lose our character , and with it , perhaps , our liberties .
a people who fail to do it can scarcely be said to hold a place among independent nations .
national honor is national property of the highest value .
the sentiment in the mind of every citizen is national strength .
it ought therefore to be cherished .
to secure us against these dangers our coast and inland frontiers should be fortified , our army and navy , regulated upon just principles as to the force of each , be kept in perfect order , and our militia be placed on the best practicable footing .
to put our extensive coast in such a state of defense as to secure our cities and interior from invasion will be attended with expense , but the work when finished will be permanent , and it is fair to presume that a single campaign of invasion by a naval force superior to our own , aided by a few thousand land troops , would expose us to greater expense , without taking into the estimate the loss of property and distress of our citizens , than would be sufficient for this great work .
our land and naval forces should be moderate , but adequate to the necessary purposes -- the former to garrison and preserve our fortifications and to meet the first invasions of a foreign foe , and , while constituting the elements of a greater force , to preserve the science as well as all the necessary implements of war in a state to be brought into activity in the event of war ; the latter , retained within the limits proper in a state of peace , might aid in maintaining the neutrality of the united states with dignity in the wars of other powers and in saving the property of their citizens from spoliation .
in time of war , with the enlargement of which the great naval resources of the country render it susceptible , and which should be duly fostered in time of peace , it would contribute essentially , both as an auxiliary of defense and as a powerful engine of annoyance , to diminish the calamities of war and to bring the war to a speedy and honorable termination .
but it ought always to be held prominently in view that the safety of these states and of everything dear to a free people must depend in an eminent degree on the militia .
invasions may be made too formidable to be resisted by any land and naval force which it would comport either with the principles of our government or the circumstances of the united states to maintain .
in such cases recourse must be had to the great body of the people , and in a manner to produce the best effect .
it is of the highest importance , therefore , that they be so organized and trained as to be prepared for any emergency .
the arrangement should be such as to put at the command of the government the ardent patriotism and youthful vigor of the country .
if formed on equal and just principles , it can not be oppressive .
it is the crisis which makes the pressure , and not the laws which provide a remedy for it .
this arrangement should be formed , too , in time of peace , to be the better prepared for war .
with such an organization of such a people the united states have nothing to dread from foreign invasion .
at its approach an overwhelming force of gallant men might always be put in motion .
other interests of high importance will claim attention , among which the improvement of our country by roads and canals , proceeding always with a constitutional sanction , holds a distinguished place .
by thus facilitating the intercourse between the states we shall add much to the convenience and comfort of our fellow - citizens , much to the ornament of the country , and , what is of greater importance , we shall shorten distances , and , by making each part more accessible to and dependent on the other , we shall bind the union more closely together .
nature has done so much for us by intersecting the country with so many great rivers , bays , and lakes , approaching from distant points so near to each other , that the inducement to complete the work seems to be peculiarly strong .
a more interesting spectacle was perhaps never seen than is exhibited within the limits of the united states -- a territory so vast and advantageously situated , containing objects so grand , so useful , so happily connected in all their parts !
our manufacturers will likewise require the systematic and fostering care of the government .
possessing as we do all the raw materials , the fruit of our own soil and industry , we ought not to depend in the degree we have done on supplies from other countries .
while we are thus dependent the sudden event of war , unsought and unexpected , can not fail to plunge us into the most serious difficulties .
it is important , too , that the capital which nourishes our manufacturers should be domestic , as its influence in that case instead of exhausting , as it may do in foreign hands , would be felt advantageously on agriculture and every other branch of industry .
equally important is it to provide at home a market for our raw materials , as by extending the competition it will enhance the price and protect the cultivator against the casualties incident to foreign markets .
with the indian tribes it is our duty to cultivate friendly relations and to act with kindness and liberality in all our transactions .
equally proper is it to persevere in our efforts to extend to them the advantages of civilization .
the great amount of our revenue and the flourishing state of the treasury are a full proof of the competency of the national resources for any emergency , as they are of the willingness of our fellow - citizens to bear the burdens which the public necessities require .
the vast amount of vacant lands , the value of which daily augments , forms an additional resource of great extent and duration .
these resources , besides accomplishing every other necessary purpose , put it completely in the power of the united states to discharge the national debt at an early period .
peace is the best time for improvement and preparation of every kind ; it is in peace that our commerce flourishes most , that taxes are most easily paid , and that the revenue is most productive .
the executive is charged officially in the departments under it with the disbursement of the public money , and is responsible for the faithful application of it to the purposes for which it is raised .
the legislature is the watchful guardian over the public purse .
it is its duty to see that the disbursement has been honestly made .
to meet the requisite responsibility every facility should be afforded to the executive to enable it to bring the public agents intrusted with the public money strictly and promptly to account .
nothing should be presumed against them ; but if , with the requisite facilities , the public money is suffered to lie long and uselessly in their hands , they will not be the only defaulters , nor will the demoralizing effect be confined to them .
it will evince a relaxation and want of tone in the administration which will be felt by the whole community .
i shall do all i can to secure economy and fidelity in this important branch of the administration , and i doubt not that the legislature will perform its duty with equal zeal .
a thorough examination should be regularly made , and i will promote it .
it is particularly gratifying to me to enter on the discharge of these duties at a time when the united states are blessed with peace .
it is a state most consistent with their prosperity and happiness .
it will be my sincere desire to preserve it , so far as depends on the executive , on just principles with all nations , claiming nothing unreasonable of any and rendering to each what is its due .
equally gratifying is it to witness the increased harmony of opinion which pervades our union .
discord does not belong to our system .
union is recommended as well by the free and benign principles of our government , extending its blessings to every individual , as by the other eminent advantages attending it .
the american people have encountered together great dangers and sustained severe trials with success .
they constitute one great family with a common interest .
experience has enlightened us on some questions of essential importance to the country .
the progress has been slow , dictated by a just reflection and a faithful regard to every interest connected with it .
to promote this harmony in accord with the principles of our republican government and in a manner to give them the most complete effect , and to advance in all other respects the best interests of our union , will be the object of my constant and zealous exertions .
never did a government commence under auspices so favorable , nor ever was success so complete .
if we look to the history of other nations , ancient or modern , we find no example of a growth so rapid , so gigantic , of a people so prosperous and happy .
in contemplating what we have still to perform , the heart of every citizen must expand with joy when he reflects how near our government has approached to perfection ; that in respect to it we have no essential improvement to make ; that the great object is to preserve it in the essential principles and features which characterize it , and that is to be done by preserving the virtue and enlightening the minds of the people ; and as a security against foreign dangers to adopt such arrangements as are indispensable to the support of our independence , our rights and liberties .
if we persevere in the career in which we have advanced so far and in the path already traced , we can not fail , under the favor of a gracious providence , to attain the high destiny which seems to await us .
in the administrations of the illustrious men who have preceded me in this high station , with some of whom i have been connected by the closest ties from early life , examples are presented which will always be found highly instructive and useful to their successors .
from these i shall endeavor to derive all the advantages which they may afford .
of my immediate predecessor , under whom so important a portion of this great and successful experiment has been made , i shall be pardoned for expressing my earnest wishes that he may long enjoy in his retirement the affections of a grateful country , the best reward of exalted talents and the most faithful and meritorious service .
relying on the aid to be derived from the other departments of the government , i enter on the trust to which i have been called by the suffrages of my fellow - citizens with my fervent prayers to the almighty that he will be graciously pleased to continue to us that protection which he has already so conspicuously displayed in our favor .

fellow citizens of the senate and of the house of representatives : 
 the progress of our affairs since the last session has been such as may justly be claimed and expected under a government deriving all its powers from an enlightened people , and under laws formed by their representatives , on great consideration , for the sole purpose of promoting the welfare and happiness of their constituents .
in the execution of those laws and of the powers vested by the constitution in the executive , unremitted attention has been paid to the great objects to which they extend .
in the concerns which are exclusively internal there is good cause to be satisfied with the result .
the laws have had their due operation and effect .
in those relating to foreign powers , i am happy to state that peace and amity are preserved with all by a strict observance on both sides of the rights of each .
in matters touching our commercial intercourse , where a difference of opinion has existed as to the conditions on which it should be placed , each party has pursued its own policy without giving just cause of offense to the other .
in this annual communication , especially when it is addressed to a new congress , the whole scope of our political concerns naturally comes into view , that errors , if such have been committed , may be corrected ; that defects which have become manifest may be remedied ; and , on the other hand , that measures which were adopted on due deliberation , and which experience has shewn are just in themselves and essential to the public welfare , should be persevered in and supported .
in performing this necessary and very important duty i shall endeavor to place before you on its merits every subject that is thought to be entitled to your particular attention in as distinct and clear a light as i may be able .
by an act of [ 1815 - 03 - 03 ] , so much of the several acts as imposed higher duties on the tonnage of foreign vessels and on the manufactures and productions of foreign nations when imported into the united states in foreign vessels than when imported in vessels of the united states were repealed so far as respected the manufactures and productions of the nation to which such vessels belonged , on the condition that the repeal should take effect only in favor of any foreign nation when the executive should be satisfied that such discriminating duties to the disadvantage of the united states had likewise been repealed by such nation .
by this act a proposition was made to all nations to place our commerce with each on a basis which it was presumed would be acceptable to all .
every nation was allowed to bring its manufactures and productions into our ports and to take the manufactures and productions of the united states back to their ports in their own vessels on the same conditions that they might be transported in vessels of the united states , and in return it was required that a like accommodation should be granted to the vessels of the united states in the ports of other powers .
the articles to be admitted or prohibited on either side formed no part of the proposed arrangement .
each party would retain the right to admit or prohibit such articles from the other as it thought proper , and on its own conditions .
when the nature of the commerce between the united states and every other country was taken into view , it was thought that this proposition would be considered fair , and even liberal , by every power .
the exports of the united states consist generally of articles of the 1st necessity and of rude materials in demand for foreign manufactories , of great bulk , requiring for their transportation many vessels , the return for which in the manufactures and productions of any foreign country , even when disposed of there to advantage , may be brought in a single vessel .
this observation is the more especially applicable to those countries from which manufactures alone are imported , but it applies in great extent to the european dominions of every european power and in a certain extent to all the colonies of those powers .
by placing , then , the navigation precisely on the same ground in the transportation of exports and imports between the united states and other countries it was presumed that all was offered which could be desired .
it seemed to be the only proposition which could be devised which would retain even the semblance of equality in our favor .
many considerations of great weight gave us a right to expect that this commerce should be extended to the colonies as well as to the european dominions of other powers .
with the latter , especially with countries exclusively manufacturing , the advantage was manifestly on their side .
an indemnity for that loss was expected from a trade with the colonies , and with the greater reason as it was known that the supplies which the colonies derived from us were of the highest importance to them , their labor being bestowed with so much greater profit in the culture of other articles ; and because , likewise , the articles of which those supplies consisted , forming so large a proportion of the exports of the united states , were never admitted into any of the ports of europe except in cases of great emergency to avert a serious calamity .
when no article is admitted which is not required to supply the wants of the party admitting it , and admitted then not in favor of any particular country to the disadvantage of others , but on conditions equally applicable to all , it seems just that the articles thus admitted and invited should be carried thither in the vessels of the country affording such supply and that the reciprocity should be found in a corresponding accommodation on the other side .
by allowing each party to participate in the transportation of such supplies on the payment of equal tonnage a strong proof was afforded of an accommodating spirit .
to abandon to it the transportation of the whole would be a sacrifice which ought not to be expected .
the demand in the present instance would be the more unreasonable in consideration of the great inequality existing in the trade with the parent country .
such was the basis of our system as established by the act of 1815 and such its true character .
in the year in which this act was passed a treaty was concluded with great britain , in strict conformity with its principles , in regard to her european dominions .
to her colonies , however , in the west indies and on this continent it was not extended , the british government claiming the exclusive supply of those colonies , and from our own ports , and of the productions of the colonies in return in her own vessels .
to this claim the united states could not assent , and in consequence each party suspended the intercourse in the vessels of the other by a prohibition which still exists .
the same conditions were offered to france , but not accepted .
her government has demanded other conditions more favorable to her navigation , and which should also give extraordinary encouragement to her manufactures and productions in ports of the united states .
to these it was thought improper to accede , and in consequence the restrictive regulations which had been adopted on her part , being countervailed on the part of the united states , the direct commerce between the 2 countries in the vessels of each party has been in great measure suspended .
it is much to be regretted that , although a negotiation has been long pending , such is the diversity of views entertained on the various points which have been brought into discussion that there does not appear to be any reasonable prospect of its early conclusion .
it is my duty to state , as a cause of very great regret , that very serious differences have occurred in this negotiation respecting the construction of the 8th article of the treaty of 1803 , by which louisiana was ceded to the united states , and likewise respecting the seizure of the apollo , in 1820 , for a violation of our revenue laws .
the claim of the government of france has excited not less surprise than concern , because there does not appear to be a just foundation for it in either instance .
by the 8th article of the treaty referred to it is stipulated that after the expiration of 12 years , during which time it was provided by the 7th or preceding article that the vessels of france and spain should be admitted into the ports of the ceded territory without paying higher duties on merchandise or tonnage on the vessels than such as were paid by citizens of the united states , the ships of france should forever afterwards be placed on the footing of the most favored nation .
by the obvious construction of this article it is presumed that it was intended that no favor should be granted to any power in those ports to which france should not be forthwith entitled , nor should any accommodation be allowed to another power on conditions to which she would not also be entitled on the same conditions .
under this construction no favor or accommodation could be granted to any power to the prejudice of france .
by allowing the equivalent allowed by those powers she would always stand in those ports on the footing of the most favored nation .
but if this article should be so construed as that france should enjoy , of right , and without paying the equivalent , all the advantages of such conditions as might be allowed to other powers in return for important concessions made by them , then the whole character of the stipulations would be changed .
she would not be placed on the footing of the most favored nation , but on a footing held by no other nation .
she would enjoy all advantages allowed to them in consideration of like advantages allowed to us , free from every and any condition whatever .
as little cause has the government of france to complain of the seizure of the apollo and the removal of other vessels from the waters of the st. marys .
it will not be denied that every nation has a right to regulate its commercial system as it thinks fit and to enforce the collection of its revenue , provided it be done without an invasion of the rights of other powers .
the violation of its revenue laws is an offense which all nations punish , the punishment of which gives no just cause of complaint to the power to which the offenders belong , provided it be extended to all equally .
in this case every circumstance which occurred indicated a fixed purpose to violate our revenue laws .
had the party intended to have pursued a fair trade he would have entered the port of some other power , landed his goods at the custom house according to law , and re - shipped and sent them in the vessel of such power , or of some other power which might lawfully bring them , free from such duties , to a port of the united states .
but the conduct of the party in this case was altogether different .
he entered the river st. marys , the boundary line between the united states and florida , and took his position on the spanish side , on which in the whole extent of the river there was no town , no port or custom house , and scarcely any settlement .
his purpose , therefore , was not to sell his goods to the inhabitants of florida , but to citizens of the united states , in exchange for their productions , which could not be done without a direct and palpable breach of our laws .
it is known that a regular systematic plan had been formed by certain persons for the violation of our revenue system , which made it the more necessary to check the proceeding in its commencement .
that the unsettled bank of a river so remote from the spanish garrisons and population could give no protection to any party in such a practice is believed to be in strict accord with the law of nations .
it would not have comported with a friendly policy in spain herself to have established a custom house there , since it could have subserved no other purpose than to elude our revenue law .
but the government of spain did not adopt that measure .
on the contrary , it is understood that the captain - general of cuba , to whom an application to that effect was made by these adventurers , had not acceded to it .
the condition of those provinces for many years before they were ceded to the united states need not now be dwelt on .
inhabited by different tribes of indians and an inroad for every kind of adventurer , the jurisdiction of spain may be said to have been almost exclusively confined to her garrisons .
it certainly could not extend to places where she had no authority .
the rules , therefore , applicable to settled countries governed by laws could not be deemed so to the deserts of florida and to the occurrences there .
it merits attention also that the territory had been ceded to the united states by a treaty the ratification of which had not been refused , and which has since been performed .
under any circumstances , therefore , spain became less responsible for such acts committed there , and the united states more at liberty to exercise authority to prevent so great a mischief .
the conduct of this government has in every instance been conciliatory and friendly to france .
the construction of our revenue law in its application to the cases which have formed the ground of such serious complaint on her part and the order to the collector of st. marys , in accord with it , were given two years before these cases occurred , and in reference to a breach which was attempted by the subjects of another power .
the application , therefore , to the cases in question was inevitable .
as soon as the treaty by which these provinces were ceded to the united states was ratified , and all danger of further breach of our revenue laws ceased , an order was given for the release of the vessel which had been seized and for the dismission of the libel which had been instituted against her .
the principles of this system of reciprocity , founded on the law of [ 1815 - 03 - 03 ] , have been since carried into effect with the kingdoms of the netherlands , sweden , prussia , and with hamburg , lubeck , and oldenburg , with a provision made by subsequent laws in regard to the netherlands , prussia , hamburg , and bremen that such produce and manufactures as could only be , or most usually were , 1st shipped from the ports of those countries , the same being imported in vessels wholly belonging to their subjects , should be considered and admitted as their own manufactures and productions .
the government of norway has by an ordinance opened the ports of that part of the dominions of the king of sweden to the vessels of the united states upon the payment of no other or higher duties than are paid by norwegian vessels , from whatever place arriving and with whatever articles laden .
they have requested the reciprocal allowance for the vessels of norway in the ports of the united states .
as this privilege is not within the scope of the act of [ 1815 - 03 - 03 ] , and can only be granted by congress , and as it may involve the commercial relations of the united states with other nations , the subject is submitted to the wisdom of congress .
i have presented thus fully to your view our commercial relations with other powers , that , seeing them in detail with each power , and knowing the basis on which they rest , congress may in its wisdom decide whether any change ought to be made , and , if any , in what respect .
if this basis is unjust or unreasonable , surely it ought to be abandoned ; but if it be just and reasonable , and any change in it will make concessions subversive of equality and tending in its consequences to sap the foundations of our prosperity , then the reasons are equally strong for adhering to the ground already taken , and supporting it by such further regulations as may appear to be proper , should any additional support be found necessary .
the question concerning the construction of the first article of the treaty of ghent has been , by a joint act of the representatives of the united states and of great britain at the court of st. petersburg , submitted to the decision of his imperial majesty the emperor of russia .
the result of that submission has not yet been received .
the commissioners under the 5th article of that treaty not having been able to agree upon their decision , their reports to the two governments , according to the provisions of the treaty , may be expected at an early day .
with spain the treaty of [ 1819 - 02 - 22 ] , has been partly carried into execution .
possession of e and w fl has been given to the united states , but the officers charged with that service by an order from his catholic majesty , delivered by his minister to the sec of state , and transmitted by a special agent to the captain - general of cuba , to whom it was directed and in whom the government of those provinces was vested , have not only omitted , in contravention of the order of their sovereign , the performance of the express stipulation to deliver over the archives and documents relating to the property and sovereignty of those provinces , all of which it was expected would have been delivered either before or when the troops were withdrawn , but defeated since every effort of the united states to obtain them , especially those of the greatest importance .
this omission has given rise to several incidents of a painful nature , the character of which will be fully disclosed by the documents which will be hereafter communicated .
in every other circumstance of the law of the 3rd of march last , for carrying into effect that treaty , has been duly attended to .
for the execution of that part which preserved in force , for the government of the inhabitants for the term specified , all the civil , military , and judicial powers exercised by the existing government of those provinces an adequate # of officers , as was presumed , were appointed , and ordered to their respective stations .
both provinces were formed into 1 territory , and a governor appointed for it ; but in consideration of the pre - existing division and of the distance and difficulty of communication between pensacola , the residence of the governor of west florida , and st. augustine , that of the governor of east florida , at which places the inconsiderable population of each province was principally collected , two secretaries were appointed , the one to reside at pensacola and the other at st. augustine .
due attention was likewise paid to the execution of the laws of the united states relating to the revenue and the slave trade , which were extended to these provinces .
the whole territory was divided into three collection districts , that part lying between the river st. marys and cape florida forming one , that from the cape to the apalachicola another , and that from the apalachicola to the perdido the third .
to these districts the usual number of revenue officers were appointed ; and to secure the due operation of these laws one judge and a district attorney were appointed to reside at pensacola , and likewise one judge and a district attorney to reside at st. augustine , with a specified boundary between them ; and one marshal for the whole , with authority to appoint a deputy .
in carrying this law into effect , and especially that part relating to the powers of the existing government of those provinces , it was thought important , in consideration of the short term for which it was to operate and the radical change which would be made at the approaching session of congress , to avoid expense , to make no appointment which should not be absolutely necessary to give effect to those powers , to withdraw none of our citizens from their pursuits , whereby to subject the government to claims which could not be gratified and the parties to losses which it would be painful to witness .
it has been seen with much concern that in the performance of these duties a collision arose between the governor of the territory and the judge appointed for the western district .
it was presumed that the law under which this transitory government was organized , and the commissions which were granted to the officers who were appointed to execute each branch of the system , and to which the commissions were adapted , would have been understood in the same sense by them in which they were understood by the executive .
much allowance is due to officers employed in each branch of this system , and the more so as there is good cause to believe that each acted under the conviction that he possessed the power which he undertook to exercise .
of the officer holding the principal station , i think it proper to observe that he accepted it with reluctance , in compliance with the invitation given him , and from a high sense of duty to his country , being willing to contribute to the consummation of an event which would insure complete protection to an important part of our union , which had suffered much from incursion and invasion , and to the defense of which his very gallant and patriotic services had been so signally and usefully devoted .
from the intrinsic difficulty of executing laws deriving their origin from different sources , and so essentially different in many important circumstances , the advantage , and indeed the necessity , of establishing as soon as practicable a well - organized government over that territory on the principles of our system is apparent .
this subject is therefore recommended to the early consideration of congress .
in compliance with an injunction of the law of the 3rd of march last , three commissioners have also been appointed and a board organized for carrying into effect the 11th article of the treaty above recited , making provision for the payment of such of our citizens as have well - founded claims on spain of the character specified by that treaty .
this board has entered on its duties and made some progress therein .
the commissioner and surveyor of his catholic majesty , provided for by the 4th article of the treaty , have not yet arrived in the united states , but are soon expected .
as soon as they do arrive corresponding appointments will be made and every facility be afforded for the due execution of this service .
the government of his most faithful majesty since the termination of the last session of congress has been removed from rio de janeiro to lisbon , where a revolution similar to that which had occurred in the neighboring kingdom of spain had in like manner been sanctioned by the accepted and pledged faith of the reigning monarch .
the diplomatic intercourse between the united states and the portuguese dominions , interrupted by this important event , has not yet been resumed , but the change of internal administration having already materially affected the commercial intercourse of the united states with the portuguese dominions , the renewal of the public missions between the two countries appears to be desirable at an early day .
it is understood that the colonies in south america have had great success during the present year in the struggle for their independence .
the new government of colombia has extended its territories and considerably augmented its strength , and at buenos ayres , where civil dissensions had for some time before prevailed , greater harmony and better order appear to have been established .
equal success has attended their efforts in the provinces on the pacific .
it has long been manifest that it would be impossible for spain to reduce these colonies by force , and equally so that no conditions short of their independence would be satisfactory to them .
it may therefore be presumed , and it is earnestly hoped , that the government of spain , guided by enlightened and liberal councils , will find it to comport with its interests and due to its magnanimity to terminate this exhausting controversy on that basis .
to promote this result by friendly counsel with the government of spain will be the object of the government of the united states .
in conducting the fiscal operations of the year it has been found necessary to carry into full effect the act of the last session of congress authorizing a loan of $ 5m. this sum has been raised at an average premium of $ 5.59 per centum upon stock bearing an interest at the rate of 5 % per annum , redeemable at the option of the government after [ 1835 - 01 - 01 ] .
there has been issued under the provisions of this act $ 4,735,296.30 of 5 % stock , and there has been or will be redeemed during the year $ 3,197,030.71 of louisiana 6 % deferred stock and mississippi stock .
there has therefore been an actual increase of the public debt contracted during the year of $ 1,538,266.69 .
the receipts into the treasury from the first of january to the 30th of september last have amounted to $ 16,219,197.70 , which , with the balance of $ 1,198,461.21 in the treasury on the former day , make the aggregate sum of $ 17,417,658.91 .
the payments from the treasury during the same period have amounted to $ 15,655,288.47 , leaving in the treasury on the last - mentioned day the sum of $ 1,762,370.44 .
it is estimated that the receipts of the 4th quarter of the year will exceed the demands which will be made on the treasury during the same period , and that the amount in the treasury on the 30th of september last will be increased on the first day of january next .
at the close of the last session it was anticipated that the progressive diminution of the public revenue in 1819 and 1820 , which had been the result of the languid state of our foreign commerce in those years , had in the latter year reached its extreme point of depression .
it has , however , been ascertained that that point was reached only at the termination of the first quarter of the present year .
from that time until the 30th of september last the duties secured have exceeded those of the corresponding quarters of the last year $ 1.172 m , whilst the amount of debentures issued during the three first quarters of this year is $ 952,000 less than that of the same quarters of the last year .
there are just grounds to believe that the improvement which has occurred in the revenue during the last - mentioned period will not only be maintained , but that it will progressively increase through the next and several succeeding years , so as to realize the results which were presented upon that subject by the official reports of the treasury at the commencement of the last session of congress .
under the influence of the most unfavorable circumstances the revenue for the next and subsequent years to the year 1825 will exceed the demands at present authorized by law .
it may fairly be presumed that under the protection given to domestic manufactures by the existing laws we shall become at no distant period a manufacturing country on an extensive scale .
possessing as we do the raw materials in such vast amount , with a capacity to augment them to an indefinite extent ; raising within the country aliment of every kind to an amount far exceeding the demand for home consumption , even in the most unfavorable years , and to be obtained always at a very moderate price ; skilled also , as our people are , in the mechanic arts and in every improvement calculated to lessen the demand for and the price of labor , it is manifest that their success in every branch of domestic industry may and will be carried , under the encouragement given by the present duties , to an extent to meet any demand which under a fair competition may be made upon it .
a considerable increase of domestic manufactures , by diminishing the importation of foreign , will probably tend to lessen the amount of the public revenue .
as , however , a large proportion of the revenue which is derived from duties is raised from other articles than manufactures , the demand for which will increase with our population , it is believed that a fund will still be raised from that source adequate to the greater part of the public expenditures , especially as those expenditures , should we continue to be blessed with peace , will be diminished by the completion of the fortifications , dock yards , and other public works , by the augmentation of the navy to the point to which it is proposed to carry it , and by the payment of the public debt , including pensions for military services .
it can not be doubted that the more complete our internal resources and the less dependent we are on foreign powers for every national as well as domestic purpose the greater and more stable will be the public felicity .
by the increase of domestic manufactures will the demand for the rude materials at home be increased , and thus will the dependence of the several parts of our union on each other and the strength of the union itself be proportionably augmented .
in this process , which is very desirable , and inevitable under the existing duties , the resources which obviously present themselves to supply a deficiency in the revenue , should it occur , are the interests which may derive the principal benefit from the change .
if domestic manufactures are raised by duties on foreign , the deficiency in the fund necessary for public purposes should be supplied by duties on the former .
at the last session it seemed doubtful whether the revenue derived from the present sources would be adequate to all the great purposes of our union , including the construction of our fortifications , the augmentation of the navy , and the protection of our commerce against the dangers to which it is exposed .
had the deficiency been such as to subject us to the necessity either to abandon those measures of defense or to resort to the other means for adequate funds , the course presented to the adoption of a virtuous and enlightened people appeared to be a plain one .
it must be gratifying to all to know that this necessity does not exist .
nothing , however , in contemplation of such important objects , which can be easily provided for , should be left to hazard .
it is thought that the revenue may receive an augmentation from the existing sources , and in a manner to aid our manufactures , without hastening prematurely the result which has been suggested .
it is believed that a moderate additional duty on certain articles would have that effect , without being liable to any serious objection .
the examination of the whole coast , for the construction of permanent fortifications , from st. croix to the sabine , with the exception of part of the territory lately acquired , will be completed in the present year , as will be the survey of the mississippi , under the resolution of the house of representatives , from the mouth of the ohio to the ocean , and likewise of the ohio from louisville to the mississippi .
a progress corresponding with the sums appropriated has also been made in the construction of these fortifications at the ports designated .
as they will form a system of defense for the whole maritime frontier , and in consequence for the interior , and are to last for ages , the greatest care has been taken to fix the position of each work and to form it on such a scale as will be adequate to the purpose intended by it .
all the inlets and assailable parts of our union have been minutely examined , and positions taken with a view to the best effect , observing in every instance a just regard for economy .
doubts , however , being entertained as to the propriety of the position and extent of the work at dauphine island , further progress in it was suspended soon after the last session of congress , and an order given to the board of engineers and naval commissioners to make a further and more minute examination of it in both respects , and to report the result without delay .
due progress has been made in the construction of vessels of war according to the law providing for the gradual augmentation of the navy , and to the extent of existing appropriations .
the vessels authorized by the act of 1820 have all been completed and are now in actual service .
none of the larger ships have been or will be launched for the present , the object being to protect all which may not be required for immediate service from decay by suitable buildings erected over them .
a squadron has been maintained , as heretofore , in the mediterranean , by means whereof peace has been preserved with the barbary powers .
this squadron has been reduced the present year to as small a force as is compatible with the fulfillment of the object intended by it .
from past experience and the best information respecting the views of those powers it is distinctly understood that should our squadron be withdrawn they would soon recommence their hostilities and depredations upon our commerce .
their fortifications have lately been rebuilt and their maritime force increased .
it has also been found necessary to maintain a naval force on the pacific for the protection of the very important interests of our citizens engaged in commerce and the fisheries in that sea .
vessels have likewise been employed in cruising along the atlantic coast , in the gulf of mexico , on the coast of africa , and in the neighboring seas .
in the latter many piracies have been committed on our commerce , and so extensive was becoming the range of those unprincipled adventurers that there was cause to apprehend , without a timely and decisive effort to suppress them , the worst consequences would ensue .
fortunately , a considerable check has been given to that spirit by our cruisers , who have succeeded in capturing and destroying several of their vessels .
nevertheless , it is considered an object of high importance to continue these cruises until the practice is entirely suppressed .
like success has attended our efforts to suppress the slave trade .
under the flag of the united states and the sanction of their papers the trade may be considered as entire suppressed , and if any of our citizens are engaged in it under the flags and papers of other powers , it is only from a respect of those powers that these offenders are not seized and brought home to receive the punishment which the laws inflict .
if every other power should adopt the same policy and pursue the same vigorous means for carrying it into effect , the trade could no longer exist .
deeply impressed with the blessings which we enjoy , and of which we have such manifold proofs , my mind is irresistibly drawn to that almighty being , the great source from whence they proceed and to whom our most grateful acknowledgments are due .

