ladies and gentlemen , before going to your questions , i have a brief report on the energy situation , the progress we have made to date , and also the problems that we have in the future .
you will recall that last october when we saw the energy crisis developing as a result of the embargo and other matters , that there were dire predictions that we would have problems with home heating oil and , even , fuel to run our factories .
as a result of the cooperation of the american people -- and they deserve most of the credit -- and also the management on the part of mr. simon and his organization , we have now passed through that crisis .
the home fuel oil , as far as it is concerned , as we know , has been furnished ; no one has suffered as a result .
and as far as our plants are concerned , all have had the fuel that is required to keep the plants going .
the major problem that remains is one that was brought home to me when i talked to one of the soundmen before coming in .
i asked him if he was having any trouble getting gas .
he said , " yes , when i went to the service station this morning , they would n't give me any because my gage was wrong .
they thought that i had more than half a tank .
actually , i had zero in the tank . "
i have seen this problem as i have driven around in the miami area and also in the washington area -- the gas lines , the fact , too , that in the eastern states generally we do have a problem of shortage of gasoline , which has been , of course , very difficult for many people going to work , going to school , or what have you .
mr. simon last week , as you know , at my direction allocated additional gasoline for these particular areas , and he is prepared to take more action in the future to deal with this problem .
as far as the entire situation is concerned , i am able to report tonight that as a result of the cooperation of the american people , as a result , too , of our own energy conservation program within the government , that i now believe confidently that there is much better than an even chance that there will be no need for gas rationing in the united states .
as far as that is concerned , however , i should point out that while the crisis has passed , the problem still remains , and it is a very serious one .
and having reported somewhat positively up to this point , let me point out some of the negative situations that we confront .
one has to do with the congress .
the congress , of course , is working hard on this problem , but i regret to say that the bill presently before the congress is one that if it reaches my desk in its present form , i will have to veto it .
i will have to veto it , because what it does is simply to manage the shortage rather than to deal with the real problem and what should be our real goal , and that is to get rid of the shortage .
for example , there is a provision in the bill , the present bill , that provides for a rollback of prices .
now this , of course , would be immediately popular , but it would mean , if we did have such a rollback , that we would not only have more and longer gas lines , but a rollback of prices would lead to shortages which would require , without question , rationing all over the country .
that would mean 17,000 to 20,000 more federal bureaucrats to run the system at a cost of $ 1 1/2 billion a year .
and this we should avoid .
this we can avoid .
and that is why i again urge the congress to act responsibly on the measures that we have presented to the congress to deal with the problem of price and profits through the windfall profits measure that we have submitted and to deal with the problem of gas shortage overall by getting more supplies , and that means the deregulation of natural gas so that it is competitive as far as price is concerned ; the amendment of some of our environmental actions so that we can use more coal and thereby take some of the pressure off of the demands for gasoline and other fuels ; the deepwater ports ; and the other measures that i have mentioned on many occasions to the nation and also before members of the press .
looking to the future , i believe , we can say now that while the crisis has been passed , the problem remains .
it is a serious problem , but it is one that can be dealt with .
and our goal of becoming completely independent in energy , independent of any foreign source , is one that we can achieve , but it will require the continued cooperation of the american people , which i am sure we will get , and responsible action by the congress , action directed not simply toward distributing a shortage and making it worse , but action which will increase supplies and thereby get rid of the shortage .
miss thomas , i think you are number one tonight .
miss thomas , as you know , the matter of the judiciary committee 's investigation is now being discussed by white house counsel , mr. st. clair , and mr. doar .
and as i indicated in my state of the union address , i am prepared to cooperate with the committee in any way consistent with my constitutional responsibility to defend the office of the presidency against any action which would weaken that office and the ability of future presidents to carry out the great responsibilities that any president will have .
mr. doar is conducting those negotiations with mr. st. clair , and whatever is eventually arranged , which will bring a prompt resolution of this matter , i will cooperate in .
mr. cormier , the problem of inflation is still a very nagging one .
the last figures , as you know , the one percent increase in one month of the consumer price index , was a very troublesome one .
looking to the future , we are keenly aware of this problem , and we are preparing to deal with it .
first , we believe that it is vitally important to get at the source of the problem .
one is in the field of energy .
the way to get at the source of the problem in the field of energy is to increase supplies .
i have already directed my comments to that point .
the other is in the field of food , and in the field of food we have the same objective -- to increase supplies .
and secretary butz indicates to me and to other members of the cabinet and the cost of living council that he expects that our supplies , through the balance of this year , of food will go up and that that will have a restraining influence as far as food costs are concerned .
with regard to inflation , i should point out , too , that almost two - thirds of the price increase , the increase in prices last year , which was at a very high rate , was due to energy and also to the problem of food .
by getting at these two problems and by continuing our cost of living council activities in the areas that secretary shultz has testified to , i believe that we will bring inflation under control as the year goes on .
but i would not underestimate the problem .
we are going to continue to fight it .
it is going to have to take responsibility on the part of the congress to keep the budget within the limits that we have laid out .
it is also going to take an effort on the part of our farmers , an effort on the part of the administration in the field of energy and the rest , so that we can get the supplies up , because the answer to higher prices is not simply controls .
controls have been tried , and controls have been found wanting .
the answer to higher prices is to get up the supplies .
that will bring the price down .
well , this is a matter , mr. jarriel , that has been discussed by mr. st. clair with mr. doar , and the decision will be made , based on what arrangements are developed between the two for the confidentiality of those particular items where they must remain confidential and also based on whether or not turning over to the committee will , in any way , jeopardize the rights of defendants or impair the ability of the prosecution to carry on its proper functions in the cases that may develop .
it is a matter that we are talking about , and it is a matter where we will be cooperative within those guidelines .
well , mr. rather , you do n't have to be a constitutional lawyer to know that the constitution is very precise in defining what is an impeachable offense .
and in this respect it is the opinion of white house counsel and a number of other constitutional lawyers , who are perhaps more up - to - date on this than i am at this time , that a criminal offense on the part of the president is the requirement for impeachment .
this is a matter which will be presented , however , to the committee by mr. st. clair in a brief which he presently is preparing .
i believe that the lines for gasoline will become shorter in the spring and summer months .
in fact , that is the purpose of our program , and i think we will achieve it .
as far as the price of gasoline is concerned , i would be less than candid if i were not to say that the price of gasoline is not going to go down until more supplies of gasoline come into the country and also until other fuels come on stream which will reduce the pressure which is upward on the price of gasoline .
obviously , too , when the embargo is lifted , that is and will have some effect on the price of gasoline .
the embargo question is one that i know is on the minds of all of us , and it is one that presently is under consideration , as you know , by the oil - producing countries .
i should point out here that dr. kissinger 's trip to the mideast is directed toward getting a disengagement or getting talks started with regard to a disengagement on the syrian front .
that , following on the disengagement on the egyptian front , i think , will have a positive effect , although it is not linked to the problem of the embargo directly .
if i could perhaps elaborate just a bit on that : as far as the oil - producing countries are concerned we believe it is in their interest to lift the embargo .
they should do that independently of what happens on the front of the negotiation with regard to developing a permanent peace in the mideast .
as far as we are concerned , we believe that getting a permanent peace in the mideast is a goal worth achieving , apart from the embargo .
but while they are not conditioned on one another by either party , what happens in one area inevitably affects what happens in the other .
and i can say , based on the conversations i have had with the foreign ministers i met with last week and based on the reports i have received to date , i believe we are going to make continued progress on the peace front .
i believe that will be helpful in bringing progress on getting the embargo lifted .
by the same token , if the embargo is not lifted , it will naturally slow down the efforts that we are making on the peace front .
and it is because i believe that we are going to make progress in developing those particular items that are essential towards movement toward a permanent peace in the mideast that the oil - producing countries will conclude that they should move on the embargo front .
well , i believe it is a matter of record that the special prosecutor transmitted a request that i testify before the grand jury , and on constitutional grounds , i respectfully declined to do so .
i did offer , of course , to respond to any interrogatories that the special prosecutor might want to submit or to meet with him personally and answer questions , and he indicated that he did not want to proceed in that way .
well , a full impeachment trial in the senate , under our constitution , comes only when the house determines that there is an impeachable offense .
it is my belief that the house , after it conducts its inquiry , will not reach that determination .
i do not expect to be impeached .
first , i would not say that the shah was irresponsible and reckless .
however , his information , i think , is different from ours , and we have good reason to know what we are getting .
we are getting substantially less from the oil - producing countries in the mideast than we were before the embargo .
that is why we are , of course , very anxious to get the embargo lifted as soon as possible .
with regard to my statement that there will be no recession , i have met with my economic advisers just last week .
i went over this question in great detail .
we are going through what i would say is a downturn in the economy at this point , but not a recession .
and for the balance of the year , the prospects are good .
they are good , because we are going to be dealing with the energy crisis - what was a crisis -- as a problem .
that will be helpful .
we expect to have an increase insofar as food is concerned , and as far as other elements of the economy are concerned , there are very great areas of strength .
the last half of the year we expect to be on an upward curve rather than the down curve .
however , those are projections made by economists , and i gave directions to the office of management and budget , mr. ash , and to our economic advisers that we will be and should be prepared to deal effectively with any areas of the country - and there may be spot areas of hardship -- through the budget means , and we have various contingency plans ready to go .
we will not stand by and allow this country -- because of the energy crisis and because of some of the problems we have had on the inflation front -- stand by and allow a recession to occur .
that is why i have been so positive in saying that there will be no recession .
i had better turn this way .
you have the loudest voice , you go right ahead .
well , this is a question which you very properly bring to the attention of the nation .
it is a question that has already been brought to my attention , i am sure , by a number of people 



  -- and the question -- if i may give the answer now -- is very simply this .
mr. don johnson of the veterans administration , as you know , acted expeditiously when we had a case in california .
we have another one in illinois at the present time .
there are great numbers of veterans .
we have an adequate program to deal with it , and i can assure you that when any matter is brought to my attention or to his , we will deal with it as quickly as we can , because our vietnam veterans and all veterans deserve whatever the law provides for them , and i will see that they get it .
well , if he is n't listening to this program , i will report to him just what you said .
he may have heard even though he was n't listening to the program .
the others were n't political ?
first , i want republican candidates to win where they are deserving candidates .
and second , i recall the year 1948 when we confidently expected to gain in the house and when mr. fulbright , as you may recall , called for president truman 's resignation in the spring because the economy was in a slump and president truman had other problems , and we proceeded to campaign against mr. truman .
he was the issue .
and we took a bad licking in the congress in 1948 .
what my advice to the candidates very simply would be is this : it is that 9 months before an election , no one can predict what can happen in this country .
what will affect the election in this year 1974 is what always affects elections -- peace and prosperity .
on the peace front , we are doing well , and i think we will continue to do well .
with regard to the prosperity issue , the bread and butter issue , as i have already indicated , i think that this economy is going to be moving up .
i think , therefore , it will be a good year for those candidates who stand for the administration .
with regard to any state taxes or concern , i will pay any that the law requires .
as i understand , in california a ruling has been made , apparently , that even though i have a residence in california that there is not a requirement that i pay california taxes .
i would be glad to pay those taxes and , of course , deduct that from my federal income tax liability as others can do if they desire to do so .
with regard to the gift of papers that i made to the government , there is no question about my intent .
all of my vice presidential papers were delivered to the archives in march , 4 months before the deadline .
the paperwork on it apparently was not concluded until after that time .
this raises a legal question as to whether or not the deduction , therefore , is proper .
that is why i voluntarily asked the senate control committee of the house and senate to look into the matter and to advise me as to whether or not the deduction was a proper one .
if it was not a proper one , i , of course , will be glad to pay the tax .
well , my personal reaction is that i am , of course , an admirer of a man who has won a nobel prize for literature and one who has also shown , as he has shown , such great courage .
second , as far as our relations with the soviets are concerned , if i thought that breaking relations with the soviets or turning off our policy of negotiation and turning back to confrontation would help him or help thousands of others like him in the soviet union , we might do that .
on the other hand , i look back to the years of confrontation , and i find that men like him , as a matter of fact , rather than being sent to paris , would have been sent to siberia or probably worse .
as far as our relations with the soviets are concerned , we shall continue .
we shall continue to negotiate , recognizing that they do n't like our system or approve of it and i do n't like their system or approve of it .
mr. brezhnev knows that , and i know it , and we have discussed it quite bluntly and directly .
however , it is essential that both nations , being the super powers that we are , continue to make progress toward limiting arms , toward avoiding confrontations which might explode into war , as it might have in the mideast if we had not had this period of negotiation , and also continuing those negotiations for reduction of forces in europe and reduction of arms , or certainly the limitation of arms , and the various other initiatives that we are undertaking with the soviets .
in a nutshell , this is what we have to consider : do we want to go back to a period when the united states and the soviet union , the two great super powers , stood in confrontation against each other and risk a runaway nuclear arms race and also crisis in berlin , in the mideast , even again in southeast asia or other places of the world , or do we want to continue on a path in which we recognize our differences but try to recognize also the fact that we must either live together or we will all die together ?
no .
i want my party to succeed , but more important , i want the presidency to survive .
and it is vitally important in this nation that the presidency of the united states not be hostage to what happens to the popularity of a president at one time or another .
the stability of this office , the ability of the president to continue to govern , the ability , for example , of this president to continue the great initiatives which have led to a more peaceful world than we have had for a generation , and to move on the domestic front in the many areas that i have described , all of these things , these goals , are yet before us .
we have a lot of work left to do , more than 3 years left to do , and i am going to stay here until i get it done .
well , as a matter of fact , in the privacy message , which , as you know , i issued on saturday , i did not raise this question specifically , but certainly i want that question , along with others , considered .
because in this whole area of privacy , it is n't just a question of those who run credit bureaus and banks and others with their huge computers , but the federal government itself , in its activities , can very much impinge on the privacy of individuals .
this is a matter that i think should be considered by the commission that i have appointed , which is chaired , as you know , by the vice president .
the answer to the first question is no ; the answer to the second question is yes .
and i would go further and say that ambassadorships have not been for sale , to my knowledge , ambassadorships can not be purchased , and i would not approve an ambassadorship unless the man or woman was qualified , clearly apart from any contributions .
it would be very easy for me to jump on the vice president when he is down .
i can only say that in his period of service that he rendered dedicated service in all of the assignments that i gave to him .
he went through , along with his family , a terribly difficult situation , and he resigned , as i think he thought he should , because of the embarrassment that he knew that would cause to the administration and also because he felt that in view of the criminal offense that was charged that he should not stay in office .
now at this point , i am not going to join anybody else in kicking him when he is down .
well , i would point out that those who made deductions , such as i made in this particular instance , included john kenneth galbraith , jerome wiesner , vice president humphrey , president johnson , a number of others .
i did not write that law .
when it was brought to my attention , rather vigorously by president johnson when i saw him shortly after my election , he thought that it would be wise for me to give my papers to the government and take the proper deduction .
i did that .
under the circumstances , as you know now , that deduction is no longer allowed .
as far as i am concerned , i think that was probably a proper decision .
mr. lisagor , we were informed that they were calling an urgent meeting .
we expected that to take place on the 14th of february , but the arab leaders , as you know , are not a united group necessarily , and that is an understatement .
under the circumstances , while the arab leaders who had given us this assurance tried to go forward with the meeting , they were unable to get the cooperation of others .
i believe now , however , that they will get that cooperation , that the meeting will be held , and i believe that they will lift the embargo .

mr. speaker , mr. president , my colleagues in the congress , our distinguished guests , my fellow americans : 
 we meet here tonight at a time of great challenge and great opportunities for america .
we meet at a time when we face great problems at home and abroad that will test the strength of our fiber as a nation .
but we also meet at a time when that fiber has been tested , and it has proved strong .
america is a great and good land , and we are a great and good land because we are a strong , free , creative people and because america is the single greatest force for peace anywhere in the world .
today , as always in our history , we can base our confidence in what the american people will achieve in the future on the record of what the american people have achieved in the past .
tonight , for the first time in 12 years , a president of the united states can report to the congress on the state of a union at peace with every nation of the world .
because of this , in the 22,000-word message on the state of the union that i have just handed to the speaker of the house and the president of the senate , i have been able to deal primarily with the problems of peace with what we can do here at home in america for the american people -- rather than with the problems of war .
the measures i have outlined in this message set an agenda for truly significant progress for this nation and the world in 1974 .
before we chart where we are going , let us see how far we have come .
it was five years ago on the steps of this capitol that i took the oath of office as your president .
in those five years , because of the initiatives undertaken by this administration , the world has changed .
america has changed .
as a result of those changes , america is safer today , more prosperous today , with greater opportunity for more of its people than ever before in our history .
five years ago , america was at war in southeast asia .
we were locked in confrontation with the soviet union .
we were in hostile isolation from a quarter of the world 's people who lived in mainland china .
five years ago , our cities were burning and besieged .
five years ago , our college campuses were a battleground .
five years ago , crime was increasing at a rate that struck fear across the nation .
five years ago , the spiraling rise in drug addiction was threatening human and social tragedy of massive proportion , and there was no program to deal with it .
five years ago -- as young americans bad done for a generation before that -- america 's youth still lived under the shadow of the military draft .
five years ago , there was no national program to preserve our environment .
day by day , our air was getting dirtier , our water was getting more foul .
and five years ago , american agriculture was practically a depressed industry with 100,000 farm families abandoning the farm every year .
as we look at america today , we find ourselves challenged by new problems .
but we also find a record of progress to confound the professional criers of doom and prophets of despair .
we met the challenges we faced five years ago , and we will be equally confident of meeting those that we face today .
let us see for a moment how we have met them .
after more than 10 years of military involvement , all of our troops have returned from southeast asia , and they have returned with honor .
and we can be proud of the fact that our courageous prisoners of war , for whom a dinner was held in washington tonight , that they came home with their heads high , on their feet and not on their knees .
in our relations with the soviet union , we have turned away from a policy of confrontation to one of negotiation .
for the first time since world war ii , the world 's two strongest powers are working together toward peace in the world .
with the people 's republic of china after a generation of hostile isolation , we have begun a period of peaceful exchange and expanding trade .
peace has returned to our cities , to our campuses .
the 17-year rise in crime has been stopped .
we can confidently say today that we are finally beginning to win the war against crime .
right here in this nation 's capital -- which a few years ago was threatening to become the crime capital of the world -- the rate in crime has been cut in half .
a massive campaign against drug abuse has been organized .
and the rate of new heroin addiction , the most vicious threat of all , is decreasing rather than increasing .
for the first time in a generation , no young americans are being drafted into the armed services of the united states .
and for the first time ever , we have organized a massive national effort to protect the environment .
our air is getting cleaner , our water is getting purer , and our agriculture , which was depressed , is prospering .
farm income is up 70 percent , farm production is setting all - time records , and the billions of dollars the taxpayers were paying in subsidies has been cut to nearly zero .
overall , americans are living more abundantly than ever before , today .
more than two and a half million new jobs were created in the past year alone .
that is the biggest percentage increase in nearly 20 years .
people are earning more .
what they earn buys more , more than ever before in history .
in the past five years , the average american 's real spendable income -- that is , what you really can buy with your income , even after allowing for taxes and inflation -- has increased by 16 percent .
despite this record of achievement , as we turn to the year ahead we hear once again the familiar voice of the perennial prophets of gloom telling us now that because of the need to fight inflation , because of the energy shortage , america may be headed for a recession .
let me speak to that issue head on .
there will be no recession in the united states of america .
primarily due to our energy crisis , our economy is passing through a difficult period .
but i pledge to you tonight that the full powers of this government will be used to keep america 's economy producing and to protect the jobs of america 's workers .
we are engaged in a long and hard fight against inflation .
there have been , and there will be in the future , ups and downs in that fight .
but if this congress cooperates in our efforts to hold down the cost of government , we shall win our fight to hold down the cost of living for the american people .
as we look back over our history , the years that stand out as the ones of signal achievement are those in which the administration and the congress , whether one party or the other , working together , had the wisdom and the foresight to select those particular initiatives for which the nation was ready and the moment was right -- and in which they seized the moment and acted .
looking at the year 1974 which lies before us , there are ten key areas in which landmark accomplishments are possible this year in america .
if we make these our national agenda , this is what we will achieve in 1974 : 
  -- we will break the back of the energy crisis ; we will lay the foundation for our future capacity to meet america 's energy needs from america 's own resources .
-- and we will take another giant stride toward lasting peace in the world -- not only by continuing our policy of negotiation rather than confrontation where the great powers are concerned but also by helping toward the achievement of a just and lasting settlement in the middle east .
-- we will check the rise in prices without administering the harsh medicine of recession , and we will move the economy into a steady period of growth at a sustainable level .
-- we will establish a new system that makes high - quality health care available to every american in a dignified manner and at a price he can afford .
-- we will make our states and localities more responsive to the needs of their own citizens .
-- we will make a crucial breakthrough toward better transportation in our towns and in our cities across america .
-- we will reform our system of federal aid to education , to provide it when it is needed , where it is needed , so that it will do the most for those who need it the most .
-- we will make an historic beginning on the task of defining and protecting the right of personal privacy for every american .
-- and we will start on a new road toward reform of a welfare system that bleeds the taxpayer , corrodes the community , and demeans those it is intended to assist .
-- and together with the other nations of the world , we will establish the economic framework within which americans will share more fully in an expanding worldwide trade and prosperity in the years ahead , with more open access to both markets and supplies .
in all of the 186 state of the union messages delivered from this place , in our history this is the first in which the one priority , the first priority , is energy .
let me begin by reporting a new development which i know will be welcome news to every american .
as you know , we have committed ourselves to an active role in helping to achieve a just and durable peace in the middle east , on the basis of full implementation of security council resolutions 242 and 338 .
the first step in the process is the disengagement of egyptian and israeli forces which is now taking place .
because of this hopeful development , i can announce tonight that i have been assured , through my personal contacts with friendly leaders in the middle eastern area , that an urgent meeting will be called in the immediate future to discuss the lifting of the oil embargo .
this is an encouraging sign .
however , it should be clearly understood by our friends in the middle east that the united states will not be coerced on this issue .
regardless of the outcome of this meeting , the cooperation of the american people in our energy conservation program has already gone a long way towards achieving a goal to which i am deeply dedicated .
let us do everything we can to avoid gasoline rationing in the united states of america .
last week , i sent to the congress a comprehensive special message setting forth our energy situation , recommending the legislative measures which are necessary to a program for meeting our needs .
if the embargo is lifted , this will ease the crisis , but it will not mean an end to the energy shortage in america .
voluntary conservation will continue to be necessary .
and let me take this occasion to pay tribute once again to the splendid spirit of cooperation the american people have shown which has made possible our success in meeting this emergency up to this time .
the new legislation i have requested will also remain necessary .
therefore , i urge again that the energy measures that i have proposed be made the first priority of this session of the congress .
these measures will require the oil companies and other energy producers to provide the public with the necessary information on their supplies .
they will prevent the injustice of windfall profits for a few as a result of the sacrifices of the millions of americans .
and they will give us the organization , the incentives , the authorities needed to deal with the short - term emergency and to move toward meeting our long - term needs .
just as 1970 was the year in which we began a full - scale effort to protect the environment , 1974 must be the year in which we organize a full - scale effort to provide for our energy needs , not only in this decade but through the 21st century .
as we move toward the celebration two years from now of the 200th anniversary of this nation 's independence , let us press vigorously on toward the goal i announced last november for project independence .
let this be our national goal : at the end of this decade , in the year 1980 , the united states will not be dependent on any other country for the energy we need to provide our jobs , to heat our homes , and to keep our transportation moving .
to indicate the size of the government commitment , to spur energy research and development , we plan to spend $ 10 billion in federal funds over the next five years .
that is an enormous amount .
but during the same five years , private enterprise will be investing as much as $ 200 billion -- and in 10 years , $ 500 billion -- to develop the new resources , the new technology , the new capacity america will require for its energy needs in the 1980s .
that is just a measure of the magnitude of the project we are undertaking .
but america performs best when called to its biggest tasks .
it can truly be said that only in america could a task so tremendous be achieved so quickly , and achieved not by regimentation , but through the effort and ingenuity of a free people , working in a free system .
turning now to the rest of the agenda for 1974 , the time is at hand this year to bring comprehensive , high quality health care within the reach of every american .
i shall propose a sweeping new program that will assure comprehensive health insurance protection to millions of americans who can not now obtain it or afford it , with vastly improved protection against catastrophic illnesses .
this will be a plan that maintains the high standards of quality in america 's health care .
and it will not require additional taxes .
now , i recognize that other plans have been put forward that would cost $ 80 billion or even $ 100 billion and that would put our whole health care system under the heavy hand of the federal government .
this is the wrong approach .
this has been tried abroad , and it has failed .
it is not the way we do things here in america .
this kind of plan would threaten the quality of care provided by our whole health care system .
the right way is one that builds on the strengths of the present system and one that does not destroy those strengths , one based on partnership , not paternalism .
most important of all , let us keep this as the guiding principle of our health programs .
government has a great role to play , but we must always make sure that our doctors will be working for their patients and not for the federal government .
many of you will recall that in my state of the union address three years ago , i commented that " most americans today are simply fed up with government at all levels , " and i recommended a sweeping set of proposals to revitalize state and local governments , to make them more responsive to the people they serve .
i can report to you today that as a result of revenue sharing passed by the congress , and other measures , we have made progress toward that goal .
after 40 years of moving power from the states and the communities to washington , d. c. , we have begun moving power back from washington to the states and communities and , most important , to the people of america .
in this session of the congress , i believe we are near the breakthrough point on efforts which i have suggested , proposals to let people themselves make their own decisions for their own communities and , in particular , on those to provide broad new flexibility in federal aid for community development , for economic development , for education .
and i look forward to working with the congress , with members of both parties in resolving whatever remaining differences we have in this legislation so that we can make available nearly $ 5.5 billion to our states and localities to use not for what a federal bureaucrat may want , but for what their own people in those communities want .
the decision should be theirs .
i think all of us recognize that the energy crisis has given new urgency to the need to improve public transportation , not only in our cities but in rural areas as well .
the program i have proposed this year will give communities not only more money but also more freedom to balance their own transportation needs .
it will mark the strongest federal commitment ever to the improvement of mass transit as an essential element of the improvement of life in our towns and cities .
one goal on which all americans agree is that our children should have the very best education this great nation can provide .
in a special message last week , i recommended a number of important new measures that can make 1974 a year of truly significant advances for our schools and for the children they serve .
if the congress will act on these proposals , more flexible funding will enable each federal dollar to meet better the particular need of each particular school district .
advance funding will give school authorities a chance to make each year 's plans , knowing ahead of time what federal funds they are going to receive .
special targeting will give special help to the truly disadvantaged among our people .
college students faced with rising costs for their education will be able to draw on an expanded program of loans and grants .
these advances are a needed investment in america 's most precious resource , our next generation .
and i urge the congress to act on this legislation in 1974 .
one measure of a truly free society is the vigor with which it protects the liberties of its individual citizens .
as technology has advanced in america , it has increasingly encroached on one of those liberties -- what i term the right of personal privacy .
modern information systems , data banks , credit records , mailing list abuses , electronic snooping , the collection of personal data for one purpose that may be used for another -- all these have left millions of americans deeply concerned by the privacy they cherish .
and the time has come , therefore , for a major initiative to define the nature and extent of the basic rights of privacy and to erect new safeguards to ensure that those rights are respected .
i shall launch such an effort this year at the highest levels of the administration , and i look forward again to working with this congress in establishing a new set of standards that respect the legitimate needs of society , but that also recognize personal privacy as a cardinal principle of american liberty .
many of those in this chamber tonight will recall that it was three years ago that i termed the nation 's welfare system " a monstrous , consuming outrage -- an outrage against the community , against the taxpayer , and particularly against the children that it is supposed to help . "
that system is still an outrage .
by improving its administration , we have been able to reduce some of the abuses .
as a result , last year , for the first time in 18 years , there has been a halt in the growth of the welfare caseload .
but as a system , our welfare program still needs reform as urgently today as it did when i first proposed in 1969 that we completely replace it with a different system .
in these final three years of my administration , i urge the congress to join me in mounting a major new effort to replace the discredited present welfare system with one that works , one that is fair to those who need help or can not help themselves , fair to the community , and fair to the taxpayer .
and let us have as our goal that there will be no government program which makes it more profitable to go on welfare than to go to work .
i recognize that from the debates that have taken place within the congress over the past three years on this program that we can not expect enactment overnight of a new reform .
but i do propose that the congress and the administration together make this the year in which we discuss , debate , and shape such a reform so that it can be enacted as quickly as possible .
america 's own prosperity in the years ahead depends on our sharing fully and equitably in an expanding world prosperity .
historic negotiations will take place this year that will enable us to ensure fair treatment in international markets for american workers , american farmers , american investors , and american consumers .
it is vital that the authorities contained in the trade bill i submitted to the congress be enacted so that the united states can negotiate flexibly and vigorously on behalf of american interests .
these negotiations can usher in a new era of international trade that not only increases the prosperity of all nations but also strengthens the peace among all nations .
in the past five years , we have made more progress toward a lasting structure of peace in the world than in any comparable time in the nation 's history .
we could not have made that progress if we had not maintained the military strength of america .
thomas jefferson once observed that the price of liberty is eternal vigilance .
by the same token , and for the same reason , in today 's world the price of peace is a strong defense as far as the united states is concerned .
in the past five years , we have steadily reduced the burden of national defense as a share of the budget , bringing it down from 44 percent in 1969 to 29 percent in the current year .
we have cut our military manpower over the past five years by more than a third , from 3.5 million to 2.2 million .
in the coming year , however , increased expenditures will be needed .
they will be needed to assure the continued readiness of our military forces , to preserve present force levels in the face of rising costs , and to give us the military strength we must have if our security is to be maintained and if our initiatives for peace are to succeed .
the question is not whether we can afford to maintain the necessary strength of our defense , the question is whether we can afford not to maintain it , and the answer to that question is no .
we must never allow america to become the second strongest nation in the world .
i do not say this with any sense of belligerence , because i recognize the fact that is recognized around the world .
america 's military strength has always been maintained to keep the peace , never to break it .
it has always been used to defend freedom , never to destroy it .
the world 's peace , as well as our own , depends on our remaining as strong as we need to be as long as we need to be .
in this year 1974 , we will be negotiating with the soviet union to place further limits on strategic nuclear arms .
together with our allies , we will be negotiating with the nations of the warsaw pact on mutual and balanced reduction of forces in europe .
and we will continue our efforts to promote peaceful economic development in latin america , in africa , in asia .
we will press for full compliance with the peace accords that brought an end to american fighting in indochina , including particularly a provision that promised the fullest possible accounting for those americans who are missing in action .
and having in mind the energy crisis to which i have referred to earlier , we will be working with the other nations of the world toward agreement on means by which oil supplies can be assured at reasonable prices on a stable basis in a fair way to the consuming and producing nations alike .
all of these are steps toward a future in which the world 's peace and prosperity , and ours as well as a result , are made more secure .
throughout the five years that i have served as your president , i have had one overriding aim , and that was to establish a new structure of peace in the world that can free future generations of the scourge of war .
i can understand that others may have different priorities .
this has been and this will remain my first priority and the chief legacy i hope to leave from the eight years of my presidency .
this does not mean that we shall not have other priorities , because as we strengthen the peace , we must also continue each year a steady strengthening of our society here at home .
our conscience requires it , our interests require it , and we must insist upon it .
as we create more jobs , as we build a better health care system , as we improve our education , as we develop new sources of energy , as we provide more abundantly for the elderly and the poor , as we strengthen the system of private enterprise that produces our prosperity as we do all of this and even more , we solidify those essential bonds that hold us together as a nation .
even more importantly , we advance what in the final analysis government in america is all about .
what it is all about is more freedom , more security , a better life for each one of the 211 million people that live in this land .
we can not afford to neglect progress at home while pursuing peace abroad .
but neither can ave afford to neglect peace abroad while pursuing progress at home .
with a stable peace , all is possible , but without peace , nothing is possible .
in the written message that i have just delivered to the speaker and to the president of the senate , i commented that one of the continuing challenges facing us in the legislative process is that of the timing and pacing of our initiatives , selecting each year among many worthy projects those that are ripe for action at that time .
what is true in terms of our domestic initiatives is true also in the world .
this period we now are in , in the world -- and i say this as one who has seen so much of the world , not only in these past five years but going back over many years -- we are in a period which presents a juncture of historic forces unique in this century .
they provide an opportunity we may never have again to create a structure of peace solid enough to last a lifetime and more , not just peace in our time but peace in our children 's time as well .
it is on the way we respond to this opportunity , more than anything else , that history will judge whether we in america have met our responsibility .
and i am confident we will meet that great historic responsibility which is ours today .
it was 27 years ago that john f. kennedy and i sat in this chamber , as freshmen congressmen , hearing our first state of the union address delivered by harry truman .
i know from my talks with him , as members of the labor committee on which we both served , that neither of us then even dreamed that either one or both might eventually be standing in this place that i now stand in now and that he once stood in , before me .
it may well be that one of the freshmen members of the 93rd congress , one of you out there , will deliver his own state of the union message 27 years from now , in the year 2001 .
well , whichever one it is , i want you to be able to look back with pride and to say that your first years here were great years and recall that you were here in this 93rd congress when america ended its longest war and began its longest peace .
mr. speaker , and mr. president , and my distinguished colleagues and our guests : i would like to add a personal word with regard to an issue that has been of great concern to all americans over the past year .
i refer , of course , to the investigations of the so - called watergate affair .
as you know , i have provided to the special prosecutor voluntarily a great deal of material .
i believe that i have provided all the material that he needs to conclude his investigations and to proceed to prosecute the guilty and to clear the innocent .
i believe the time has come to bring that investigation and the other investigations of this matter to an end .
one year of watergate is enough .
and the time has come , my colleagues , for not only the executive , the president , but the members of congress , for all of us to join together in devoting our full energies to these great issues that i have discussed tonight which involve the welfare of all of the american people in so many different ways , as well as the peace of the world .
i recognize that the house judiciary committee has a special responsibility in this area , and i want to indicate on this occasion that i will cooperate with the judiciary committee in its investigation .
i will cooperate so that it can conclude its investigation , make its decision , and i will cooperate in any way that i consider consistent with my responsibilities to the office of the presidency of the united states .
there is only one limitation .
i will follow the precedent that has been followed by and defended by every president from george washington to lyndon b. johnson of never doing anything that weakens the office of the president of the united states or impairs the ability of the presidents of the future to make the great decisions that are so essential to this nation and the world .
another point i should like to make very briefly : like every member of the house and senate assembled here tonight , i was elected to the office that i hold .
and like every member of the house and senate , when i was elected to that office , i knew that i was elected for the purpose of doing a job and doing it as well as i possibly can .
and i want you to know that i have no intention whatever of ever walking away from the job that the people elected me to do for the people of the united states .
now , needless to say , it would be understatement if i were not to admit that the year 1973 was not a very easy year for me personally or for my family .
and as i have already indicated , the year 1974 presents very great and serious problems , as very great and serious opportunities are also presented .
but my colleagues , this i believe : with the help of god , who has blessed this land so richly , with the cooperation of the congress , and with the support of the american people , we can and we will make the year 1974 a year of unprecedented progress toward our goal of building a structure of lasting peace in the world and a new prosperity without war in the united states of america .

mr. speaker , mr. president , my colleagues in the congress , our distinguished guests , my fellow americans : twenty - five years ago i sat here as a freshman congressman -- along with speaker albert -- and listened for the first time to the president address the state of the union .
i shall never forget that moment .
the senate , the diplomatic corps , the supreme court , the cabinet entered the chamber , and then the president of the united states .
as all of you are aware , i had some differences with president truman .
he had some with me .
but i remember that on that day -- the day he addressed that joint session of the newly elected republican 80th congress , he spoke not as a partisan , but as president of all the people -- calling upon the congress to put aside partisan considerations in the national interest .
the greek - turkish aid program , the marshall plan , the great foreign policy initiatives which have been responsible for avoiding a world war for over 25 years were approved by the 80th congress , by a bipartisan majority of which i was proud to be a part .
nineteen hundred seventy - two is now before us .
it holds precious time in which to accomplish good for the nation .
we must not waste it .
i know the political pressures in this session of the congress will be great .
there are more candidates for the presidency in this chamber today than there probably have been at any one time in the whole history of the republic .
and there is an honest difference of opinion , not only between the parties , but within each party , on some foreign policy issues and on some domestic policy issues .
however , there are great national problems that are so vital that they transcend partisanship .
so let us have our debates .
let us have our honest differences .
but let us join in keeping the national interest first .
let us join in making sure that legislation the nation needs does not become hostage to the political interests of any party or any person .
there is ample precedent , in this election year , for me to present you with a huge list of new proposals , knowing full well that there would not be any possibility of your passing them if you worked night and day .
i shall not do that .
i have presented to the leaders of the congress today a message of 15,000 words discussing in some detail where the nation stands and setting forth specific legislative items on which i have asked the congress to act .
much of this is legislation which i proposed in 1969 , in 1970 , and also in the first session of this 92nd congress and on which i feel it is essential that action be completed this year .
i am not presenting proposals which have attractive labels but no hope of passage .
i am presenting only vital programs which are within the capacity of this congress to enact , within the capacity of the budget to finance , and which i believe should be above partisanship -- programs which deal with urgent priorities for the nation , which should and must be the subject of bipartisan action by this congress in the interests of the country in 1972 .
when i took the oath of office on the steps of this building just three years ago today , the nation was ending one of the most tortured decades in its history .
the 1960s were a time of great progress in many areas .
but as we all know , they were also times of great agony -- the agonies of war , of inflation , of rapidly rising crime , of deteriorating titles , of hopes raised and disappointed , and of anger and frustration that led finally to violence and to the worst civil disorder in a century .
i recall these troubles not to point any fingers of blame .
the nation was so torn in those final years of the ' 60s that many in both parties questioned whether america could be governed at all .
the nation has made significant progress in these first years of the ' 70s : our cities are no longer engulfed by civil disorders .
our colleges and universities have again become places of learning instead of battlegrounds .
a beginning has been made in preserving and protecting our environment .
the rate of increase in crime has been slowed -- and here in the district of columbia , the one city where the federal government has direct jurisdiction , serious crime in 1971 was actually reduced by 13 percent from the year before .
most important , because of the beginnings that have been made , we can say today that this year 1972 can be the year in which america may make the greatest progress in 25 years toward achieving our goal of being at peace with all the nations of the world .
as our involvement in the war in vietnam comes to an end , we must now go on to build a generation of peace .
to achieve that goal , we must first face realistically the need to maintain our defense .
in the past three years , we have reduced the burden of arms .
for the first time in 20 years , spending on defense has been brought below spending on human resources .
as we look to the future , we find encouraging progress in our negotiations with the soviet union on limitation of strategic arms .
and looking further into the future , we hope there can eventually be agreement on the mutual reduction of arms .
but until there is such a mutual agreement , we must maintain the strength necessary to deter war .
and that is why , because of rising research and development costs , because of increases in military and civilian pay , because of the need to proceed with new weapons systems , my budget for the coming fiscal year will provide for an increase in defense spending .
strong military defenses are not the enemy of peace ; they are the guardians of peace .
there could be no more misguided set of priorities than one which would tempt others by weakening america , and thereby endanger the peace of the world .
in our foreign policy , we have entered a new era .
the world has changed greatly in the 11 years since president john kennedy said in his inaugural address , " ... we shall pay any price , bear any burden , meet any hardship , support any friend , oppose any foe to assure the survival and the success of liberty . "
our policy has been carefully and deliberately adjusted to meet the new realities of the new world we live in .
we make today only those commitments we are able and prepared to meet .
our commitment to freedom remains strong and unshakable .
but others must bear their share of the burden of defending freedom around the world .
and so this , then , is our policy : -- we will maintain a nuclear deterrent adequate to meet any threat to the security of the united states or of our allies . --
we will help other nations develop the capability of defending themselves . --
we will faithfully honor all of our treaty commitments . --
we will act to defend our interests , whenever and wherever they are threatened anyplace in the world . --
but where our interests or our treaty commitments are not involved , our role will be limited . --
we will not intervene militarily . --
but we will use our influence to prevent war . --
if war comes , we will use our influence to stop it . --
once it is over , we will do our share in helping to bind up the wounds of those who have participated in it .
as you know , i will soon be visiting the people 's republic of china and the soviet union .
i go there with no illusions .
we have great differences with both powers .
we shall continue to have great differences .
but peace depends on the ability of great powers to live together on the same planet despite their differences .
we would not be true to our obligation to generations yet unborn if we failed to seize this moment to do everything in our power to insure that we will be able to talk about those differences , rather than to fight about them , in the future .
as we look back over this century , let us , in the highest spirit of bipartisanship , recognize that we can be proud of our nation 's record in foreign affairs .
america has given more generously of itself toward maintaining freedom , preserving peace , alleviating human suffering around the globe , than any nation has ever done in the history of man .
we have fought four wars in this century , but our power has never been used to break the peace , only to keep it ; never been used to destroy freedom , only to defend it .
we now have within our reach the goal of insuring that the next generation can be the first generation in this century to be spared the scourges of war .
turning to our problems at home , we are making progress toward our goal of a new prosperity without war .
industrial production , consumer spending , retail sales , personal income all have been rising .
total employment , real income are the highest in history .
new home building starts this past year reached the highest level ever .
business and consumer confidence have both been rising .
interest rates are down .
the rate of inflation is down .
we can look with confidence to 1972 as the year when the back of inflation will be broken .
now , this a good record , but it is not good enough -- not when we still have an unemployment rate of 6 percent .
it is not enough to point out that this was the rate of the early peacetime years of the ' 60s , or that if the more than two million men released from the armed forces and defense - related industries were still in their wartime jobs , unemployment would be far lower .
our goal in this country is full employment in peacetime .
we intend to meet that goal , and we can .
the congress has helped to meet that goal by passing our job - creating tax program last month .
the historic monetary agreements , agreements that we have reached with the major european nations , canada , and japan , will help meet it by providing new markets for american products , new jobs for american workers .
our budget will help meet it by being expansionary without being inflationary -- a job - producing budget that will help take up the gap as the economy expands to full employment .
our program to raise farm income will help meet it by helping to revitalize rural america , by giving to america 's farmers their fair share of america 's increasing productivity .
we also will help meet our goal of full employment in peacetime with a set of major initiatives to stimulate more imaginative use of america 's great capacity for technological advance , and to direct it toward improving the quality of life for every american .
in reaching the moon , we demonstrated what miracles american technology is capable of achieving .
now the time has come to move more deliberately toward making full use of that technology here on earth , of harnessing the wonders of science to the service of man .
i shall soon send to the congress a special message proposing a new program of federal partnership in technological research and development -- with federal incentives to increase private research , federally supported research on projects designed to improve our everyday lives in ways that will range from improving mass transit to developing new systems of emergency health care that could save thousands of lives annually .
historically , our superior technology , and high productivity have made it possible for american workers to be the highest paid in the world by far , and yet for our goods still to compete in world markets .
now we face a new situation .
as other nations move rapidly forward in technology , the answer to the new competition is not to build a wall around america , but rather to remain competitive by improving our own technology still further and by increasing productivity in american industry .
our new monetary and trade agreements will make it possible for american goods to compete fairly in the world 's markets -- but they still must compete .
the new technology program will put to use the skills of many highly trained americans , skills that might otherwise be wasted .
it will also meet the growing technological challenge from abroad , and it will thus help to create new industries , as well as creating more jobs for america 's workers in producing for the world 's markets .
this second session of the 92nd congress already has before it more than 90 major administration proposals which still await action .
i have discussed these in the extensive written message that i have presented to the congress today .
they include , among others , our programs to improve life for the aging ; to combat crime and drug abuse ; to improve health services and to ensure that no one will be denied needed health care because of inability to pay ; to protect workers ' pension rights ; to promote equal opportunity for members of minorities , and others who have been left behind ; to expand consumer protection ; to improve the environment ; to revitalize rural america ; to help the cities ; to launch new initiatives in education ; to improve transportation , and to put an end to costly labor tie - ups in transportation .
the west coast dock strike is a case in point .
this nation can not and will not tolerate that kind of irresponsible labor tie - up in the future .
the messages also include basic reforms which are essential if our structure of government is to be adequate in the decades ahead .
they include reform of our wasteful and outmoded welfare system -- substitution of a new system that provides work requirements and work incentives for those who can help themselves , income support for those who can not help themselves , and fairness to the working poor .
they include a $ 17 billion program of federal revenue sharing with the states and localities as an investment in their renewal , an investment also of faith in the american people .
they also include a sweeping reorganization of the executive branch of the federal government so that it will be more efficient , more responsive , and able to meet the challenges of the decades ahead .
one year ago , standing in this place , i laid before the opening session of this congress six great goals .
one of these was welfare reform .
that proposal has been before the congress now for nearly two and a half years .
my proposals on revenue sharing , government reorganization , health care , and the environment have now been before the congress for nearly a year .
many of the other major proposals that i have referred to have been here that long or longer .
now , 1971 , we can say , was a year of consideration of these measures .
now let us join in making 1972 a year of action on them , action by the congress , for the nation and for the people of america .
now , in addition , there is one pressing need which i have not previously covered , but which must be placed on the national agenda .
we long have looked in this nation to the local property tax as the main source of financing for public primary and secondary education .
as a result , soaring school costs , soaring property tax rates now threaten both our communities and our schools .
they threaten communities because property taxes , which more than doubled in the 10 years from 1960 to ' 70 , have become one of the most oppressive and discriminatory of all taxes , hitting most cruelly at the elderly and the retired ; and they threaten schools , as hard - pressed voters understandably reject new bond issues at the polls .
the problem has been given even greater urgency by four recent court decisions , which have held that the conventional method of financing schools through local property taxes is discriminatory and unconstitutional .
nearly two years ago , i named a special presidential commission to study the problems of school finance , and i also directed the federal departments to look into the same problems .
we are developing comprehensive proposals to meet these problems .
this issue involves two complex and interrelated sets of problems : support of the schools and the basic relationships of federal , state , and local governments in any tax reforms .
under the leadership of the secretary of the treasury , we are carefully reviewing all of the tax aspects , and i have this week enlisted the advisory commission on intergovernmental relations in addressing the intergovernmental relations aspects .
i have asked this bipartisan commission to review our proposals for federal action to cope with the gathering crisis of school finance and property taxes .
later in the year , when both commissions have completed their studies , i shall make my final recommendations for relieving the burden of property taxes and providing both fair and adequate financing for our children 's education .
these recommendations will be revolutionary .
but all these recommendations , however , will be rooted in one fundamental principle with which there can be no compromise : local school boards must have control over local schools .
as we look ahead over the coming decades , vast new growth and change are not only certainties , they will be the dominant reality of this world , and particularly of our life in america .
surveying the certainty of rapid change , we can be like a fallen rider caught in the stirrups -- we can sit high in the saddle , the masters of change , directing it on a course we choose .
the secret of mastering change in today 's world is to reach back to old and proven principles , and to adapt them with imagination and intelligence to the new realities of a new age .
that is what we have done in the proposals that i have laid before the congress .
they are rooted in basic principles that are as enduring as human nature , as robust as the american experience ; and they are responsive to new conditions .
thus they represent a spirit of change that is truly renewal .
as we look back at those old principles , we find them as timely as they are timeless .
we believe in independence , and self - reliance , and the creative value of the competitive spirit .
we believe in full and equal opportunity for all americans and in the protection of individual rights and liberties .
we believe in the family as the keystone of the community , and in the community as the keystone of the nation .
we believe in compassion toward those in need .
we believe in a system of law , justice , and order as the basis of a genuinely free society .
we believe that a person should get what he works for -- and that those who can , should work for what they get .
we believe in the capacity of people to make their own decisions in their own lives , in their own communities -- and we believe in their right to make those decisions .
in applying these principles , we have done so with the full understanding that what we seek in the seventies , what our quest is , is not merely for more , but for better for a better quality of life for all americans .
thus , for example , we are giving a new measure of attention to cleaning up our air and water , making our surroundings more attractive .
we are providing broader support for the arts , helping stimulate a deeper appreciation of what they can contribute to the nation 's activities and to our individual lives .
but nothing really matters more to the quality of our lives than the way we treat one another , than our capacity to live respectfully together as a unified society , with a full , generous regard for the rights of others and also for the feelings of others .
as we recover from the turmoil and violence of recent years , as we learn once again to speak with one another instead of shouting at one another , we are regaining that capacity .
as is customary here , on this occasion , i have been talking about programs .
programs are important .
but even more important than programs is what we are as a nation -- what we mean as a nation , to ourselves and to the world .
in new york harbor stands one of the most famous statues in the world -- the statue of liberty , the gift in 1886 of the people of france to the people of the united states .
this statue is more than a landmark ; it is a symbol -- a symbol of what america has meant to the world .
it reminds us that what america has meant is not its wealth , and not its power , but its spirit and purpose -- a land that enshrines liberty and opportunity , and that has held out a hand of welcome to millions in search of a better and a fuller and , above all , a freer life .
the world 's hopes poured into america , along with its people .
and those hopes , those dreams , that have been brought here from every corner of the world , have become a part of the hope that we now hold out to the world .
four years from now , america will celebrate the 200th anniversary of its founding as a nation .
there are those who say that the old spirit of ' 76 is dead -- that we no longer have the strength of character , the idealism , the faith in our founding purposes that that spirit represents .
those who say this do not know america .
we have been undergoing self - doubts and self - criticism .
but these are only the other side of our growing sensitivity to the persistence of want in the midst of plenty , of our impatience with the slowness with which age - old ills are being overcome .
if we were indifferent to the shortcomings of our society , or complacent about our institutions , or blind to the lingering inequities -- then we would have lost our way .
but the fact that we have those concerns is evidence that our ideals , deep down , are still strong .
indeed , they remind us that what is really best about america is its compassion .
they remind us that in the final analysis , america is great not because it is strong , not because it is rich , but because this is a good country .
let us reject the narrow visions of those who would tell us that we are evil because we are not yet perfect , that we are corrupt because we are not yet pure , that all the sweat and toil and sacrifice that have gone into the building of america were for naught because the building is not yet done .
let us see that the path we are traveling is wide , with room in it for all of us , and that its direction is toward a better nation and a more peaceful world .
never has it mattered more that we go forward together .
look at this chamber .
the leadership of america is here today -- the supreme court , the cabinet , the senate , the house of representatives .
together , we hold the future of the nation , and the conscience of the nation in our hands .
because this year is an election year , it will be a time of great pressure .
if we yield to that pressure and fail to deal seriously with the historic challenges that we face , we will have failed the trust of millions of americans and shaken the confidence they have a right to place in us , in their government .
never has a congress had a greater opportunity to leave a legacy of a profound and constructive reform for the nation than this congress .
if we succeed in these tasks , there will be credit enough for all -- not only for doing what is right , but doing it in the right way , by rising above partisan interest to serve the national interest .
and if we fail , more than any one of us , america will be the loser .
that is why my call upon the congress today is for a high statesmanship , so that in the years to come americans will look back and say because it withstood the intense pressures of a political year , and achieved such great good for the american people and for the future of this nation , this was truly a great congress .

good evening : 
 now that most of the major witnesses in the watergate phase of the senate committee hearings on campaign practices have been heard , the time has come for me to speak out about the charges made and to provide a perspective on the issue for the american people .
for over four months , watergate has dominated the news media .
during the past three months , the three major networks have devoted an average of over 22 hours of television time each week to this subject .
the senate committee has heard over 2 million words of testimony .
this investigation began as an effort to discover the facts about the break - in and bugging of the democratic national headquarters and other campaign abuses .
but as the weeks have gone by , it has become clear that both the hearings themselves and some of the commentaries on them have become increasingly absorbed in an effort to implicate the president personally in the illegal activities that took place .
because the abuses occurred during my administration , and in the campaign for my reelection , i accept full responsibility for them .
i regret that these events took place , and i do not question the right of a senate committee to investigate charges made against the president to the extent that this is relevant to legislative duties .
however , it is my constitutional responsibility to defend the integrity of this great office against false charges .
i also believe that it is important to address the overriding question of what we as a nation can learn from this experience and what we should now do .
i intend to discuss both of these subjects tonight .
the record of the senate hearings is lengthy .
the facts are complicated , the evidence conflicting .
it would not be right for me to try to sort out the evidence , to rebut specific witnesses , or to pronounce my own judgments about their credibility .
that is for the committee and for the courts .
i shall not attempt to deal tonight with the various charges in detail .
rather , i shall attempt to put the events in perspective from the standpoint of the presidency .
on may 22 , before the major witnesses had testified , i issued a detailed statement addressing the charges that had been made against the president .
i have today issued another written statement , which addresses the charges that have been made since then as they relate to my own conduct , and which describes the efforts that i made to discover the facts about the matter .
on may 22 , i stated in very specific terms -- and i state again to every one of you listening tonight these facts -- i had no prior knowledge of the watergate break - in ; i neither took part in nor knew about any of the subsequent coverup activities ; i neither authorized nor encouraged subordinates to engage in illegal or improper campaign tactics .
that was and that is the simple truth .
in all of the millions of words of testimony , there is not the slightest suggestion that i had any knowledge of the planning for the watergate break - in .
as for the coverup , my statement has been challenged by only one of the 35 witnesses who appeared -- a witness who offered no evidence beyond his own impressions and whose testimony has been contradicted by every other witness in a position to know the facts .
tonight , let me explain to you what i did about watergate after the break - in occurred , so that you can better understand the fact that i also had no knowledge of the so - called coverup .
from the time when the break - in occurred , i pressed repeatedly to know the facts , and particularly whether there was any involvement of anyone in the white house .
i considered two things essential : 
 first , that the investigation should be thorough and aboveboard ; and second , that if there were any higher involvement , we should get the facts out first .
as i said at my august 29 press conference last year , " what really hurts in matters of this sort is not the fact that they occur , because over - zealous people in campaigns do things that are wrong .
what really hurts is if you try to cover it up . "
i believed that then , and certainly the experience of this last year has proved that to be true .
i know that the justice department and the fbi were conducting intensive investigations -- as i had insisted that they should .
the white house counsel , john dean , was assigned to monitor these investigations , and particularly to check into any possible white house involvement .
throughout the summer of 1972 , i continued to press the question , and i continued to get the same answer : i was told again and again that there was no indication that any persons were involved other than the seven who were known to have planned and carried out the operation , and who were subsequently indicted and convicted .
on september 12 at a meeting that i held with the cabinet , the senior white house staff and a number of legislative leaders , attorney general kleindienst reported on the investigation .
he told us it had been the most extensive investigation since the assassination of president kennedy and that it had established that only those seven were involved .
on september 15 , the day the seven were indicted , i met with john dean , the white house counsel .
he gave me no reason whatever to believe that any others were guilty ; i assumed that the indictments of only the seven by the grand jury confirmed the reports he had been giving to that effect throughout the summer .
on february 16 , i met with acting director gray prior to submitting his name to the senate for confirmation as permanent director of the fbi .
i stressed to him that he would be questioned closely about the fbi 's conduct of the watergate investigation .
i asked him if he still had full confidence in it .
he replied that he did , that he was proud of its thoroughness and that he could defend it with enthusiasm before the committee .
because i trusted the agencies conducting the investigations , because i believed the reports i was getting , i did not believe the newspaper accounts that suggested a coverup .
i was convinced there was no coverup , because i was convinced that no one had anything to cover up .
it was not until march 21 of this year that i received new information from the white house counsel that led me to conclude that the reports i had been getting for over 9 months were not true .
on that day , i launched an intensive effort of my own to get the facts and to get the facts out .
whatever the facts might be , i wanted the white house to be the first to make them public .
at first , i entrusted the task of getting me the facts to mr. dean .
when , after spending a week at camp david , he failed to produce the written report i had asked for , i turned to john ehrlichman and to the attorney general -- while also making independent inquiries of my own .
by mid - april , i had received mr. ehrlichman 's report and also one from the attorney general based on new information uncovered by the justice department .
these reports made it clear to me that the situation was far more serious than i had imagined .
it at once became evident to me that the responsibility for the investigation in the case should be given to the criminal division of the justice department .
i turned over all the information i had to the head of that department , assistant attorney general henry petersen , a career government employee with an impeccable nonpartisan record , and i instructed him to pursue the matter thoroughly .
i ordered all members of the administration to testify fully before the grand jury .
and with my concurrence , on may 18 attorney general richardson appointed a special prosecutor to handle the matter , and the case is now before the grand jury .
far from trying to hide the facts , my effort throughout has been to discover the facts -- and to lay those facts before the appropriate law enforcement authorities so that justice could be done and the guilty dealt with .
i relied on the best law enforcement agencies in the country to find and report the truth .
i believed they had done so -- just as they believed they had done so .
many have urged that in order to help prove the truth of what i have said , i should turn over to the special prosecutor and the senate committee recordings of conversations that i held in my office or on my telephone .
however , a much more important principle is involved in this question than what the tapes might prove about watergate .
each day , a president of the united states is required to make difficult decisions on grave issues .
it is absolutely necessary , if the president is to be able to do his job as the country expects , that he be able to talk openly and candidly with his advisers about issues and individuals .
this kind of frank discussion is only possible when those who take part in it know that what they say is in strictest confidence .
the presidency is not the only office that requires confidentiality .
a member of congress must be able to talk in confidence with his assistants ; judges must be able to confer in confidence with their law clerks and with each other .
for very good reasons , no branch of government has ever compelled disclosure of confidential conversations between officers of other branches of government and their advisers about government business .
would want to talk frankly about the congressional horse - trading that might get a vital bill passed .
no one would want to speak bluntly about public figures here and abroad .
that is why i shall continue to oppose efforts which would set a precedent that would cripple all future presidents by inhibiting conversations between them and those they look to for advice .
this principle of confidentiality of presidential conversations is at stake in the question of these tapes .
i must and i shall oppose any efforts to destroy this principle , which is so vital to the conduct of this great office .
turning now to the basic issues which have been raised by watergate , i recognize that merely answering the charges that have been made against the president is not enough .
the word " watergate " has come to represent a much broader set of concerns .
to most of us , watergate has come to mean not just a burglary and bugging of party headquarters but a whole series of acts that either represent or appear to represent an abuse of trust .
it has come to stand for excessive partisanship , for " enemy lists , " for efforts to use the great institutions of government for partisan political purposes .
for many americans , the term " watergate " also has come to include a number of national security matters that have been brought into the investigation , such as those involved in my efforts to stop massive leaks of vital diplomatic and military secrets , and to counter the wave of bombings and burnings and other violent assaults of just a few years ago .
let me speak first of the political abuses .
i know from long experience that a political campaign is always a hard and a tough contest .
a candidate for high office has an obligation to his party , to his supporters , and to the cause he represents .
he must always put forth his best efforts to win .
but he also has an obligation to the country to conduct that contest within the law and within the limits of decency .
no political campaign ever justifies obstructing justice , or harassing individuals , or compromising those great agencies of government that should and must be above politics .
to the extent that these things were done in the 1972 campaign , they were serious abuses , and i deplore them .
practices of that kind do not represent what i believe government should be , or what i believe politics should be .
in a free society , the institutions of government belong to the people .
they must never be used against the people .
and in the future , my administration will be more vigilant in ensuring that such abuses do not take place and that officials at every level understand that they are not to take place .
and i reject the cynical view that politics is inevitably or even usually a dirty business .
let us not allow what a few overzealous people did in watergate to tar the reputation of the millions of dedicated americans of both parties who fought hard but clean for the candidates of their choice in 1972 .
by their unselfish efforts , these people make our system work and they keep america free .
i pledge to you tonight that i will do all that i can to ensure that one of the results of watergate is a new level of political decency and integrity in america - in which what has been wrong in our politics no longer corrupts or demeans what is right in our politics .
let me turn now to the difficult questions that arise in protecting the national security .
it is important to recognize that these are difficult questions and that reasonable and patriotic men and women may differ on how they should be answered .
only last year , the supreme court said that implicit in the president 's constitutional duty is " the power to protect our government against those who would subvert or overthrow it by unlawful means . "
how to carry out this duty is often a delicate question to which there is no easy answer .
for example , every president since world war ii has believed that in internal security matters , the president has the power to authorize wiretaps without first obtaining a search warrant .
an act of congress in 1968 had seemed to recognize such power .
last year the supreme court held to the contrary .
and my administration is , of course , now complying with that supreme court decision .
but until the supreme court spoke , i had been acting , as did my predecessors -- president truman , president eisenhower , president kennedy , and president johnson -- in a reasonable belief that in certain circumstances the constitution permitted and sometimes even required such measures to protect the national security in the public interest .
although it is the president 's duty to protect the security of the country , we , of course , must be extremely careful in the way we go about this for if we lose our liberties we will have little use for security .
instances have now come to light in which a zeal for security did go too far and did interfere impermissibly with individual liberty .
it is essential that such mistakes not be repeated .
but it is also essential that we do not overreact to particular mistakes by tying the president 's hands in a way that would risk sacrificing our security , and with it all our liberties .
i shall continue to meet my constitutional responsibility to protect the security of this nation so that americans may enjoy their freedom .
but i shall and can do so by constitutional means , in ways that will not threaten that freedom .
as we look at watergate in a longer perspective , we can see that its abuses resulted from the assumption by those involved that their cause placed them beyond the reach of those rules that apply to other persons and that hold a free society together .
that attitude can never be tolerated in our country .
however , it did not suddenly develop in the year 1972 .
it became fashionable in the 1960 's as individuals and groups increasingly asserted the right to take the law into their own hands , insisting that their purposes represented a higher morality .
then their attitude was praised in the press and even from some of our pulpits as evidence of a new idealism .
those of us who insisted on the old restraints , who warned of the overriding importance of operating within the law and by the rules , were accused of being reactionaries .
that same attitude brought a rising spiral of violence and fear , of riots and arson and bombings , all in the name of peace and in the name of justice .
political discussion turned into savage debate .
free speech was brutally suppressed as hecklers shouted down or even physically assaulted those with whom they disagreed .
serious people raised serious questions about whether we could survive as a free democracy .
the notion that the end justifies the means proved contagious .
thus , it is not surprising , even though it is deplorable , that some persons in 1972 adopted the morality that they themselves had rightly condemned and committed acts that have no place in our political system .
those acts can not be defended .
those who were guilty of abuses must be punished .
but ultimately , the answer does not lie merely in the jailing of a few overzealous persons who mistakenly thought their cause justified their violations of the law .
rather , it lies in a commitment by all of us to show a renewed respect for the mutual restraints that are the mark of a free and a civilized society .
it requires that we learn once again to work together , if not united in all of our purposes , then at least united in respect for the system by which our conflicts are peacefully resolved and our liberties maintained .
if there are laws we disagree with , let us work to change them , but let us obey them until they are changed .
if we have disagreements over government policies , let us work those out in a decent and civilized way , within the law , and with respect for our differences .
we must recognize that one excess begets another , and that the extremes of violence and discord in the 1960 's contributed to the extremes of watergate .
both are wrong .
both should be condemned .
no individual , no group , and no political party has a corner on the market on morality in america .
if we learn the important lessons of watergate , if we do what is necessary to prevent such abuses in the future -- on both sides -- we can emerge from this experience a better and a stronger nation .
let me turn now to an issue that is important above all else and that is critically affecting your life today and will affect your life and your children 's life in the years to come .
after 12 weeks and two million words of televised testimony , we have reached a point at which a continued , backward looking obsession with watergate is causing this nation to neglect matters of far greater importance to all of the american people .
we must not stay so mired in watergate that we fail to respond to challenges of surpassing importance to america and the world .
we can not let an obsession with the past destroy our hopes for the future .
legislation vital to your health and well - being sits unattended on the congressional calendar .
confidence at home and abroad in our economy , our currency , our foreign policy is being sapped by uncertainty .
critical negotiations are taking place on strategic weapons and on troop levels in europe that can affect the security of this nation and the peace of the world long after watergate is forgotten .
vital events are taking place in southeast asia which could lead to a tragedy for the cause of peace .
these are matters that can not wait .
they cry out for action now , and either we , your elected representatives here in washington , ought to get on with the jobs that need to be done -- for you -- or every one of you ought to be demanding to know why .
the time has come to turn watergate over to the courts , where the questions of guilt or innocence belong .
the time has come for the rest of us to get on with the urgent business of our nation .
last november , the american people were given the clearest choice of this century .
your votes were a mandate , which i accepted , to complete the initiatives we began in my first term and to fulfill the promises i made for my second term .
this administration was elected to control inflation ; to reduce the power and size of government ; to cut the cost of government so that you can cut the cost of living ; to preserve and defend those fundamental values that have made america great ; to keep the nation 's military strength second to none ; to achieve peace with honor in southeast asia , and to bring home our prisoners of war ; to build a new prosperity , without inflation and without war ; to create a structure of peace in the world that would endure long after we are gone .
these are great goals , they are worthy of a great people , and i would not be true to your trust if i let myself be turned aside from achieving those goals .
if you share my belief in these goals -- if you want the mandate you gave this administration to be carried out -- then i ask for your help to ensure that those who would exploit watergate in order to keep us from doing what we were elected to do will not succeed .
i ask tonight for your understanding , so that as a nation we can learn the lessons of watergate and gain from that experience .
i ask for your help in reaffirming our dedication to the principles of decency , honor , and respect for the institutions that have sustained our progress through these past two centuries .
and i ask for your support in getting on once again with meeting your problems , improving your life , building your future .
with your help , with god 's help , we will achieve those great goals for america .
thank you and good evening .

mr. speaker , mr. president , my colleagues in the congress , our distinguished guests , my fellow americans : as this 92nd congress begins its session , america has lost a great senator , and all of us who had the privilege to know him have lost a loyal friend .
i had the privilege of visiting senator russell in the hospital just a few days before he died .
he never spoke about himself .
he only spoke eloquently about the need for a strong national defense .
in tribute to one of the most magnificent americans of all time , i respectfully ask that all those here will rise in silent prayer for senator russell .
thank you .
mr. speaker , before i begin my formal address , i want to use this opportunity to congratulate all of those who were winners in the rather spirited contest for leadership positions in the house and the senate and , also , to express my condolences to the losers .
i know how both of you feel .
and i particularly want to join with all of the members of the house and the senate as well in congratulating the new speaker of the united states congress .
to those new members of this house who may have some doubts about the possibilities for advancement in the years ahead , i would remind you that the speaker and i met just 24 years ago in this chamber as freshmen members of the 80th congress .
as you see , we both have come up in the world a bit since then .
mr. speaker , this 92nd congress has a chance to be recorded as the greatest congress in america 's history .
in these troubled years just past , america has been going through a long nightmare of war and division , of crime and inflation .
even more deeply , we have gone through a long , dark night of the american spirit .
but now that night is ending .
now we must let our spirits soar again .
now we are ready for the lift of a driving dream .
the people of this nation are eager to get on with the quest for new greatness .
they see challenges , and they are prepared to meet those challenges .
it is for us here to open the doors that will set free again the real greatness of this nation -- the genius of the american people .
how shall we meet this challenge ?
how can we truly open the doors , and set free the full genius of our people ?
the way in which the 92nd congress answers these questions will determine its place in history .
more importantly , it can determine this nation 's place in history as we enter the third century of our independence .
tonight i shall present to the congress six great goals .
i shall ask not simply for more new programs in the old framework .
i shall ask to change the framework of government itself -- to reform the entire structure of american government so we can make it again fully responsive to the needs and the wishes of the american people .
if we act boldly -- if we seize this moment and achieve these goals -- we can close the gap between promise and performance in american government .
we can bring together the resources of this nation and the spirit of the american people .
in discussing these great goals , i shall deal tonight only with matters on the domestic side of the nation 's agenda .
i shall make a separate report to the congress and the nation next month on developments in foreign policy .
the first of these great goals is already before the congress .
i urge that the unfinished business of the 91st congress be made the first priority business of the 92nd congress .
over the next two weeks , i will call upon congress to take action on more than 35 pieces of proposed legislation on which action was not completed last year .
the most important is welfare reform .
the present welfare system has become a monstrous , consuming outrage -- an outrage against the community , against the taxpayer , and particularly against the children it is supposed to help .
we may honestly disagree , as we do , on what to do about it .
but we can all agree that we must meet the challenge , not by pouring more money into a bad program , but by abolishing the present welfare system and adopting a new one .
so let us place a floor under the income of every family with children in america -- and without those demeaning , soul - stifling affronts to human dignity that so blight the lives of welfare children today .
but let us also establish an effective work incentive and an effective work requirement .
let us provide the means by which more can help themselves .
this shall be our goal .
let us generously help those who are not able to help themselves .
but let us stop helping those who are able to help themselves but refuse to do so .
the second great goal is to achieve what americans have not enjoyed since 1957 -- full prosperity in peacetime .
the tide of inflation has turned .
the rise in the cost of living , which had been gathering dangerous momentum in the late sixties , was reduced last year .
inflation will be further reduced this year .
but as we have moved from runaway inflation toward reasonable price stability and at the same time as we have been moving from a wartime economy to a peacetime economy , we have paid a price in increased unemployment .
we should take no comfort from the fact that the level of unemployment in this transition from a wartime to a peacetime economy is lower than in any peacetime year of the sixties .
this is not good enough for the man who is unemployed in the 70s .
we must do better for workers in peacetime and we will do better .
to achieve this , i will submit an expansionary budget this year -- one that will help stimulate the economy and thereby open up new job opportunities for millions of americans .
it will be a full employment budget , a budget designed to be in balance if the economy were operating at its peak potential .
by spending as if we were at full employment , we will help to bring about full employment .
i ask the congress to accept these expansionary policies -- to accept the concept of a full employment budget .
at the same time , i ask the congress to cooperate in resisting expenditures that go beyond the limits of the full employment budget .
for as we wage a campaign to bring about a widely shared prosperity , we must not reignite the fires of inflation and so undermine that prosperity .
with the stimulus and the discipline of a full employment budget , with the commitment of the independent federal reserve system to provide fully for the monetary needs of a growing economy , and with a much greater effort on the part of labor and management to make their wage and price decisions in the light of the national interest and their own self - interest -- then for the worker , the farmer , the consumer , for americans everywhere we shall gain the goal of a new prosperity : more jobs , more income , more profits , without inflation and without war .
this is a great goal , and one that we can achieve together .
the third great goal is to continue the effort so dramatically begun last year : to restore and enhance our natural environment .
building on the foundation laid in the 37-point program that i submitted to congress last year , i will propose a strong new set of initiatives to clean up our air and water , to combat noise , and to preserve and restore our surroundings .
i will propose programs to make better use of our land , to encourage a balanced national growth -- growth that will revitalize our rural heartland and enhance the quality of life in america .
and not only to meet today 's needs but to anticipate those of tomorrow , i will put forward the most extensive program ever proposed by a president of the united states to expand the nation 's parks , recreation areas , open spaces , in a way that truly brings parks to the people where the people are .
for only if we leave a legacy of parks will the next generation have parks to enjoy .
as a fourth great goal , i will offer a far - reaching set of proposals for improving america 's health care and making it available more fairly to more people .
i will propose : -- a program to insure that no american family will be prevented from obtaining basic medical care by inability to pay . --
i will propose a major increase in and redirection of aid to medical schools , to greatly increase the number of doctors and other health personnel . --
incentives to improve the delivery of health services , to get more medical care resources into those areas that have not been adequately served , to make greater use of medical assistants , and to slow the alarming rise in the costs of medical care . --
new programs to encourage better preventive medicine , by attacking the causes of disease and injury , and by providing incentives to doctors to keep people well rather than just to treat them when they are sick .
i will also ask for an appropriation of an extra $ 100 million to launch an intensive campaign to find a cure for cancer , and i will ask later for whatever additional funds can effectively be used .
the time has come in america when the same kind of concentrated effort that split the atom and took man to the moon should be turned toward conquering this dread disease .
let us make a total national commitment to achieve this goal .
america has long been the wealthiest nation in the world .
now it is time we became the healthiest nation in the world .
the fifth great goal is to strengthen and to renew our state and local governments .
as we approach our 200th anniversary in 1976 , we remember that this nation launched itself as a loose confederation of separate states , without a workable central government .
at that time , the mark of its leaders ' vision was that they quickly saw the need to balance the separate powers of the states with a government of central powers .
and so they gave us a constitution of balanced powers , of unity with diversity -- and so clear was their vision that it survives today as the oldest written constitution still in force in the world .
for almost two centuries since -- and dramatically in the 1930s -- at those great turning points when the question has been between the states and the federal government , that question has been resolved in favor of a stronger central federal government .
during this time the nation grew and the nation prospered .
but one thing history tells us is that no great movement goes in the same direction forever .
nations change , they adapt , or they slowly die .
the time has now come in america to reverse the flow of power and resources from the states and communities to washington , and start power and resources flowing back from washington to the states and communities and , more important , to the people all across america .
the time has come for a new partnership between the federal government and the states and localities -- a partnership in which we entrust the states and localities with a larger share of the nation 's responsibilities , and in which we share our federal revenues with them so that they can meet those responsibilities .
to achieve this goal , i propose to the congress tonight that we enact a plan of revenue sharing historic in scope and bold in concept .
all across america today , states and cities are confronted with a financial crisis .
some have already been cutting back on essential services -- for example , just recently san diego and cleveland cut back on trash collections .
most are caught between the prospects of bankruptcy on the one hand and adding to an already crushing tax burden on the other .
as one indication of the rising costs of local government , i discovered the other day that my home town of whittier , california -- which has a population of 67,000 -- has a larger budget for 1971 than the entire federal budget was in 1791 .
now the time has come to take a new direction , and once again to introduce a new and more creative balance to our approach to government .
so let us put the money where the needs are .
and let us put the power to spend it where the people are .
i propose that the congress make a $ 16 billion investment in renewing state and local government .
five billion dollars of this will be in new and unrestricted funds to be used as the states and localities see fit .
the other $ 11 billion will be provided by allocating $ 1 billion of new funds and converting one - third of the money going to the present narrow - purpose aid programs into federal revenue sharing funds for six broad purposes for urban development , rural development , education , transportation , job training , and law enforcement but with the states and localites making their own decisions on how it should be spent within each category .
for the next fiscal year , this would increase total federal aid to the states and localities more than 25 percent over the present level .
the revenue sharing proposals i send to the congress will include the safeguards against discrimination that accompany all other federal funds allocated to the states .
neither the president nor the congress nor the conscience of this nation can permit money which comes from all the people to be used in a way which discriminates against some of the people .
the federal government will still have a large and vital role to play in achieving our national progress .
established functions that are clearly and essentially federal in nature will still be performed by the federal government .
new functions that need to be sponsored or performed by the federal government -- such as those i have urged tonight in welfare and health -- will be added to the federal agenda .
whenever it makes the best sense for us to act as a whole nation , the federal government should and will lead the way .
but where states or local governments can better do what needs to be done , let us see that they have the resources to do it there .
under this plan , the federal government will provide the states and localities with more money and less interference -- and by cutting down the interference the same amount of money will go a lot further .
let us share our resources .
let us share them to rescue the states and localities from the brink of financial crisis .
let us share them to give homeowners and wage earners a chance to escape from ever - higher property taxes and sales taxes .
let us share our resources for two other reasons as well .
the first of these reasons has to do with government itself , and the second has to do with each of us , with the individual .
let 's face it .
most americans today are simply fed up with government at all levels .
they will not -- and they should not -- continue to tolerate the gap between promise and performance in government .
the fact is that we have made the federal government so strong it grows muscle - bound and the states and localities so weak they approach impotence .
if we put more power in more places , we can make government more creative in more places .
that way we multiply the number of people with the ability to make things happen -- and we can open the way to a new burst of creative energy throughout america .
the final reason i urge this historic shift is much more personal , for each and for every one of us .
as everything seems to have grown bigger and more complex in america , as the forces that shape our lives seem to have grown more distant and more impersonal , a great feeling of frustration has crept across this land .
whether it is the workingman who feels neglected , the black man who feels oppressed , or the mother concerned about her children , there has been a growing feeling that " things are in the saddle , and ride mankind . "
millions of frustrated young americans today are crying out -- asking not what will government do for me , but what can i do , how can i contribute , how can i matter ?
and so let us answer them .
let us say to them and let us say to all americans , " we hear you .
we will give you a chance .
we are going to give you a new chance to have more to say about the decisions that affect your future -- a chance to participate in government -- because we are going to provide more centers of power where what you do can make a difference that you can see and feel in your own life and the life of your whole community . "
the further away government is from people , the stronger government becomes and the weaker people become .
and a nation with a strong government and a weak people is an empty shell .
i reject the patronizing idea that government in washington , d. c. , is inevitably more wise , more honest , and more efficient than government at the local or state level .
the honesty and efficiency of government depends on people .
government at all levels has good people and bad people .
and the way to get more good people into government is to give them more opportunity to do good things .
the idea that a bureaucratic elite in washington knows best what is best for people everywhere and that you can not trust local governments is really a contention that you can not trust people to govern themselves .
this notion is completely foreign to the american experience .
local government is the government closest to the people , it is most responsive to the individual person .
it is people 's government in a far more intimate way than the government in washington can ever be .
people came to america because they wanted to determine their own future rather than to live in a country where others determined their future for them .
what this change means is that once again in america we are placing our trust in people .
i have faith in people .
i trust the judgment of people .
let us give the people of america a chance , a bigger voice in deciding for themselves those questions that so greatly affect their lives .
the sixth great goal is a complete reform of the federal government itself .
based on a long and intensive study with the aid of the best advice obtainable , i have concluded that a sweeping reorganization of the executive branch is needed if the government is to keep up with the times and with the needs of the people .
i propose , therefore , that we reduce the present 12 cabinet departments to eight .
i propose that the departments of state , treasury , defense , and justice remain , but that all the other departments be consolidated into four : human resources , community development , natural resources , and economic development .
let us look at what these would be : -- first , a department dealing with the concerns of people -- as individuals , as members of a family -- a department focused on human needs . --
second , a department concerned with the community -- rural communities and urban communities -- and with all that it takes to make a community function as a community . --
third , a department concerned with our physical environment , with the preservation and balanced use of those great natural resources on which our nation depends . --
and fourth , a department concerned with our prosperity -- with our jobs , our businesses , and those many activities that keep our economy running smoothly and well .
under this plan , rather than dividing up our departments by narrow subjects , we would organize them around the great purposes of government .
rather than scattering responsibility by adding new levels of bureaucracy , we would focus and concentrate the responsibility for getting problems solved .
with these four departments , when we have a problem we will know where to go -- and the department will have the authority and the resources to do something about it .
over the years we have added departments and created agencies at the federal level , each to serve a new constituency , to handle a particular task -- and these have grown and multiplied in what has become a hopeless confusion of form and function .
the time has come to match our structure to our purposes -- to look with a fresh eye , to organize the government by conscious , comprehensive design to meet the new needs of a new era .
one hundred years ago , abraham lincoln stood on a battlefield and spoke of a " government of the people , by the people , for the people . "
too often since then , we have become a nation of the government , by the government , for the government .
by enacting these reforms , we can renew that principle that lincoln stated so simply and so well .
by giving everyone 's voice a chance to be heard , we will have government that truly is of the people .
by creating more centers of meaningful power , more places where decisions that really count can be made , by giving more people a chance to do something , we can have government that truly is by the people .
and by setting up a completely modern , functional system of government at the national level , we in washington will at last be able to provide government that is truly for the people .
i realize that what i am asking is that not only the executive branch in washington but that even this congress will have to change by giving up some of its power .
change is hard .
but without change there can be no progress .
and for each of us the question then becomes , not " will change cause me inconvenience ? "
but " will change bring progress for america ? "
giving up power is hard .
but i would urge all of you , as leaders of this country , to remember that the truly revered leaders in world history are those who gave power to people , and not those who took it away .
as we consider these reforms we will be acting , not for the next two years or for the next ten years , but for the next 100 years .
so let us approach these six great goals with a sense not only of this moment in history but also of history itself .
let us act with the willingness to work together and the vision and the boldness and the courage of those great americans who met in philadelphia almost 190 years ago to write a constitution .
let us leave a heritage as they did -- not just for our children but for millions yet unborn -- of a nation where every american will have a chance not only to live in peace and to enjoy prosperity and opportunity but to participate in a system of government where he knows not only his votes but his ideas count -- a system of government which will provide the means for america to reach heights of achievement undreamed of before .
those men who met at philadelphia left a great heritage because they had a vision -- not only of what the nation was but of what it could become .
as i think of that vision , i recall that america was founded as the land of the open door -- as a haven for the oppressed , a land of opportunity , a place of refuge , of hope .
when the first settlers opened the door of america three and a half centuries ago , they came to escape persecution and to find opportunity -- and they left wide the door of welcome for others to follow .
when the 13 colonies declared their independence almost two centuries ago , they opened the door to a new vision of liberty and of human fulfillment -- not just for an elite but for all .
to the generations that followed , america 's was the open door that beckoned millions from the old world to the new in search of a better life , a freer life , a fuller life , and in which , by their own decisions , they could shape their own destinies .
for the black american , the indian , the mexican - american , and for those others in our land who have not had an equal chance , the nation at last has begun to confront the need to press open the door of full and equal opportunity , and of human dignity .
for all americans , with these changes i have proposed tonight we can open the door to a new era of opportunity .
we can open the door to full and effective participation in the decisions that affect their lives .
we can open the door to a new partnership among governments at all levels , between those governments and the people themselves .
and by so doing , we can open wide the doors of human fulfillment for millions of people here in america now and in the years to come .
in the next few weeks i will spell out in greater detail the way i propose that we achieve these six great goals .
i ask this congress to be responsive .
if it is , then the 92nd congress , your congress , our congress , at the end of its term , will be able to look back on a record more splendid than any in our history .
this can be the congress that helped us end the longest war in the nation 's history , and end it in a way that will give us at last a genuine chance to enjoy what we have not had in this century : a full generation of peace .
this can be the congress that helped achieve an expanding economy , with full employment and without inflation -- and without the deadly stimulus of war .
this can be the congress that reformed a welfare system that has robbed recipients of their dignity and robbed states and cities of their resources .
this can be the congress that pressed forward the rescue of our environment , and established for the next generation an enduring legacy of parks for the people .
this can be the congress that launched a new era in american medicine , in which the quality of medical care was enhanced while the costs were made less burdensome .
but above all , what this congress can be remembered for is opening the way to a new american revolution -- a peaceful revolution in which power was turned back to the people -- in which government at all levels was refreshed and renewed and made truly responsive .
this can be a revolution as profound , as far - reaching , as exciting as that first revolution almost 200 years ago -- and it can mean that just five years from now america will enter its third century as a young nation new in spirit , with all the vigor and the freshness with which it began its first century .
my colleagues in the congress , these are great goals .
they can make the sessions of this congress a great moment for america .
so let us pledge together to go forward together -- by achieving these goals to give america the foundation today for a new greatness tomorrow and in all the years to come , and in so doing to make this the greatest congress in the history of this great and good country .

good evening my fellow americans : 
 ten days ago , in my report to the nation on vietnam , i announced a decision to withdraw an additional 150,000 americans from vietnam over the next year .
i said then that i was making that decision despite our concern over increased enemy activity in laos , in cambodia , and in south vietnam .
at that time , i warned that if i concluded that increased enemy activity in any of these areas endangered the fives of americans remaining in vietnam , i would not hesitate to take strong and effective measures to deal with that situation .
despite that warning , north vietnam has increased its military aggression in all these areas , and particularly in cambodia .
after full consultation with the national security council , ambassador bunker , general abrams , and my other advisers , i have concluded that the actions of the enemy in the last 10 days clearly endanger the lives of americans who are in vietnam now and would constitute an unacceptable risk to those who will be there after withdrawal of another 150,000 .
to protect our men who are in vietnam and to guarantee the continued success of our withdrawal and vietnamization programs , i have concluded that the time has come for action .
tonight , i shall describe the actions of the enemy , the actions i have ordered to deal with that situation , and the reasons for my decision .
cambodia , a small country of 7 million people , has been a neutral nation since the geneva agreement of 1954 -- an agreement , incidentally , which was signed by the government of north vietnam .
american policy since then has been to scrupulously respect the neutrality of the cambodian people .
we have maintained a skeleton diplomatic mission of fewer than 15 in cambodia 's capital , and that only since last august .
for the previous 4 years , from 1965 to 1969 , we did not have any diplomatic mission whatever in cambodia .
and for the past 5 years , we have provided no military assistance whatever and no economic assistance to cambodia .
north vietnam , however , has not respected that neutrality .
for the past 5 years -- as indicated on this map that you see here -- north vietnam has occupied military sanctuaries all along the cambodian frontier with south vietnam .
some of these extend up to 20 miles into cambodia .
the sanctuaries are in red and , as you note , they are on both sides of the border .
they are used for hit and run attacks on american and south vietnamese forces in south vietnam .
these communist occupied territories contain major base camps , training sites , logistics facilities , weapons and ammunition factories , airstrips , and prisoner - of - war compounds .
for 5 years , neither the united states nor south vietnam has moved against these enemy sanctuaries because we did not wish to violate the territory of a neutral nation .
even after the vietnamese communists began to expand these sanctuaries four weeks ago , we counseled patience to our south vietnamese allies and imposed restraints on our own commanders .
in contrast to our policy , the enemy in the past two weeks has stepped up his guerrilla actions and he is concentrating his main forces in these sanctuaries that you see on this map where they are building up to launch massive attacks on our forces and those of south vietnam .
north vietnam in the last two weeks has stripped away all pretense of respecting the sovereignty or the neutrality of cambodia .
thousands of their soldiers are invading the country from the sanctuaries ; they are encircling the capital of phnom penh .
coming from these sanctuaries , as you see here , they have moved into cambodia and are encircling the capital .
cambodia , as a result of this , has sent out a call to the united states , to a number of other nations , for assistance .
because if this enemy effort succeeds , cambodia would become a vast enemy staging area and a springboard for attacks on south vietnam along 600 miles of frontier -- a refuge where enemy troops could return from combat without fear of retaliation .
north vietnamese men and supplies could then be poured into that country , jeopardizing not only the lives of our own men but the people of south vietnam as well .
now confronted with this situation , we have three options .
first , we can do nothing .
well , the ultimate result of that course of action is clear .
unless we indulge in wishful thinking , the lives of americans remaining in vietnam after our next withdrawal of 150,000 would be gravely threatened .
let us go to the map again .
here is south vietnam .
here is north vietnam .
north vietnam already occupies this part of laos .
if north vietnam also occupied this whole band in cambodia , or the entire country , it would mean that south vietnam was completely outflanked and the forces of americans in this area , as well as the south vietnamese , would be in an untenable military position .
our second choice is to provide massive military assistance to cambodia itself .
now unfortunately , while we deeply sympathize with the plight of seven million cambodians whose country is being invaded , massive amounts of military assistance could not be rapidly and effectively utilized by the small cambodian army against the immediate threat .
with other nations , we shall do our best to provide the small arms and other equipment which the cambodian army of 40,000 needs and can use for its defense .
but the aid we will provide will be limited to the purpose of enabling cambodia to defend its neutrality and not for the purpose of making it an active belligerent on one side or the other .
our third choice is to go to the heart of the trouble .
that means cleaning out major north vietnamese and vietcong occupied territories -- these sanctuaries which serve as bases for attacks on both cambodia and american and south vietnamese forces in south vietnam .
some of these , incidentally , are as close to saigon as baltimore is to washington .
this one , for example , is called the parrot 's beak .
it is only 33 miles from saigon .
now faced with these three options , this is the decision i have made .
in cooperation with the armed forces of south vietnam , attacks are being launched this week to clean out major enemy sanctuaries on the cambodian - vietnam border .
a major responsibility for the ground operations is being assumed by south vietnamese forces .
for example , the attacks in several areas , including the parrot 's beak that i referred to a moment ago , are exclusively south vietnamese ground operations under south vietnamese command with the united states providing air and logistical support .
there is one area , however , immediately above parrot 's beak , where i have concluded that a combined american and south vietnamese operation is necessary .
tonight , american and south vietnamese units will attack the headquarters for the entire communist military operation in south vietnam .
this key control center has been occupied by the north vietnamese and vietcong for five years in blatant violation of cambodia 's neutrality .
this is not an invasion of cambodia .
the areas in which these attacks will be launched are completely occupied and controlled by north vietnamese forces .
our purpose is not to occupy the areas .
once enemy forces are driven out of these sanctuaries and once their military supplies are destroyed , we will withdraw .
these actions are in no way directed to the security interests of any nation .
any government that chooses to use these actions as a pretext for harming relations with the united states will be doing so on its own responsibility , and on its own initiative , and we will draw the appropriate conclusions .
now let me give you the reasons for my decision .
a majority of the american people , a majority of you listening to me , are for the withdrawal of our forces from vietnam .
the action i have taken tonight is indispensable for the continuing success of that withdrawal program .
a majority of the american people want to end this war rather than to have it drag on interminably .
the action i have taken tonight will serve that purpose .
a majority of the american people want to keep the casualties of our brave men in vietnam at an absolute minimum .
the action i take tonight is essential if we are to accomplish that goal .
we take this action not for the purpose of expanding the war into cambodia but for the purpose of ending the war in vietnam and winning the just peace we all desire .
we have made -- we will continue to make every possible effort to end this war through negotiation at the conference table rather than through more fighting on the battlefield .
let us look again at the record .
we have stopped the bombing of north vietnam .
we have cut air operations by over 20 percent .
we have announced withdrawal of over 250,000 of our men .
we have offered to withdraw all of our men if they will withdraw theirs .
we have offered to negotiate all issues with only one condition -- and that is that the future of south vietnam be determined not by north vietnam , and not by the united states , but by the people of south vietnam themselves .
the answer of the enemy has been intransigence at the conference table , belligerence in hanoi , massive military aggression in laos and cambodia , and stepped - up attacks in south vietnam , designed to increase american casualties .
this attitude has become intolerable .
we will not react to this threat to american lives merely by plaintive diplomatic protests .
if we did , the credibility of the united states would be destroyed in every area of the world where only the power of the united states deters aggression .
tonight , i again warn the north vietnamese that if they continue to escalate the fighting when the united states is withdrawing its forces , i shall meet my responsibility as commander in chief of our armed forces to take the action i consider necessary to defend the security of our american men .
the action that i have announced tonight puts the leaders of north vietnam on notice that we will be patient in working for peace ; we will be conciliatory at the conference table , but we will not be humiliated .
we will not be defeated .
we will not allow american men by the thousands to be killed by an enemy from privileged sanctuaries .
the time came long ago to end this war through peaceful negotiations .
we stand ready for those negotiations .
we have made major efforts , many of which must remain secret .
i say tonight : all the offers and approaches made previously remain on the conference table whenever hanoi is ready to negotiate seriously .
but if the enemy response to our most conciliatory offers for peaceful negotiation continues to be to increase its attacks and humiliate and defeat us , we shall react accordingly .
my fellow americans , we live in an age of anarchy , both abroad and at home .
we see mindless attacks on all the great institutions which have been created by free civilizations in the last 500 years .
even here in the united states , great universities are being systematically destroyed .
small nations all over the world find themselves under attack from within and from without .
if , when the chips are down , the world 's most powerful nation , the united states of america , acts like a pitiful , helpless giant , the forces of totalitarianism and anarchy will threaten free nations and free institutions throughout the world .
it is not our power but our will and character that is being tested tonight .
the question all americans must ask and answer tonight is this : does the richest and strongest nation in the history of the world have the character to meet a direct challenge by a group which rejects every effort to win a just peace , ignores our warning , tramples on solemn agreements , violates the neutrality of an unarmed people , and uses our prisoners as hostages ?
if we fail to meet this challenge , all other nations will be on notice that despite its overwhelming power the united states , when a real crisis comes , will be found wanting .
during my campaign for the presidency , i pledged to bring americans home from vietnam .
they are coming home .
i promised to end this war .
i shall keep that promise .
i promised to win a just peace .
i shall keep that promise .
we shall avoid a wider war .
but we are also determined to put an end to this war .
in this room , woodrow wilson made the great decisions which led to victory in world war i. franklin roosevelt made the decisions which led to our victory in world war ii .
dwight d. eisenhower made decisions which ended the war in korea and avoided war in the middle east .
john f. kennedy , in his finest hour , made the great decision which removed soviet nuclear missiles from cuba and the western hemisphere .
i have noted that there has been a great deal of discussion with regard to this decision that i have made and i should point out that i do not contend that it is in the same magnitude as these decisions that i have just mentioned .
but between those decisions and this decision there is a difference that is very fundamental .
in those decisions , the american people were not assailed by counsels of doubt and defeat from some of the most widely known opinion leaders of the nation .
i have noted , for example , that a republican senator has said that this action i have taken means that my party has lost all chance of winning the november elections .
and others are saying today that this move against enemy sanctuaries will make me a one - term president .
no one is more aware than i am of the political consequences of the action i have taken .
it is tempting to take the easy political path : to blame this war on previous administrations and to bring all of our men home immediately , regardless of the consequences , even though that would mean defeat for the united states ; to desert 18 million south vietnamese people , who have put their trust in us and to expose them to the same slaughter and savagery which the leaders of north vietnam inflicted on hundreds of thousands of north vietnamese who chose freedom when the communists took over north vietnam in 1954 ; to get peace at any price now , even though i know that a peace of humiliation for the united states would lead to a bigger war or surrender later .
i have rejected all political considerations in making this decision .
whether my party gains in november is nothing compared to the lives of 400,000 brave americans fighting for our country and for the cause of peace and freedom in vietnam .
whether i may be a one - term president is insignificant compared to whether by our failure to act in this crisis the united states proves itself to be unworthy to lead the forces of freedom in this critical period in world history .
i would rather be a one - term president and do what i believe is right than to be a two - term president at the cost of seeing america become a second - rate power and to see this nation accept the first defeat in its proud 190-year history .
i realize that in this war there are honest and deep differences in this country about whether we should have become involved , that there are differences as to how the war should have been conducted .
but the decision i announce tonight transcends those differences .
for the lives of american men are involved .
the opportunity for americans to come home in the next 12 months is involved .
the future of 18 million people in south vietnam and 7 million people in cambodia is involved .
the possibility of winning a just peace in vietnam and in the pacific is at stake .
it is customary to conclude a speech from the white house by asking support for the president of the united states .
tonight , i depart from that precedent .
what i ask is far more important .
i ask for your support for our brave men fighting tonight halfway around the world -- not for territory -- not for glory -- but so that their younger brothers and their sons and your sons can have a chance to grow up in a world of peace and freedom and justice .
thank you and good night .

good evening : 
 i have asked for this radio and television time tonight for the purpose of announcing that we today have concluded an agreement to end the war and bring peace with honor in vietnam and in southeast asia .
the following statement is being issued at this moment in washington and hanoi : 
 at 12:30 paris time today , january 23 , 1973 , the agreement on ending the war and restoring peace in vietnam was initialed by dr. henry kissinger on behalf of the united states , and special adviser le duc tho on behalf of the democratic republic of vietnam .
the agreement will be formally signed by the parties participating in the paris conference on vietnam on january 27 , 1973 , at the international conference center in paris .
the cease - fire will take effect at 2400 greenwich mean time , january 27 , 1973 .
the united states and the democratic republic of vietnam express the hope that this agreement will insure stable peace in vietnam and contribute to the preservation of lasting peace in indochina and southeast asia .
that concludes the formal statement .
throughout the years of negotiations , we have insisted on peace with honor .
in my addresses to the nation from this room of january 25 and may 8 , i set forth the goals that we considered essential for peace with honor .
in the settlement that has now been agreed to , all the conditions that i laid down then have been met : 
 a cease - fire , internationally supervised , will begin at 7 p. m. , this saturday , january 27 , washington time .
within 60 days from this saturday , all americans held prisoners of war throughout indochina will be released .
there will be the fullest possible accounting for all of those who are missing in action .
during the same 60-day period , all american forces will be withdrawn from south vietnam .
the people of south vietnam have been guaranteed the right to determine their own future , without outside interference .
by joint agreement , the full text of the agreement and the protocol to carry it out will be issued tomorrow .
throughout these negotiations we have been in the closest consultation with president thieu and other representatives of the republic of vietnam .
this settlement meets the goals and has the full support of president thieu and the government of the republic of vietnam , as well as that of our other allies who are affected .
the united states will continue to recognize the government of the republic of vietnam as the sole legitimate government of south vietnam .
we shall continue to aid south vietnam within the terms of the agreement , and we shall support efforts by the people of south vietnam to settle their problems peacefully among themselves .
we must recognize that ending the war is only the first step toward building the peace .
all parties must now see to it that this is a peace that lasts , and also a peace that heals -- and a peace that not only ends the war in southeast asia but contributes to the prospects of peace in the whole world .
this will mean that the terms of the agreement must be scrupulously adhered to .
we shall do everything the agreement requires of us , and we shall expect the other parties to do everything it requires of them .
we shall also expect other interested nations to help insure that the agreement is carried out and peace is maintained .
as this long and very difficult war ends , i would like to address a few special words to each of those who have been parties in the conflict .
first , to the people and government of south vietnam : by your courage , by your sacrifice , you have won the precious right to determine your own future , and you have developed the strength to defend that right .
we look forward to working with you in the future -- friends in peace as we have been allies in war .
to the leaders of north vietnam : as we have ended the war through negotiations , let us now build a peace of reconciliation .
for our part , we are prepared to make a major effort to help achieve that goal .
but just as reciprocity was needed to end the war , so too will it be needed to build and strengthen the peace .
to the other major powers that have been involved even indirectly : now is the time for mutual restraint so that the peace we have achieved can last .
and finally , to all of you who are listening , the american people : your steadfastness in supporting our insistence on peace with honor has made peace with honor possible .
i know that you would not have wanted that peace jeopardized .
with our secret negotiations at the sensitive stage they were in during this recent period , for me to have discussed publicly our efforts to secure peace would not only have violated our understanding with north vietnam , it would have seriously harmed and possibly destroyed the chances for peace .
therefore , i know that you now can understand why , during these past several weeks , i have not made any public statements about those efforts .
the important thing was not to talk about peace , but to get peace -- and to get the right kind of peace .
this we have done .
now that we have achieved an honorable agreement , let us be proud that america did not settle for a peace that would have betrayed our allies , that would have abandoned our prisoners of war , or that would have ended the war for us but would have continued the war for the 50 million people of indochina .
let us be proud of the 2 1/2 million young americans who served in vietnam , who served with honor and distinction in one of the most selfless enterprises in the history of nations .
and let us be proud of those who sacrificed , who gave their lives so that the people of south vietnam might live in freedom and so that the world might live in peace .
in particular , i would like to say a word to some of the bravest people i have ever met -- the wives , the children , the families of our prisoners of war and the missing in action .
when others called on us to settle on any terms , you had the courage to stand for the right kind of peace so that those who died and those who suffered would not have died and suffered in vain , and so that where this generation knew war , the next generation would know peace .
nothing means more to me at this moment than the fact that your long vigil is coming to an end .
just yesterday , a great american , who once occupied this office , died .
in his life , president johnson endured the vilification of those who sought to portray him as a man of war .
but there was nothing he cared about more deeply than achieving a lasting peace in the world .
i remember the last time i talked with him .
it was just the day after new year 's .
he spoke then of his concern with bringing peace , with making it the right kind of peace , and i was grateful that he once again expressed his support for my efforts to gain such a peace .
no one would have welcomed this peace more than he .
and i know he would join me in asking -- for those who died and for those who live -- let us consecrate this moment by resolving together to make the peace we have achieved a peace that will last .
thank you and good evening .

members of the cabinet , members of the white house staff , all of our friends here : 
 i think the record should show that this is one of those spontaneous things that we always arrange whenever the president comes in to speak , and it will be so reported in the press , and we do n't mind , because they have to call it as they see it .
but on our part , believe me , it is spontaneous .
you are here to say goodby to us , and we do n't have a good word for it in english -- the best is au revoir .
we will see you again .
i just met with the members of the white house staff , you know , those who serve here in the white house day in and day out , and i asked them to do what i ask all of you to do to the extent that you can and , of course , are requested to do so : to serve our next president as you have served me and previous presidents -- because many of you have been here for many years -- with devotion and dedication , because this office , great as it is , can only be as great as the men and women who work for and with the president .
this house , for example -- i was thinking of it as we walked down this hall , and i was comparing it to some of the great houses of the world that i have been in .
this is n't the biggest house .
many , and most , in even smaller countries , are much bigger .
this is n't the finest house .
many in europe , particularly , and in china , asia , have paintings of great , great value , things that we just do n't have here and , probably , will never have until we are 1,000 years old or older .
but this is the best house .
it is the best house , because it has something far more important than numbers of people who serve , far more important than numbers of rooms or how big it is , far more important than numbers of magnificent pieces of art .
this house has a great heart , and that heart comes from those who serve .
i was rather sorry they did n't come down .
we said goodby to them upstairs .
but they are really great .
and i recall after so many times i have made speeches , and some of them pretty tough , yet , i always come back , or after a hard day -- and my days usually have run rather long -- i would always get a lift from them , because i might be a little down but they always smiled .
and so it is with you .
i look around here , and i see so many on this staff that , you know , i should have been by your offices and shaken hands , and i would love to have talked to you and found out how to run the world -- everybody wants to tell the president what to do , and boy , he needs to be told many times -- but i just have n't had the time .
but i want you to know that each and every one of you , i know , is indispensable to this government .
i am proud of this cabinet .
i am proud of all the members who have served in our cabinet .
i am proud of our sub - cabinet .
i am proud of our white house staff .
as i pointed out last night , sure , we have done some things wrong in this administration , and the top man always takes the responsibility , and i have never ducked it .
but i want to say one thing : we can be proud of it -- 5 1/2 years .
no man or no woman came into this administration and left it with more of this world 's goods than when he came in .
no man or no woman ever profited at the public expense or the public till .
that tells something about you .
mistakes , yes .
but for personal gain , never .
you did what you believed in .
sometimes right , sometimes wrong .
and i only wish that i were a wealthy man -- at the present time , i have got to find a way to pay my taxes --   -- and if i were , i would like to recompense you for the sacrifices that all of you have made to serve in government .
but you are getting something in government -- and i want you to tell this to your children , and i hope the nation 's children will hear it , too -- something in government service that is far more important than money .
it is a cause bigger than yourself .
it is the cause of making this the greatest nation in the world , the leader of the world , because without our leadership , the world will know nothing but war , possibly starvation or worse , in the years ahead .
with our leadership it will know peace , it will know plenty .
we have been generous , and we will be more generous in the future as we are able to .
but most important , we must be strong here , strong in our hearts , strong in our souls , strong in our belief , and strong in our willingness to sacrifice , as you have been willing to sacrifice , in a pecuniary way , to serve in government .
there is something else i would like for you to tell your young people .
you know , people often come in and say , " what will i tell my kids ? "
they look at government and say , sort of a rugged life , and they see the mistakes that are made .
they get the impression that everybody is here for the purpose of feathering his nest .
that is why i made this earlier point -- not in this administration , not one single man or woman .
and i say to them , there are many fine careers .
this country needs good farmers , good businessmen , good plumbers , good carpenters .
i remember my old man .
i think that they would have called him sort of a little man , common man .
he did n't consider himself that way .
you know what he was ?
he was a streetcar motorman first , and then he was a farmer , and then he had a lemon ranch .
it was the poorest lemon ranch in california , i can assure you .
he sold it before they found oil on it .
and then he was a grocer .
but he was a great man , because he did his job , and every job counts up to the hilt , regardless of what happens .
nobody will ever write a book , probably , about my mother .
well , i guess all of you would say this about your mother -- my mother was a saint .
and i think of her , two boys dying of tuberculosis , nursing four others in order that she could take care of my older brother for three years in arizona , and seeing each of them die , and when they died , it was like one of her own .
yes , she will have no books written about her .
but she was a saint .
now , however , we look to the future .
i had a little quote in the speech last night from t. r. as you know , i kind of like to read books .
i am not educated , but i do read books --   -- and the t. r. quote was a pretty good one .
here is another one i found as i was reading , my last night in the white house , and this quote is about a young man .
he was a young lawyer in new york .
he had married a beautiful girl , and they had a lovely daughter , and then suddenly she died , and this is what he wrote .
this was in his diary .
he said , " she was beautiful in face and form and lovelier still in spirit .
as a flower she grew and as a fair young flower she died .
her life had been always in the sunshine .
there had never come to her a single great sorrow .
none ever knew her who did not love and revere her for her bright and sunny temper and her saintly unselfishness .
fair , pure and joyous as a maiden , loving , tender and happy as a young wife .
when she had just become a mother , when her life seemed to be just begun and when the years seemed so bright before her , then by a strange and terrible fate death came to her .
and when my heart 's dearest died , the light went from my life forever . "
that was t. r. in his twenties .
he thought the light had gone from his life forever -- but he went on .
and he not only became president but , as an ex - president , he served his country , always in the arena , tempestuous , strong , sometimes wrong , sometimes right , but he was a man .
and as i leave , let me say , that is an example i think all of us should remember .
we think sometimes when things happen that do n't go the right way ; we think that when you do n't pass the bar exam the first time -- i happened to , but i was just lucky ; i mean , my writing was so poor the bar examiner said , " we have just got to let the guy through . "
we think that when someone dear to us dies , we think that when we lose an election , we think that when we suffer a defeat that all is ended .
we think , as t. r. said , that the light had left his life forever .
not true .
it is only a beginning , always .
the young must know it ; the old must know it .
it must always sustain us , because the greatness comes not when things go always good for you , but the greatness comes and you are really tested , when you take some knocks , some disappointments , when sadness comes , because only if you have been in the deepest valley can you ever know how magnificent it is to be on the highest mountain .
and so i say to you on this occasion , as we leave , we leave proud of the people who have stood by us and worked for us and served this country .
we want you to be proud of what you have done .
we want you to continue to serve in government , if that is your wish .
always give your best , never get discouraged , never be petty ; always remember , others may hate you , but those who hate you do n't win unless you hate them , and then you destroy yourself .
and so , we leave with high hopes , in good spirit , and with deep humility , and with very much gratefulness in our hearts .
i can only say to each and every one of you , we come from many faiths , we pray perhaps to different gods -- but really the same god in a sense -- but i want to say for each and every one of you , not only will we always remember you , not only will we always be grateful to you but always you will be in our hearts and you will be in our prayers .
thank you very much .

good evening my fellow americans : 
 before going over to the shoreham hotel to address the victory celebration which is in process there , i wanted to take a moment to say a word to all of you in this very personal way , speaking from the oval office .
i first want to express my deep appreciation to every one of you , the millions of you who gave me your support in the election today , and i want to express my respect for millions of others who gave their support to senator mcgovern .
i know that after a campaign , when one loses , he can feel very , very low , and his supporters as well may feel that way .
and when he wins , as you will note when i get over to the shoreham , people are feeling very much better .
the important thing in our process , however , is to play the game , and in the great game of life , and particularly the game of politics , what is important is that on either side more americans voted this year than ever before , and the fact that you won or you lost must not keep you from keeping in the great game of politics in the years ahead , because the better competition we have between the two parties , between the two men running for office , whatever office that may be , means that we get the better people and the better programs for our country .
now that the election is over , it is time to get on with the great tasks that lie before us .
i have tried to conduct myself in this campaign in a way that would not divide our country , not divide it regionally or by parties or in any other way , because i very firmly believe that what unites america today is infinitely more important than those things which divide us .
we are united americans -- north , east , west , and south , both parties -- in our desire for peace , peace with honor , the kind of a peace that will last , and we are moving swiftly toward that great goal , not just in vietnam , but a new era of peace in which the old relationships between the two super powers , the soviet union and the united states , and between the world 's most populous nation , the people 's republic of china , and the united states , are changed so that we are on the eve of what could be the greatest generation of peace , true peace for the whole world , that man has ever known .
this is a great goal , bigger than whether we are democrats or republicans , and it is one that i think you will want to work with me , with all of us , in helping to achieve .
there are other goals that go with that -- the prosperity without war and without inflation that we have all wanted and that we now can have , and the progress for all americans , the kind of progress so that we can say to any young american , whatever his background , that he or she in this great country has an equal chance to go to the top in whatever field he or she may choose .
i have noted , in listening to the returns a few minutes ago , that several commentators have reflected on the fact that this may be one of the great political victories of all time .
in terms of votes that may be true , but in terms of what a victory really is , a huge landslide margin means nothing at all unless it is a victory for america .
it will be a victory for america only if , in these next four years , we , all of us , can work together to achieve our common great goals of peace at home and peace for all nations in the world , and for that new progress and prosperity which all americans deserve .
i would only hope that in these next four years we can so conduct ourselves in this country , and so meet our responsibilities in the world in building peace in the world , that years from now people will look back to the generation of the 1970s , at how we have conducted ourselves , and they will say , " god bless america . "
thank you very much .

mr. vice president , mr. speaker , mr. chief justice , senator cook , mrs. eisenhower , and my fellow citizens of this great and good country we share together : 
 when we met here four years ago , america was bleak in spirit , depressed by the prospect of seemingly endless war abroad and of destructive conflict at home .
as we meet here today , we stand on the threshold of a new era of peace in the world .
the central question before us is : how shall we use that peace ?
let us resolve that this era we are about to enter will not be what other postwar periods have so often been : a time of retreat and isolation that leads to stagnation at home and invites new danger abroad .
let us resolve that this will be what it can become : a time of great responsibilities greatly borne , in which we renew the spirit and the promise of america as we enter our third century as a nation .
this past year saw far - reaching results from our new policies for peace .
by continuing to revitalize our traditional friendships , and by our missions to peking and to moscow , we were able to establish the base for a new and more durable pattern of relationships among the nations of the world .
because of america 's bold initiatives , 1972 will be long remembered as the year of the greatest progress since the end of world war ii toward a lasting peace in the world .
the peace we seek in the world is not the flimsy peace which is merely an interlude between wars , but a peace which can endure for generations to come .
it is important that we understand both the necessity and the limitations of america 's role in maintaining that peace .
unless we in america work to preserve the peace , there will be no peace .
unless we in america work to preserve freedom , there will be no freedom .
but let us clearly understand the new nature of america 's role , as a result of the new policies we have adopted over these past four years .
we shall respect our treaty commitments .
we shall support vigorously the principle that no country has the right to impose its will or rule on another by force .
we shall continue , in this era of negotiation , to work for the limitation of nuclear arms , and to reduce the danger of confrontation between the great powers .
we shall do our share in defending peace and freedom in the world .
but we shall expect others to do their share .
the time has passed when america will make every other nation 's conflict our own , or make every other nation 's future our responsibility , or presume to tell the people of other nations how to manage their own affairs .
just as we respect the right of each nation to determine its own future , we also recognize the responsibility of each nation to secure its own future .
just as america 's role is indispensable in preserving the world 's peace , so is each nation 's role indispensable in preserving its own peace .
together with the rest of the world , let us resolve to move forward from the beginnings we have made .
let us continue to bring down the walls of hostility which have divided the world for too long , and to build in their place bridges of understanding -- so that despite profound differences between systems of government , the people of the world can be friends .
let us build a structure of peace in the world in which the weak are as safe as the strong -- in which each respects the right of the other to live by a different system -- in which those who would influence others will do so by the strength of their ideas , and not by the force of their arms .
let us accept that high responsibility not as a burden , but gladly -- gladly because the chance to build such a peace is the noblest endeavor in which a nation can engage ; gladly , also , because only if we act greatly in meeting our responsibilities abroad will we remain a great nation , and only if we remain a great nation will we act greatly in meeting our challenges at home .
we have the chance today to do more than ever before in our history to make life better in america -- to ensure better education , better health , better housing , better transportation , a cleaner environment -- to restore respect for law , to make our communities more livable -- and to insure the god - given right of every american to full and equal opportunity .
because the range of our needs is so great -- because the reach of our opportunities is so great -- let us be bold in our determination to meet those needs in new ways .
just as building a structure of peace abroad has required turning away from old policies that failed , so building a new era of progress at home requires turning away from old policies that have failed .
abroad , the shift from old policies to new has not been a retreat from our responsibilities , but a better way to peace .
and at home , the shift from old policies to new will not be a retreat from our responsibilities , but a better way to progress .
abroad and at home , the key to those new responsibilities lies in the placing and the division of responsibility .
we have lived too long with the consequences of attempting to gather all power and responsibility in washington .
abroad and at home , the time has come to turn away from the condescending policies of paternalism -- of " washington knows best . "
a person can be expected to act responsibly only if he has responsibility .
this is human nature .
so let us encourage individuals at home and nations abroad to do more for themselves , to decide more for themselves .
let us locate responsibility in more places .
let us measure what we will do for others by what they will do for themselves .
that is why today i offer no promise of a purely governmental solution for every problem .
we have lived too long with that false promise .
in trusting too much in government , we have asked of it more than it can deliver .
this leads only to inflated expectations , to reduced individual effort , and to a disappointment and frustration that erode confidence both in what government can do and in hat people can do .
government must learn to take less from people so that people an do more for themselves .
let us remember that america was built not by government , but by people -- not by welfare , but by work -- not by shirking responsibility , but by seeking responsibility .
in our own lives , let each of us ask -- not just what will government do for me , but what can i do for myself ?
in the challenges we face together , let each of us ask -- not just how can government help , but how can i help ?
your national government has a great and vital role to play .
and i pledge to you that where this government should act , we will act boldly and we will lead boldly .
but just as important is the role that each and every one of us must play , as an individual and as a member of his own community .
from this day forward , let each of us make a solemn commitment in his own heart : to bear his responsibility , to do his part , to live his ideals -- so that together , we can see the dawn of a new age of progress for america , and together , as we celebrate our 200th anniversary as a nation , we can do so proud in the fulfillment of our promise to ourselves and to the world .
as america 's longest and most difficult war comes to an end , let us again learn to debate our differences with civility and decency .
and let each of us reach out for that one precious quality government can not provide -- a new level of respect for the rights and feelings of one another , a new level of respect for the individual human dignity which is the cherished birthright of every american .
above all else , the time has come for us to renew our faith in ourselves and in america .
in recent years , that faith has been challenged .
our children have been taught to be ashamed of their country , ashamed of their parents , ashamed of america 's record at home and of its role in the world .
at every turn , we have been beset by those who find everything wrong with america and little that is right .
but i am confident that this will not be the judgment of history on these remarkable times in which we are privileged to live .
america 's record in this century has been unparalleled in the world 's history for its responsibility , for its generosity , for its creativity and for its progress .
let us be proud that our system has produced and provided more freedom and more abundance , more widely shared , than any other system in the history of the world .
let us be proud that in each of the four wars in which we have been engaged in this century , including the one we are now bringing to an end , we have fought not for our selfish advantage , but to help others resist aggression .
let us be proud that by our bold , new initiatives , and by our steadfastness for peace with honor , we have made a break - through toward creating in the world what the world has not known before -- a structure of peace that can last , not merely for our time , but for generations to come .
we are embarking here today on an era that presents challenges great as those any nation , or any generation , has ever faced .
we shall answer to god , to history , and to our conscience for the way in which we use these years .
as i stand in this place , so hallowed by history , i think of others who have stood here before me .
i think of the dreams they had for america , and i think of how each recognized that he needed help far beyond himself in order to make those dreams come true .
today , i ask your prayers that in the years ahead i may have god 's help in making decisions that are right for america , and i pray for your help so that together we may be worthy of our challenge .
let us pledge together to make these next four years the best four years in america 's history , so that on its 200th birthday america will be as young and as vital as when it began , and as bright a beacon of hope for all the world .
let us go forward from here confident in hope , strong in our faith in one another , sustained by our faith in god who created us , and striving always to serve his purpose .

senator dirksen , mr. chief justice , mr. vice president , president johnson , vice president humphrey , my fellow americans -- and my fellow citizens of the world community : 
 i ask you to share with me today the majesty of this moment .
in the orderly transfer of power , we celebrate the unity that keeps us free .
each moment in history is a fleeting time , precious and unique .
but some stand out as moments of beginning , in which courses are set that shape decades or centuries .
this can be such a moment .
forces now are converging that make possible , for the first time , the hope that many of man 's deepest aspirations can at last be realized .
the spiraling pace of change allows us to contemplate , within our own lifetime , advances that once would have taken centuries .
in throwing wide the horizons of space , we have discovered new horizons on earth .
for the first time , because the people of the world want peace , and the leaders of the world are afraid of war , the times are on the side of peace .
eight years from now america will celebrate its 200th anniversary as a nation .
within the lifetime of most people now living , mankind will celebrate that great new year which comes only once in a thousand years -- the beginning of the third millennium .
what kind of nation we will be , what kind of world we will live in , whether we shape the future in the image of our hopes , is ours to determine by our actions and our choices .
the greatest honor history can bestow is the title of peacemaker .
this honor now beckons america -- the chance to help lead the world at last out of the valley of turmoil , and onto that high ground of peace that man has dreamed of since the dawn of civilization .
if we succeed , generations to come will say of us now living that we mastered our moment , that we helped make the world safe for mankind .
this is our summons to greatness .
i believe the american people are ready to answer this call .
the second third of this century has been a time of proud achievement .
we have made enormous strides in science and industry and agriculture .
we have shared our wealth more broadly than ever .
we have learned at last to manage a modern economy to assure its continued growth .
we have given freedom new reach , and we have begun to make its promise real for black as well as for white .
we see the hope of tomorrow in the youth of today .
i know america 's youth .
i believe in them .
we can be proud that they are better educated , more committed , more passionately driven by conscience than any generation in our history .
no people has ever been so close to the achievement of a just and abundant society , or so possessed of the will to achieve it .
because our strengths are so great , we can afford to appraise our weaknesses with candor and to approach them with hope .
standing in this same place a third of a century ago , franklin delano roosevelt addressed a nation ravaged by depression and gripped in fear .
he could say in surveying the nation 's troubles : " they concern , thank god , only material things . "
our crisis today is the reverse .
we have found ourselves rich in goods , but ragged in spirit ; reaching with magnificent precision for the moon , but falling into raucous discord on earth .
we are caught in war , wanting peace .
we are torn by division , wanting unity .
we see around us empty lives , wanting fulfillment .
we see tasks that need doing , waiting for hands to do them .
to a crisis of the spirit , we need an answer of the spirit .
to find that answer , we need only look within ourselves .
when we listen to " the better angels of our nature , " we find that they celebrate the simple things , the basic things -- such as goodness , decency , love , kindness .
greatness comes in simple trappings .
the simple things are the ones most needed today if we are to surmount what divides us , and cement what unites us .
to lower our voices would be a simple thing .
in these difficult years , america has suffered from a fever of words ; from inflated rhetoric that promises more than it can deliver ; from angry rhetoric that fans discontents into hatreds ; from bombastic rhetoric that postures instead of persuading .
we can not learn from one another until we stop shouting at one another -- until we speak quietly enough so that our words can be heard as well as our voices .
for its part , government will listen .
we will strive to listen in new ways -- to the voices of quiet anguish , the voices that speak without words , the voices of the heart -- to the injured voices , the anxious voices , the voices that have despaired of being heard .
those who have been left out , we will try to bring in .
those left behind , we will help to catch up .
for all of our people , we will set as our goal the decent order that makes progress possible and our lives secure .
as we reach toward our hopes , our task is to build on what has gone before -- not turning away from the old , but turning toward the new .
in this past third of a century , government has passed more laws , spent more money , initiated more programs , than in all our previous history .
in pursuing our goals of full employment , better housing , excellence in education ; in rebuilding our cities and improving our rural areas ; in protecting our environment and enhancing the quality of life -- in all these and more , we will and must press urgently forward .
we shall plan now for the day when our wealth can be transferred from the destruction of war abroad to the urgent needs of our people at home .
the american dream does not come to those who fall asleep .
but we are approaching the limits of what government alone can do .
our greatest need now is to reach beyond government , and to enlist the legions of the concerned and the committed .
what has to be done , has to be done by government and people together or it will not be done at all .
the lesson of past agony is that without the people we can do nothing ; with the people we can do everything .
to match the magnitude of our tasks , we need the energies of our people -- enlisted not only in grand enterprises , but more importantly in those small , splendid efforts that make headlines in the neighborhood newspaper instead of the national journal .
with these , we can build a great cathedral of the spirit -- each of us raising it one stone at a time , as he reaches out to his neighbor , helping , caring , doing .
i do not offer a life of uninspiring ease .
i do not call for a life of grim sacrifice .
i ask you to join in a high adventure -- one as rich as humanity itself , and as exciting as the times we live in .
the essence of freedom is that each of us shares in the shaping of his own destiny .
until he has been part of a cause larger than himself , no man is truly whole .
the way to fulfillment is in the use of our talents ; we achieve nobility in the spirit that inspires that use .
as we measure what can be done , we shall promise only what we know we can produce , but as we chart our goals we shall be lifted by our dreams .
no man can be fully free while his neighbor is not .
to go forward at all is to go forward together .
this means black and white together , as one nation , not two .
the laws have caught up with our conscience .
what remains is to give life to what is in the law : to ensure at last that as all are born equal in dignity before god , all are born equal in dignity before man .
as we learn to go forward together at home , let us also seek to go forward together with all mankind .
let us take as our goal : where peace is unknown , make it welcome ; where peace is fragile , make it strong ; where peace is temporary , make it permanent .
after a period of confrontation , we are entering an era of negotiation .
let all nations know that during this administration our lines of communication will be open .
we seek an open world -- open to ideas , open to the exchange of goods and people -- a world in which no people , great or small , will live in angry isolation .
we can not expect to make everyone our friend , but we can try to make no one our enemy .
those who would be our adversaries , we invite to a peaceful competition -- not in conquering territory or extending dominion , but in enriching the life of man .
as we explore the reaches of space , let us go to the new worlds together -- not as new worlds to be conquered , but as a new adventure to be shared .
with those who are willing to join , let us cooperate to reduce the burden of arms , to strengthen the structure of peace , to lift up the poor and the hungry .
but to all those who would be tempted by weakness , let us leave no doubt that we will be as strong as we need to be for as long as we need to be .
over the past twenty years , since i first came to this capital as a freshman congressman , i have visited most of the nations of the world .
i have come to know the leaders of the world , and the great forces , the hatreds , the fears that divide the world .
i know that peace does not come through wishing for it -- that there is no substitute for days and even years of patient and prolonged diplomacy .
i also know the people of the world .
i have seen the hunger of a homeless child , the pain of a man wounded in battle , the grief of a mother who has lost her son .
i know these have no ideology , no race .
i know america .
i know the heart of america is good .
i speak from my own heart , and the heart of my country , the deep concern we have for those who suffer , and those who sorrow .
i have taken an oath today in the presence of god and my countrymen to uphold and defend the constitution of the united states .
to that oath i now add this sacred commitment : i shall consecrate my office , my energies , and all the wisdom i can summon , to the cause of peace among nations .
let this message be heard by strong and weak alike : 
 the peace we seek to win is not victory over any other people , but the peace that comes " with healing in its wings " ; with compassion for those who have suffered ; with understanding for those who have opposed us ; with the opportunity for all the peoples of this earth to choose their own destiny .
only a few short weeks ago , we shared the glory of man 's first sight of the world as god sees it , as a single sphere reflecting light in the darkness .
as the apollo astronauts flew over the moon 's gray surface on christmas eve , they spoke to us of the beauty of earth -- and in that voice so clear across the lunar distance , we heard them invoke god 's blessing on its goodness .
in that moment , their view from the moon moved poet archibald macleish to write : 
 " to see the earth as it truly is , small and blue and beautiful in that eternal silence where it floats , is to see ourselves as riders on the earth together , brothers on that bright loveliness in the eternal cold -- brothers who know now they are truly brothers . "
in that moment of surpassing technological triumph , men turned their thoughts toward home and humanity -- seeing in that far perspective that man 's destiny on earth is not divisible ; telling us that however far we reach into the cosmos , our destiny lies not in the stars but on earth itself , in our own hands , in our own hearts .
we have endured a long night of the american spirit .
but as our eyes catch the dimness of the first rays of dawn , let us not curse the remaining dark .
let us gather the light .
our destiny offers , not the cup of despair , but the chalice of opportunity .
so let us seize it , not in fear , but in gladness-- and , " riders on the earth together , " let us go forward , firm in our faith , steadfast in our purpose , cautious of the dangers ; but sustained by our confidence in the will of god and the promise of man .

good evening , my fellow americans : 
 tonight i want to talk to you on a subject of deep concern to all americans and to many people in all parts of the world -- the war in vietnam .
i believe that one of the reasons for the deep division about vietnam is that many americans have lost confidence in what their government has told them about our policy .
the american people can not and should not be asked to support a policy which involves the overriding issues of war and peace unless they know the truth about that policy .
tonight , therefore , i would like to answer some of the questions that i know are on the minds of many of you listening to me .
how and why did america get involved in vietnam in the first place ?
how has this administration changed the policy of the previous administration ?
what has really happened in the negotiations in paris and on the battlefront in vietnam ?
what choices do we have if we are to end the war ?
what are the prospects for peace ?
now , let me begin by describing the situation i found when i was inaugurated on january 20 .
-- the war had been going on for 4 years .
-- 31,000 americans had been killed in action .
-- the training program for the south vietnamese was behind schedule .
-- 540,000 americans were in vietnam with no plans to reduce the number .
-- no progress had been made at the negotiations in paris and the united states had not put forth a comprehensive peace proposal .
-- the war was causing deep division at home and criticism from many of our friends as well as our enemies abroad .
in view of these circumstances there were some who urged that i end the war at once by ordering the immediate withdrawal of all american forces .
from a political standpoint this would have been a popular and easy course to follow .
after all , we became involved in the war while my predecessor was in office .
i could blame the defeat which would be the result of my action on him and come out as the peacemaker .
some put it to me quite bluntly : this was the only way to avoid allowing johnson 's war to become nixon 's war .
but i had a greater obligation than to think only of the years of my administration and of the next election .
i had to think of the effect of my decision on the next generation and on the future of peace and freedom in america and in the world .
let us all understand that the question before us is not whether some americans are for peace and some americans are against peace .
the question at issue is not whether johnson 's war becomes nixon 's war .
the great question is : how can we win america 's peace ?
well , let us turn now to the fundamental issue .
why and how did the united states become involved in vietnam in the first place ?
fifteen years ago north vietnam , with the logistical support of communist china and the soviet union , launched a campaign to impose a communist government on south vietnam by instigating and supporting a revolution .
in response to the request of the government of south vietnam , president eisenhower sent economic aid and military equipment to assist the people of south vietnam in their efforts to prevent a communist takeover .
seven years ago , president kennedy sent 16,000 military personnel to vietnam as combat advisers .
four years ago , president johnson sent american combat forces to south vietnam .
now , many believe that president johnson 's decision to send american combat forces to south vietnam was wrong .
and many others -- i among them -- have been strongly critical of the way the war has been conducted .
but the question facing us today is : now that we are in the war , what is the best way to end it ?
in january i could only conclude that the precipitate withdrawal of american forces from vietnam would be a disaster not only for south vietnam but for the united states and for the cause of peace .
for the south vietnamese , our precipitate withdrawal would inevitably allow the communists to repeat the massacres which followed their takeover in the north 15 years before .
-- they then murdered more than 50,000 people and hundreds of thousands more died in slave labor camps .
-- we saw a prelude of what would happen in south vietnam when the communists entered the city of hue last year .
during their brief rule there , there was a bloody reign of terror in which 3,000 civilians were clubbed , shot to death , and buried in mass graves .
-- with the sudden collapse of our support , these atrocities of hue would become the nightmare of the entire nation -- and particularly for the million and a half catholic refugees who fled to south vietnam when the 
 communists took over in the north .
for the united states , this first defeat in our nation 's history would result in a collapse of confidence in american leadership , not only in asia but throughout the world .
three american presidents have recognized the great stakes involved in vietnam and understood what had to be done .
in 1963 , president kennedy , with his characteristic eloquence and clarity , said : " we want to see a stable government there , carrying on a struggle to maintain its national independence . "
" we believe strongly in that .
we are not going to withdraw from that effort .
in my opinion , for us to withdraw from that effort would mean a collapse not only of south viet - nam , but southeast asia .
so we are going to stay there . "
president eisenhower and president johnson expressed the same conclusion during their terms of office .
for the future of peace , precipitate withdrawal would thus be a disaster of immense magnitude .
-- a nation can not remain great if it betrays its allies and lets down its friends .
-- our defeat and humiliation in south vietnam without question would promote recklessness in the councils of those great powers who have not yet abandoned their goals of world conquest .
-- this would spark violence wherever our commitments help maintain the peace -- in the middle east , in berlin , eventually even in the western hemisphere .
ultimately , this would cost more lives .
it would not bring peace ; it would bring more war .
for these reasons , i rejected the recommendation that i should end the war by immediately withdrawing all of our forces .
i chose instead to change american policy on both the negotiating front and battlefront .
in order to end a war fought on many fronts , i initiated a pursuit for peace on many fronts .
in a television speech on may 14 , in a speech before the united nations , and on a number of other occasions i set forth our peace proposals in great detail .
-- we have offered the complete withdrawal of all outside forces within one year .
-- we have proposed a cease - fire under international supervision .
-- we have offered free elections under international supervision with the communists participating in the organization and conduct of the elections as an organized political force .
and the saigon government has pledged to accept the result of the elections .
we have not put forth our proposals on a take - it - or - leave - it basis .
we have indicated that we are willing to discuss the proposals that have been put forth by the other side .
we have declared that anything is negotiable except the fight of the people of south vietnam to determine their own future .
at the paris peace conference , ambassador lodge has demonstrated our flexibility and good faith in 40 public meetings .
hanoi has refused even to discuss our proposals .
they demand our unconditional acceptance of their terms , which are that we withdraw all american forces immediately and unconditionally and that we overthrow the government of south vietnam as we leave .
we have not limited our peace initiatives to public forums and public statements .
i recognized , in january , that a long and bitter war like this usually can not be settled in a public forum .
that is why in addition to the public statements and negotiations i have explored every possible private avenue that might lead to a settlement .
tonight i am taking the unprecedented step of disclosing to you some of our other initiatives for peace -- initiatives we undertook privately and secretly because we thought we thereby might open a door which publicly would be closed .
i did not wait for my inauguration to begin my quest for peace .
-- soon after my election , through an individual who is directly in contact on a personal basis with the leaders of north vietnam , i made two private offers for a rapid , comprehensive settlement .
hanoi 's replies called in effect for our surrender before negotiations .
-- since the soviet union furnishes most of the military equipment for north vietnam , secretary of state rogers , my assistant for national security affairs , dr. kissinger , ambassador lodge , and i , personally , have met on a number of occasions with representatives of the soviet government to enlist their assistance in getting meaningful negotiations started .
in addition , we have had extended discussions directed toward that same end with representatives of other governments which have diplomatic relations with north vietnam .
none of these initiatives have to date produced results .
-- in mid - july , i became convinced that it was necessary to make a major move to break the deadlock in the paris talks .
i spoke directly in this office , where i am now sitting , with an individual who had known ho chi minh   on a personal basis for 25 years .
through him i sent a letter to ho chi minh .
i did this outside of the usual diplomatic channels with the hope that with the necessity of making statements for propaganda removed , there might be constructive progress toward bringing the war to an end .
let me read from that letter to you now .
" dear mr. president : 
 " i realize that it is difficult to communicate meaningfully across the gulf of four years of war .
but precisely because of this gulf , i wanted to take this opportunity to reaffirm in all solemnity my desire to work for a just peace .
i deeply believe that the war in vietnam has gone on too long and delay in bringing it to an end can benefit no one -- least of all the people of vietnam .... 
 " the time has come to move forward at the conference table toward an early resolution of this tragic war .
you will find us forthcoming and open - minded in a common effort to bring the blessings of peace to the brave people of vietnam .
let history record that at this critical juncture , both sides turned their face toward peace rather than toward conflict and war . "
i received ho chi minh 's reply on august 30 , 3 days before his death .
it simply reiterated the public position north vietnam had taken at paris and flatly rejected my initiative .
the full text of both letters is being released to the press .
-- in addition to the public meetings that i have referred to , ambassador lodge has met with vietnam 's chief negotiator in paris in 11 private sessions .
-- we have taken other significant initiatives which must remain secret to keep open some channels of communication which may still prove to be productive .
but the effect of all the public , private , and secret negotiations which have been undertaken since the bombing halt a year ago and since this administration came into office on january 20 , can be summed up in one sentence : no progress whatever has been made except agreement on the shape of the bargaining table .
well now , who is at fault ?
it has become clear that the obstacle in negotiating an end to the war is not the president of the united states .
it is not the south vietnamese government .
the obstacle is the other side 's absolute refusal to show the least willingness to join us in seeking a just peace .
and it will not do so while it is convinced that all it has to do is to wait for our next concession , and our next concession after that one , until it gets everything it wants .
there can now be no longer any question that progress in negotiation depends only on hanoi 's deciding to negotiate , to negotiate seriously .
i realize that this report on our efforts on the diplomatic front is discouraging to the american people , but the american people are entitled to know the truth - the bad news as well as the good news - where the lives of our young men are involved .
now let me turn , however , to a more encouraging report on another front .
at the time we launched our search for peace i recognized we might not succeed in bringing an end to the war through negotiation .
i , therefore , put into effect another plan to bring peace -- a plan which will bring the war to an end regardless of what happens on the negotiating front .
it is in line with a major shift in u. s. foreign policy which i described in my press conference at guam on july 25 .
let me briefly explain what has been described as the nixon doctrine -- a policy which not only will help end the war in vietnam , but which is an essential element of our program to prevent future vietnams .
we americans are a do - it - yourself people .
we are an impatient people .
instead of teaching someone else to do a job , we like to do it ourselves .
and this trait has been carried over into our foreign policy .
in korea and again in vietnam , the united states furnished most of the money , most of the arms , and most of the men to help the people of those countries defend their freedom against communist aggression .
before any american troops were committed to vietnam , a leader of another asian country expressed this opinion to me when i was traveling in asia as a private citizen .
he said : " when you are trying to assist another nation defend its freedom , u. s. policy should be to help them fight the war but not to fight the war for them . "
well , in accordance with this wise counsel , i laid down in guam three principles as guidelines for future american policy toward asia : 
  -- first , the united states will keep all of its treaty commitments .
-- second , we shall provide a shield if a nuclear power threatens the freedom of a nation allied with us or of a nation whose survival we consider vital to our security .
-- third , in cases involving other types of aggression , we shall furnish military and economic assistance when requested in accordance with our treaty commitments .
but we shall look to the nation directly threatened to assume the primary responsibility of providing the manpower for its defense .
after i announced this policy , i found that the leaders of the philippines , thailand , vietnam , south korea , and other nations which might be threatened by communist aggression , welcomed this new direction in american foreign policy .
the defense of freedom is everybody 's business -- not just america 's business .
and it is particularly the responsibility of the people whose freedom is threatened .
in the previous administration , we americanized the war in vietnam .
in this administration , we are vietnamizing the search for peace .
the policy of the previous administration not only resulted in our assuming the primary responsibility for fighting the war , but even more significantly did not adequately stress the goal of strengthening the south vietnamese so that they could defend themselves when we left .
the vietnamization plan was launched following secretary laird 's visit to vietnam in march .
under the plan , i ordered first a substantial increase in the training and equipment of south vietnamese forces .
in july , on my visit to vietnam , i changed general abrams ' orders so that they were consistent with the objectives of our new policies .
under the new orders , the primary mission of our troops is to enable the south vietnamese forces to assume the full responsibility for the security of south vietnam .
our air operations have been reduced by over 20 percent .
and now we have begun to see the results of this long overdue change in american policy in vietnam .
-- after 5 years of americans going into vietnam , we are finally bringing american men home .
by december 15 , over 60,000 men will have been withdrawn from south vietnam including 20 percent of all of our combat forces .
-- the south vietnamese have continued to gain in strength .
as a result they have been able to take over combat responsibilities from our american troops .
two other significant developments have occurred since this administration took office .
-- enemy infiltration , infiltration which is essential if they are to launch a major attack , over the last 3 months is less than 20 percent of what it was over the same period last year .
-- most important -- united states casualties have declined during the last 2 months to the lowest point in 3 years .
let me now turn to our program for the future .
we have adopted a plan which we have worked out in cooperation with the south vietnamese for the complete withdrawal of all u. s. combat ground forces , and their replacement by south vietnamese forces on an orderly scheduled timetable .
this withdrawal will be made from strength and not from weakness .
as south vietnamese forces become stronger , the rate of american withdrawal can become greater .
i have not and do not intend to announce the timetable for our program .
and there are obvious reasons for this decision which i am sure you will understand .
as i have indicated on several occasions , the rate of withdrawal will depend on developments on three fronts .
one of these is the progress which can be or might be made in the paris talks .
an announcement of a fixed timetable for our withdrawal would completely remove any incentive for the enemy to negotiate an agreement .
they would simply wait until our forces had withdrawn and then move in .
the other two factors on which we will base our withdrawal decisions are the level of enemy activity and the progress of the training programs of the south vietnamese forces .
and i am glad to be able to report tonight progress on both of these fronts has been greater than we anticipated when we started the program in june for withdrawal .
as a result , our timetable for withdrawal is more optimistic now than when we made our first estimates in june .
now , this clearly demonstrates why it is not wise to be frozen in on a fixed timetable .
we must retain the flexibility to base each withdrawal decision on the situation as it is at that time rather than on estimates that are no longer valid .
along with this optimistic estimate , i must -- in all candor -- leave one note of caution .
if the level of enemy activity significantly increases we might have to adjust our timetable accordingly .
however , i want the record to be completely clear on one point .
at the time of the bombing halt just a year ago , there was some confusion as to whether there was an understanding on the part of the enemy that if we stopped the bombing of north vietnam they would stop the shelling of cities in south vietnam .
i want to be sure that there is no misunderstanding on the part of the enemy with regard to our withdrawal program .
we have noted the reduced level of infiltration , the reduction of our casualties , and are basing our withdrawal decisions partially on those factors .
if the level of infiltration or our casualties increase while we are trying to scale down the fighting , it will be the result of a conscious decision by the enemy .
hanoi could make no greater mistake than to assume that an increase in violence will be to its advantage .
if i conclude that increased enemy action jeopardizes our remaining forces in vietnam , i shall not hesitate to take strong and effective measures to deal with that situation .
this is not a threat .
this is a statement of policy , which as commander in chief of our armed forces , i am making in meeting my responsibility for the protection of american fighting men wherever they may be .
my fellow americans , i am sure you can recognize from what i have said that we really only have two choices open to us if we want to end this war .
-- i can order an immediate , precipitate withdrawal of all americans from vietnam without regard to the effects of that action .
-- or we can persist in our search for a just peace through a negotiated settlement if possible , or through continued implementation of our plan for vietnamization if necessary -- a plan in which we will withdraw all of our forces from vietnam on a schedule in accordance with our program , as the south vietnamese become strong enough to defend their own freedom .
i have chosen this second course .
it is not the easy way .
it is the right way .
it is a plan which will end the war and serve the cause of peace -- not just in vietnam but in the pacific and in the world .
in speaking of the consequences of a precipitate withdrawal , i mentioned that our allies would lose confidence in america .
far more dangerous , we would lose confidence in ourselves .
oh , the immediate reaction would be a sense of relief that our men were coming home .
but as we saw the consequences of what we had done , inevitable remorse and divisive recrimination would scar our spirit as a people .
we have faced other crises in our history and have become stronger by rejecting the easy way out and taking the right way in meeting our challenges .
our greatness as a nation has been our capacity to do what had to be done when we knew our course was right .
i recognize that some of my fellow citizens disagree with the plan for peace i have chosen .
honest and patriotic americans have reached different conclusions as to how peace should be achieved .
in san francisco a few weeks ago , i saw demonstrators .
carrying signs reading : " lose in vietnam , bring the boys home . "
well , one of the strengths of our free society is that any american has a right to reach that conclusion and to advocate that point of view .
but as president of the united states , i would be untrue to my oath of office if i allowed the policy of this nation to be dictated by the minority who hold that point of view and who try to impose it on the nation by mounting demonstrations in the street .
for almost 200 years , the policy of this nation has been made under our constitution by those leaders in the congress and the white house elected by all of the people .
if a vocal minority , however fervent its cause , prevails over reason and the will of the majority , this nation has no future as a free society .
and now i would like to address a word , if i may , to the young people of this nation who are particularly concerned , and i understand why they are concerned , about this war .
i respect your idealism .
i share your concern for peace .
i want peace as much as you do .
there are powerful personal reasons i want to end this war .
this week i will have to sign 83 letters to mothers , fathers , wives , and loved ones of men who have given their lives for america in vietnam .
it is very little satisfaction to me that this is only one - third as many letters as i signed the first week in office .
there is nothing i want more than to see the day come when i do not have to write any of those letters .
-- i want to end the war to save the lives of those brave young men in vietnam .
-- but i want to end it in a way which will increase the chance that their younger brothers and their sons will not have to fight in some future vietnam someplace in the world .
-- and i want to end the war for another reason .
i want to end it so that the energy and dedication of you , our young people , now too often directed into bitter hatred against those responsible for the war , can be turned to the great challenges of peace , a better life for all americans , a better life for all people on this earth .
i have chosen a plan for peace .
i believe it will succeed .
if it does succeed , what the critics say now wo n't matter .
if it does not succeed , anything i say then wo n't matter .
i know it may not be fashionable to speak of patriotism or national destiny these days .
but i feel it is appropriate to do so on this occasion 
 two hundred years ago this nation was weak and poor .
but even then , america was the hope of millions in the world .
today we have become the strongest and richest nation in the world .
and the wheel of destiny has turned so that any hope the world has for the survival of peace and freedom will be determined by whether the american people have the moral stamina and the courage to meet the challenge of free world leadership .
let historians not record that when america was the most powerful nation in the world we passed on the other side of the road and allowed the last hopes for peace and freedom of millions of people to be suffocated by the forces of totalitarianism .
and so tonight -- to you , the great silent majority of my fellow americans -- i ask for your support .
i pledged in my campaign for the presidency to end the war in a way that we could win the peace .
i have initiated a plan of action which will enable me to keep that pledge .
the more support i can have from the american people , the sooner that pledge can be redeemed ; for the more divided we are at home , the less likely the enemy is to negotiate at paris .
let us be united for peace .
let us also be united against defeat .
because let us understand : north vietnam can not defeat or humiliate the united states .
only americans can do that .
fifty years ago , in this room and at this very desk , president woodrow wilson spoke words which caught the imagination of a war - weary world .
he said : " this is the war to end war . "
his dream for peace after world war i was shattered on the hard realities of great power politics and woodrow wilson died a broken man .
tonight i do not tell you that the war in vietnam is the war to end wars .
but i do say this : i have initiated a plan which will end this war in a way that will bring us closer to that great goal to which woodrow wilson and every american president in our history has been dedicated -- the goal of a just and lasting peace .
as president i hold the responsibility for choosing the best path to that goal and then leading the nation along it .
i pledge to you tonight that i shall meet this responsibility with all of the strength and wisdom i can command in accordance with your hopes , mindful of your concerns , sustained by your prayers .
thank you and goodnight .

good evening , my fellow americans .
over the past several weeks you have heard a number of reports on tv , radio , and in your newspapers on the situation in southeast asia .
i think the time has come for me as president and as commander in chief of our armed forces to put these reports in perspective , to lay all the pertinent facts before you and to let you judge for yourselves as to the success or failure of our policy .
i am glad to be able to begin my report tonight by announcing that i have decided to increase the rate of american troop withdrawals for the period from may 1 to december 1 .
before going into details , i would like to review briefly what i found when i came into office , the progress we have made to date in reducing american forces , and the reason why i am able to announce a stepped - up withdrawal without jeopardizing our remaining forces in vietnam and without endangering our ultimate goal of ending american involvement in a way which will increase the chances for a lasting peace in the pacific and in the world .
when i left washington in january of 1961 , after serving eight years as vice president under president eisenhower , there were no american combat forces in vietnam .
no americans had died in combat in vietnam .
when i returned to washington as president eight years later , there were 540,000 american troops in vietnam .
thirty - one thousand had died there .
three hundred americans were being lost every week and there was no comprehensive plan to end the united states involvement in the war .
i implemented a plan to train and equip the south vietnamese , to withdraw american forces , and to end american involvement in the war just as soon as the south vietnamese had developed the capacity to defend their country against communist aggression .
on this chart on my right , you can see how our plan has succeeded .
in june of 1969 , i announced a withdrawal of 25,000 men ; in september , 40,000 ; december , 50,000 ; april of 1970 , 150,000 .
by the first of next month , may 1 , we will have brought home more than 265,000 americans -- almost half of the troops in vietnam when i took office .
now another indication of the progress we have made is in reducing american casualties .
casualties were five times as great in the first 3 months of 1969 as they were in the first three months this year , 1971 .
south vietnamese casualties have also dropped significantly in the past two years .
one american dying in combat is one too many .
but our goal is no american fighting man dying anyplace in the world .
every , decision i have made in the past and every decision i make in the future will have the purpose of achieving that goal .
let me review now two decisions i have made which have contributed to the achievements of our goals in vietnam that you have seen on this chart .
the first was the destruction of enemy bases in cambodia .
you will recall that at the time of that decision , many expressed fears that we had widened the war , that our casualties would increase , that our troop withdrawal program would be delayed .
now i do n't question the sincerity of those who expressed these fears .
but we can see now they were wrong .
american troops were out of cambodia in 60 days , just as i pledged they would be .
american casualties did not rise ; they were cut in half .
american troop withdrawals were not halted or delayed ; they continued at an accelerated pace .
now let me turn to the laotian operation .
as you know , this was undertaken by south vietnamese ground forces with american air support against north vietnamese troops which had been using laotian territory for six years to attack american forces and allied forces in south vietnam .
since the completion of that operation , there has been a great deal of understandable speculation -- just as there was after cambodia -- whether or not it was a success or a failure , a victory or a defeat .
but , as in cambodia , what is important is not the instant analysis of the moment , but what happens in the future .
did the laotian operation contribute to the goals we sought ?
i have just completed my assessment of that operation and here are my conclusions : 
 first , the south vietnamese demonstrated that without american advisers they could fight effectively against the very best troops north vietnam could put in the field .
second , the south vietnamese suffered heavy casualties , but by every conservative estimate the casualties suffered by the enemy were far heavier .
third , and most important , the disruption of enemy supply lines , the consumption of ammunition and arms in the battle has been even more damaging to the capability of the north vietnamese to sustain major offensives in south vietnam than were the operations in cambodia 10 months ago .
consequently , tonight i can report that vietnamization has succeeded .
because of the increased strength of the south vietnamese , because of the success of the cambodian operation , because of the achievements of the south vietnamese operation in laos , i am announcing an increase in the rate of american withdrawals .
between may 1 and december 1 of this year , 100,000 more american troops will be brought home from south vietnam .
this will bring the total number of american troops withdrawn from south vietnam to 365,000 .
now that is over two - thirds of the number who were there when i came into office , as you can see from this chart on my left .
the government of south vietnam fully supports the decision i have just announced .
now , let 's look at the future : 
 as you can see from the progress we have made to date and by this announcement tonight , the american involvement in vietnam is coming to an end .
the day the south vietnamese can take over their own defense is in sight .
our goal is a total american withdrawal from vietnam .
we can and we will reach that goal through our program of vietnamization if necessary .
but we would infinitely prefer to reach it even sooner -- through negotiations .
i am sure most of you will recall that on october 7 of last year in a national tv broadcast , i proposed an immediate cease - fire throughout indochina , the immediate release of all prisoners of war in the indochina area , an all - indochina peace conference , the complete withdrawal of all outside forces , and a political settlement .
tonight i again call on hanoi to engage in serious negotiations to speed the end of this war .
i especially call on hanoi to agree to the immediate and unconditional release of all prisoners of war throughout indochina .
it is time for hanoi to end the barbaric use of our prisoners as negotiating pawns and to join us in a humane act that will free their men as well as ours .
let me turn now to a proposal which at first glance has a great deal of popular appeal .
if our goal is a total withdrawal of all our forces , why do n't i announce a date now for ending our involvement ?
well , the difficulty in making such an announcement to the american people is that i would also be making that announcement to the enemy .
and it would serve the enemy 's purpose and not our own .
if the united states should announce that we will quit regardless of what the enemy does , we would have thrown away our principal bargaining counter to win the release of american prisoners of war , we would remove the enemy 's strongest incentive to end the war sooner by negotiation , and we will have given enemy commanders the exact information they need to marshal their attacks against our remaining forces at their most vulnerable time .
the issue very simply is this : shall we leave vietnam in a way that -- by our own actions -- consciously turns the country over to the communists ?
or shall we leave in a way that gives the south vietnamese a reasonable chance to survive as a free people ?
my plan will end american involvement in a way that would provide that chance .
and the other plan would end it precipitately and give victory to the communists .
in a deeper sense , we have the choice of ending our involvement in this war on a note of despair or on a note of hope .
i believe , as thomas jefferson did , that americans will always choose hope over despair .
we have it in our power to leave vietnam in a way that offers a brave people a realistic hope of freedom .
we have it in our power to prove to our friends in the world that america 's sense of responsibility remains the world 's greatest single hope of peace .
and above all , we have it in our power to close a difficult chapter in american history , not meanly but nobly -- so that each one of us can come out of this searing experience with a measure of pride in our nation , confidence in our own character , and hope for the future of the spirit of america .
i know there are those who honestly believe that i should move to end this war without regard to what happens to south vietnam .
this way would abandon our friends .
but even more important , we would abandon ourselves .
we would plunge from the anguish of war into a nightmare of recrimination .
we would lose respect for this nation , respect for one another , respect for ourselves .
i understand the deep concerns which have been raised in this country , fanned by reports of brutalities in vietnam .
let me put this into perspective .
i have visited vietnam many times , and , speaking now from that experience and as commander in chief of our armed forces , i feel it is my duty to speak up for the two and a half million fine young americans who have served in vietnam .
the atrocity charges in individual cases should not and can not be allowed to reflect on their courage and their self - sacrifice .
war is a terrible and cruel experience for a nation , and it is particularly terrible and cruel for those who bear the burden of fighting .
but never in history have men fought for less selfish motives -- not for conquest , not for glory , but only for the right of a people far away to choose the kind of government they want .
while we hear and read much of isolated acts of cruelty , we do not hear enough of the tens of thousands of individual american soldiers -- i have seen them there -- building schools , roads , hospitals , clinics , who , through countless acts of generosity and kindness , have tried to help the people of south vietnam .
we can and we should be very proud of these men .
they deserve not our scorn , but they deserve our admiration and our deepest appreciation .
the way to express that appreciation is to end america 's participation in this conflict not in failure or in defeat , but in achievement of the great goals for which they fought : a south vietnam free to determine its own future and an america no longer divided by war but united in peace .
that is why it is so important how we end this war .
by our decision we will demonstrate the kind of people we are and the kind of country we will become .
that is why i have chartered the course i have laid out tonight : to end this war -- but end it in a way that will strengthen trust for america around the world , not undermine it , in a way that will redeem the sacrifices that have been made , not insult them , in a way that will heal this nation , not tear it apart .
i can assure you tonight with confidence that american involvement in this war is coming to an end .
but can you believe this ?
i understand why this question is raised by many very honest and sincere people .
because many times in the past in this long and difficult war , actions have been announced from washington which were supposed to lead to a reduction of american involvement in vietnam .
and over and over these actions resulted in more americans going to vietnam and more casualties in vietnam .
tonight i do not ask you to take what i say on faith .
look at the record .
look again at this chart on my left .
every action taken by this administration , every decision made , has accomplished what i said it would accomplish .
they have reduced american involvement .
they have drastically reduced our casualties .
in my campaign for the presidency , i pledged to end american involvement in this war .
i am keeping that pledge .
and i expect to be held accountable by the american people if i fail .
i am often asked what i would like to accomplish more than anything else while serving as president of the united states .
and i always give the same answer : to bring peace -- peace abroad , peace at home for america .
the reason i am so deeply committed to peace goes far beyond political considerations or my concern about my place in history , or the other reasons that political scientists usually say are the motivations of presidents .
every time i talk to a brave wife of an american pow , every time i write a letter to the mother of a boy who has been killed in vietnam , i become more deeply committed to end this war , and to end it in a way that we can build lasting peace .
i think the hardest thing that a president has to do is to present posthumously the nation 's highest honor , the medal of honor , to mothers or fathers or widows of men who have lost their lives , but in the process have saved the lives of others .
we had an award ceremony in the east room of the white house just a few weeks ago .
and at that ceremony i remember one of the recipients , mrs. karl taylor , from pennsylvania .
her husband was a marine sergeant , sergeant karl taylor .
he charged an enemy machine - gun single - handed and knocked it out .
he lost his life .
but in the process the lives of several wounded marines in the range of that machine - gun were saved .
after i presented her the medal , i shook hands with their two children , karl , jr. -- he was 8 years old - and kevin , who was 4 .
as i was about to move to the next recipient , kevin suddenly stood at attention and saluted .
i found it rather difficult to get my thoughts together for the next presentation .
my fellow americans , i want to end this war in a way that is worthy of the sacrifice of karl taylor , and i think he would want me to end it in a way that would increase the chances that kevin and karl , and all those children like them here and around the world , could grow up in a world where none of them would have to die in war ; that would increase the chance for america to have what it has not had in this century -- a full generation of peace .
we have come a long way in the last two years toward that goal .
with your continued support , i believe we will achieve that goal .
and generations in the future will look back at this difficult , trying time in america 's history and they will be proud that we demonstrated that we had the courage and the character of a great people .
thank you .

good afternoon , ladies and gentlemen : 
 as you know , the soviet - american talks an limiting nuclear arms have been deadlocked for over a year .
as a result of negotiations involving the highest level of both governments , i am announcing today a significant development in breaking the deadlock .
the statement that i shall now read is being issued simultaneously in moscow and washington : washington , 12 o'clock ; moscow , 7 p. m. 
 the governments of the united states and the soviet union , after reviewing the course of their talks on the limitation of strategic armaments , have agreed to concentrate this year on working out an agreement for the limitation of the deployment of anti - ballistic missile systems .
they have also agreed that , together with concluding an agreement to limit abms , they will agree on certain measures with respect to the limitation of offensive strategic weapons .
the two sides are taking this course in the conviction that it will create more favorable conditions for further negotiations to limit all strategic arms .
these negotiations will be actively pursued .
this agreement is a major step in breaking the stalemate on nuclear arms talks .
intensive negotiations , however , will be required to translate this understanding into a concrete agreement .
this statement that i have just read expresses the commitment of the soviet and american governments at the highest levels to achieve that goal .
if we succeed , this joint statement that has been issued today may well be remembered as the beginning of a new era in which all nations will devote more of their energies and their resources not to the weapons of war , but to the works of peace .

good evening : 
 i have asked for this time tonight in order to announce my answer to the house judiciary committee 's subpoena for additional watergate tapes , and to tell you something about the actions i shall be taking tomorrow -- about what i hope they will mean to you and about the very difficult choices that were presented to me .
these actions will at last , once and for all , show that what i knew and what i did with regard to the watergate break - in and coverup were just as i have described them to you from the very beginning .
i have spent many hours during the past few weeks thinking about what i would say to the american people if i were to reach the decision i shall announce tonight .
and so , my words have not been lightly chosen ; i can assure you they are deeply felt .
it was almost e years ago , in june 1972 that five men broke into the democratic national committee headquarters in washington .
it turned out that they were connected with my reelection committee , and the watergate break - in became a major issue in the campaign .
the full resources of the fbi and the justice department were used to investigate the incident thoroughly .
i instructed my staff and campaign aides to cooperate fully with the investigation .
the fbi conducted nearly 1,500 interviews .
for 9 months -- until march 1973 -- i was assured by those charged with conducting and monitoring the investigations that no one in the white house was involved .
nevertheless , for more than a year , there have been allegations and insinuations that i knew about the planning of the watergate break - in and that i was involved in an extensive plot to cover it up .
the house judiciary committee is now investigating these charges .
on march 6 , i ordered all materials that i had previously furnished to the special prosecutor turned over to the committee .
these included tape recordings of 19 presidential conversations and more than 700 documents from private white house files .
on april 11 , the judiciary committee issued a subpoena for 42 additional tapes of conversations which it contended were necessary for its investigation .
i agreed to respond to that subpoena by tomorrow .
in these folders that you see over here on my left are more than 1,200 pages of transcripts of private conversations i participated in between september 15 , 1972 , and april 27 of 1973 with my principal aides and associates with regard to watergate .
they include all the relevant portions of all of the subpoenaed conversations that were recorded , that is , all portions that relate to the question of what i knew about watergate or the coverup and what i did about it .
they also include transcripts of other conversations which were not subpoenaed , but which have a significant bearing on the question of presidential actions with regard to watergate .
these will be delivered to the committee tomorrow .
in these transcripts , portions not relevant to my knowledge or actions with regard to watergate are not included , but everything that is relevant is included -- the rough as well as the smooth -- the strategy sessions , the exploration of alternatives , the weighing of human and political costs .
as far as what the president personally knew and did with regard to watergate and the coverup is concerned , these materials -- together with those already made available -- will tell it all .
i shall invite chairman rodino and the committee 's ranking minority member , congressman hutchinson of michigan , to come to the white house and listen to the actual , full tapes of these conversations , so that they can determine for themselves beyond question that the transcripts are accurate and that everything on the tapes relevant to my knowledge and my actions on watergate is included .
if there should be any disagreement over whether omitted material is relevant , i shall meet with them personally in an effort to settle the matter .
i believe this arrangement is fair , and i think it is appropriate .
for many days now , i have spent many hours of my own time personally reviewing these materials and personally deciding questions of relevancy .
i believe it is appropriate that the committee 's review should also be made by its own senior elected officials , and not by staff employees .
the task of chairman rodino and congressman hutchinson will be made simpler than was mine by the fact that the work of preparing the transcripts has been completed .
all they will need to do is to satisfy themselves of their authenticity and their completeness .
ever since the existence of the white house taping system was first made known last summer , i have tried vigorously to guard the privacy of the tapes .
i have been well aware that my effort to protect the confidentiality of presidential conversations has heightened the sense of mystery about watergate and , in fact , has caused increased suspicions of the president .
many people assume that the tapes must incriminate the president , or that otherwise , he would not insist on their privacy .
but the problem i confronted was this : unless a president can protect the privacy of the advice he gets , he can not get the advice he needs .
this principle is recognized in the constitutional doctrine of executive privilege , which has been defended and maintained by every president since washington and which has been recognized by the courts , whenever tested , as inherent in the presidency .
i consider it to be my constitutional responsibility to defend this principle .
three factors have now combined to persuade me that a major unprecedented exception to that principle is now necessary : 
 first , in the present circumstances , the house of representatives must be able to reach an informed judgment about the president 's role in watergate .
second , i am making a major exception to the principle of confidentiality because i believe such action is now necessary in order to restore the principle itself , by clearing the air of the central question that has brought such pressures upon it -- and also to provide the evidence which will allow this matter to be brought to a prompt conclusion .
third , in the context of the current impeachment climate , i believe all the american people , as well as their representatives in congress , are entitled to have not only the facts but also the evidence that demonstrates those facts .
i want there to be no question remaining about the fact that the president has nothing to hide in this matter .
the impeachment of a president is a remedy of last resort ; it is the most solemn act of our entire constitutional process .
now , regardless of whether or not it succeeded , the action of the house , in voting a formal accusation requiring trial by the senate , would put the nation through a wrenching ordeal it has endured only once in its lifetime , a century ago , and never since america has become a world power with global responsibilities .
the impact of such an ordeal would be felt throughout the world , and it would have its effect on the lives of all americans for many years to come .
because this is an issue that profoundly affects all the american people , in addition to turning over these transcripts to the house judiciary committee , i have directed that they should all be made public -- all of these that you see here .
to complete the record , i shall also release to the public transcripts of all those portions of the tapes already turned over to the special prosecutor and to the committee that relate to presidential actions or knowledge of the watergate affair .
during the past year , the wildest accusations have been given banner headlines and ready credence as well .
rumor , gossip innuendo , accounts from unnamed sources of what a prospective witness might testify to , have filled the morning newspapers and then are repeated on the evening newscasts day after day .
time and again , a familiar pattern repeated itself .
a charge would be reported the first day as what it was -- just an allegation .
but it would then be referred back to the next day and thereafter as if it were true .
the distinction between fact and speculation grew blurred .
eventually , all seeped into the public consciousness as a vague general impression of massive wrongdoing , implicating everybody , gaining credibility by its endless repetition .
the basic question at issue today is whether the president personally acted improperly in the watergate matter .
month after month of rumor , insinuation , and charges by just one watergate witness -- john dean -- suggested that the president did act improperly .
this sparked the demands for an impeachment inquiry .
this is the question that must be answered .
and this is the question that will be answered by these transcripts that i have ordered published tomorrow .
these transcripts cover hour upon hour of discussions that i held with mr. haldeman , john ehrlichman , john dean , john mitchell , former attorney general kleindienst , assistant attorney general petersen , and others with regard to watergate .
they were discussions in which i was probing to find out what had happened , who was responsible , what were the various degrees of responsibilities , what were the legal capabilities , what were the political ramifications , and what actions were necessary and appropriate on the part of the president .
i realize that these transcripts will provide grist for many sensational stories in the press .
parts will seem to be contradictory with one another , and parts will be in conflict with some of the testimony given in the senate watergate committee hearings .
i have been reluctant to release these tapes , not just because they will embarrass me and those with whom i have talked -- which they will -- and not just because they will become the subject of speculation and even ridicule -- which they will -- and not just because certain parts of them will be seized upon by political and journalistic opponents -- which they will .
i have been reluctant because , in these and in all the other conversations in this office , people have spoken their minds freely , never dreaming that specific sentences or even parts of sentences would be picked out as the subjects of national attention and controversy .
i have been reluctant because the principle of confidentiality is absolutely essential to the conduct of the presidency .
in reading the raw transcripts of these conversations , i believe it will be more readily apparent why that principle is essential and must be maintained in the future .
these conversations are unusual in their subject matter , but the same kind of uninhibited discussion -- and it is that -- the same brutal candor is necessary in discussing how to bring warring factions to the peace table or how to move necessary legislation through the congress .
names are named in these transcripts .
therefore , it is important to remember that much that appears in them is no more than hearsay or speculation , exchanged as i was trying to find out what really had happened , while my principal aides were reporting to me on rumors and reports that they had heard , while we discussed the various , often conflicting stories that different persons were telling .
as the transcripts will demonstrate , my concerns during this period covered a wide range .
the first and obvious one was to find out just exactly what had happened and who was involved .
a second concern was for the people who had been , or might become , involved in watergate .
some were close advisers , valued friends , others whom i had trusted .
and i was also concerned about the human impact on others , especially some of the young people and their families who had come to washington to work in my administration , whose lives might be suddenly ruined by something they had done in an excess of loyalty or in the mistaken belief that it would serve the interests of the president .
and then , i was quite frankly concerned about the political implications .
this represented potentially a devastating blow to the administration and to its programs , one which i knew would be exploited for all it was worth by hostile elements in the congress as well as in the media .
i wanted to do what was right , but i wanted to do it in a way that would cause the least unnecessary damage in a highly charged political atmosphere to the administration .
and fourth , as a lawyer , i felt very strongly that i had to conduct myself in a way that would not prejudice the rights of potential defendants .
and fifth , i was striving to sort out a complex tangle , not only of facts but also questions of legal and moral responsibility .
i wanted , above all , to be fair .
i wanted to draw distinctions , where those were appropriate , between persons who were active and willing participants on the one hand , and on the other , those who might have gotten inadvertently caught up in the web and be technically indictable but morally innocent .
despite the confusions and contradictions , what does come through clearly is this : 
 john dean charged in sworn senate testimony that i was " fully aware of the coverup " at the time of our first meeting on september 15 , 1972 .
these transcripts show clearly that i first learned of it when mr. dean himself told me about it in this office on march 21 -- some 6 months later .
incidentally , these transcripts -- covering hours upon hours of conversations -- should place in somewhat better perspective the controversy over the 18 1/2 minute gap in the tape of a conversation i had with mr. haldeman back in june of 1972 .
now , how it was caused is still a mystery to me and , i think , to many of the experts as well .
but i am absolutely certain , however , of one thing : that it was not caused intentionally by my secretary , rose mary woods , or any of my white house assistants .
and certainly , if the theory were true that during those 18 1/2 minutes , mr. haldeman and i cooked up some sort of a watergate coverup scheme , as so many have been quick to surmise , it hardly seems likely that in all of our subsequent conversations -- many of them are here -- which neither of us ever expected would see the light of day , there is nothing remotely indicating such a scheme ; indeed , quite the contrary .
from the beginning , i have said that in many places on the tapes there were ambiguities -- a statement and comments that different people with different perspectives might interpret in drastically different ways -- but although the words may be ambiguous , though the discussions may have explored many alternatives , the record of my actions is totally clear now , and i still believe it was totally correct then .
a prime example is one of the most controversial discussions , that with mr. dean on march 21 -- the one in which he first told me of the coverup , with mr. haldeman joining us midway through the conversation .
his revelations to me on march 21 were a sharp surprise , even though the report he gave to me was far from complete , especially since he did not reveal at that time the extent of his own criminal involvement .
i was particularly concerned by his report that one of the watergate defendants , howard hunt , was threatening blackmail unless he and his lawyer were immediately given $ 121,000 for legal fees and family support , and that he was attempting to blackmail the white house , not by threatening exposure on the watergate matter , but by threatening to reveal activities that would expose extremely sensitive , highly secret national security matters that he had worked on before watergate .
i probed , questioned , tried to learn all mr. dean knew about who was involved , what was involved .
i asked more than 150 questions of mr. dean in the course of that conversation .
he said to me , and i quote from the transcripts directly : " i can just tell from our conversation that these are things that you have no knowledge of . "
it was only considerably later that i learned how much there was that he did not tell me then -- for example , that he himself had authorized promises of clemency , that he had personally handled money for the watergate defendants , and that he had suborned perjury of a witness .
i knew that i needed more facts .
i knew that i needed the judgments of more people .
i knew the facts about the watergate coverup would have to be made public , but i had to find out more about what they were before i could decide how they could best be made public .
i returned several times to the immediate problem posed by mr. hunt 's blackmail threat , which to me was not a watergate problem , but one which i regarded , rightly or wrongly , as a potential national security problem of very serious proportions .
i considered long and hard whether it might in fact be better to let the payment go forward , at least temporarily , in the hope that this national security matter would not be exposed in the course of uncovering the watergate coverup .
i believed then , and i believe today , that i had a responsibility as president to consider every option , including this one , where production of sensitive national security matters was at issue -- protection of such matters .
in the course of considering it and of " just thinking out loud , " as i put it at one point , i several times suggested that meeting hunt 's demands might be necessary .
but then i also traced through where that would lead .
the money could be raised .
but money demands would lead inescapably to clemency demands , and clemency could not be granted .
i said , and i quote directly from the tape : " it is wrong , that 's for sure . "
i pointed out , and i quote again from the tape : " but in the end we are going to be bled to death .
and in the end it is all going to come out anyway .
then you get the worst of both worlds .
we are going to lose , and people are going to -- " 
 and mr. haldeman interrupts me and says : " and look like dopes ! "
and i responded , " and in effect look like a coverup .
so that we can not do . "
now , i recognize that this tape of march 21 is one which different meanings could be read in by different people .
but by the end of the meeting , as the tape shows , my decision was to convene a new grand jury and to send everyone before the grand jury with instructions to testify .
whatever the potential for misinterpretation there may be as a result of the different options that were discussed at different times during the meeting , my conclusion at the end of the meeting was clear .
and my actions and reactions as demonstrated on the tapes that follow that date show clearly that i did not in .
tend the further payment to hunt or anyone else be made .
these are some of the actions that i took in the weeks that followed in my effort to find the truth , to carry out my responsibilities to enforce the law : 
 as a tape of our meeting on march 22 , the next day , indicates , i directed mr. dean to go to camp david with instructions to put together a written report .
i learned five days later , on march 26 , that he was unable to complete it .
and so on march 27 , i assigned john ehrlichman to try to find out what had happened , who was at fault , and in what ways and to what degree .
one of the transcripts i am making public is a call that mr. ehrlichman made to the attorney general on march 28 , in which he asked the attorney general to report to me , the president , directly , any information he might find indicating possible involvement of john mitchell or by anyone in the white house .
i had mr. haldeman separately pursue other , independent lines of inquiry .
throughout , i was trying to reach determinations on matters of both substance and procedure on what the facts were and what was the best way to move the case forward .
i concluded that i wanted everyone to go before the grand jury and testify freely and fully .
this decision , as you will recall , was publicly announced on march 30 , 1973 .
i waived executive privilege in order to permit everybody to testify .
i specifically waived executive privilege with regard to conversations with the president , and i waived the attorney - client privilege with john dean in order to permit him to testify fully and , i hope , truthfully .
finally , on april 14 -- three weeks after i learned of the coverup from mr. dean -- mr. ehrlichman reported to me on the results of his investigation .
as he acknowledged , much of what he had gathered was hearsay , but he had gathered enough to make it clear that the next step was to make his findings completely available to the attorney general , which i instructed him to do .
and the next day , sunday , april 15 , attorney general kleindienst asked to see me , and he reported new information which had come to his attention on this matter .
and although he was in no way whatever involved in watergate , because of his close personal ties , not only to john mitchell but to other potential people who might be involved , he quite properly removed himself from the case .
we agreed that assistant attorney general henry petersen , the head of the criminal division , a democrat and career prosecutor , should be placed in complete charge of the investigation .
later that day , i met with mr. petersen .
i continued to meet with him , to talk with him , to consult with him , to offer him the full cooperation of the white house -- as you will see from these transcripts -- even to the point of retaining john dean on the white house staff for an extra e weeks after he admitted his criminal involvement , because mr. petersen thought that would make it easier for the prosecutor to get his cooperation in breaking the case if it should become necessary to grant mr. dean 's demand for immunity .
on april 15 , when i heard that one of the obstacles to breaking the case was gordon liddy 's refusal to talk , i telephoned mr. petersen and directed that he should make clear not only to mr. liddy but to everyone that -- and now i quote directly from the tape of that telephone call -- " as far as the president is concerned , everybody in this case is to talk and to tell the truth . "
i told him if necessary i would personally meet with mr. liddy 's lawyer to assure him that i wanted liddy to talk and to tell the truth .
from the time mr. petersen took charge , the case was solidly within the criminal justice system , pursued personally by the nation 's top professional prosecutor with the active , personal assistance of the president of the united states .
i made clear there was to be no coverup .
let me quote just a few lines from the transcripts -- you can read them to verify them -- so that you can hear for yourself the orders i was giving in this period .
speaking to haldeman and ehrlichman , i said : " ... it is ridiculous to talk about clemency .
they all knew that . "
speaking to ehrlichman , i said : " we all have to do the fight thing ... we just can not have this kind of a business ... " 
 speaking to haldeman and ehrlichman , i said : " the boil had to be pricked . . .
we have to prick the boil and take the heat .
now that 's what we are doing here . "
speaking to henry petersen , i said : " i want you to be sure to understand that you know we are going to get to the bottom of this thing . "
speaking to john dean , i said : " tell the truth .
that is the thing i have told everybody around here . "
and then speaking to haldeman : " and you tell magruder , ' now jeb , this evidence is coming in , you ought to go to the grand jury .
purge yourself if you 're perjured and tell this whole story . ' "
i am confident that the american people will see these transcripts for what they are , fragmentary records from a time more than a year ago that now seems very distant , the records of a president and of a man suddenly being confronted and having to cope with information which , if true , would have the most far - reaching consequences , not only for his personal reputation but , more important , for his hopes , his plans , his goals for the people who had elected him as their leader .
if read with an open and a fair mind and read together with the record of the actions i took , these transcripts will show that what i have stated from the beginning to be the truth has been the truth : that i personally had no knowledge of the break - in before it occurred , that i had no knowledge of the coverup until i was informed of it by john dean on march 21 , that i never offered clemency for the defendants , and that after march 21 , my actions were directed toward finding the facts and seeing that justice was done , fairly and according to the law .
the facts are there .
the conversations are there .
the record of actions is there .
to anyone who reads his way through this mass of materials i have provided , it will be totally , abundantly clear that as far as the president 's role with regard to watergate is concerned , the entire story is there .
as you will see , now that you also will have this mass of evidence i have provided , i have tried to cooperate with the house judiciary committee .
and i repeat tonight the offer that i have made previously : to answer written interrogatories under oath and , if there are then issues still unresolved , to meet personally with the chairman of the committee and with congressman hutchinson to answer their questions under oath .
as the committee conducts its inquiry , i also consider it only essential and fair that my counsel , mr. st. clair , should be present to cross - examine witnesses and introduce evidence in an effort to establish the truth .
i am confident that for the overwhelming majority of those who study the evidence that i shall release tomorrow -- those who are willing to look at it fully , fairly , and objectively -- the evidence will be persuasive and , i hope , conclusive .
we live in a time of very great challenge and great opportunity for america .
we live at a time when peace may become possible in the middle east for the first time in a generation .
we are at last in the process of fulfilling the hope of mankind for a limitation on nuclear arms -- a process that will continue when i meet with the soviet leaders in moscow in a few weeks .
we are well on the way toward building a peace that can last , not just for this but for other generations as well .
and here at home , there is vital work to be done in moving to control inflation , to develop our energy resources , to strengthen our economy so that americans can enjoy what they have not had since 1956 : full prosperity without war and without inflation .
every day absorbed by watergate is a day lost from the work that must be done by your president and by your congress work that must be done in dealing with the great problems that affect your prosperity , affect your security , that could affect your lives .
the materials i make public tomorrow will provide all the additional evidence needed to get watergate behind us and to get it behind us now .
never before in the history of the presidency have records that are so private been made so public .
in giving you these records -- blemishes and all -- i am placing my trust in the basic fairness of the american people .
i know in my own heart that through the long , painful , and difficult process revealed in these transcripts , i was trying in that period to discover what was right and to do what was right .
i hope and i trust that when you have seen the evidence in its entirety , you will see the truth of that statement .
as for myself , i intend to go forward , to the best of my ability , with the work that you elected me to do .
i shall do so in a spirit perhaps best summed up a century ago by another president when he was being subjected to unmerciful attack .
abraham lincoln said : 
 " i do the very best i know how -- the very best i can ; and i mean to keep doing so until the end .
if the end brings me out all right , what is said against me wo n't amount to anything .
if the end brings me out wrong , ten angels swearing i was right would make no difference . "
thank you and good evening .

mr. speaker , mr. president , my colleagues in the congress , our distinguished guests and my fellow americans : to address a joint session of the congress in this great chamber in which i was once privileged to serve is an honor for which i am deeply grateful .
the state of the union address is traditionally an occasion for a lengthy and detailed account by the president of what he has accomplished in the past , what he wants the congress to do in the future , and , in an election year , to lay the basis for the political issues which might be decisive in the fall .
occasionally there comes a time when profound and far - reaching events command a break with tradition .
this is such a time .
i say this not only because 1970 marks the beginning of a new decade in which america will celebrate its 200th birthday .
i say it because new knowledge and hard experience argue persuasively that both our programs and our institutions in america need to be reformed .
the moment has arrived to harness the vast energies and abundance of this land to the creation of a new american experience , an experience richer and deeper and more truly a reflection of the goodness and grace of the human spirit .
the ' 70s will be a time of new beginnings , a time of exploring both on the earth and in the heavens , a time of discovery .
but the time has also come for emphasis on developing better ways of managing what we have and of completing what man 's genius has begun but left unfinished .
our land , this land that is ours together , is a great and a good land .
it is also an unfinished land , and the challenge of perfecting it is the summons of the ' 70s .
it is in that spirit that i address myself to those great issues facing our nation which are above partisanship .
when we speak of america 's priorities the first priority must always be peace for america and the world .
the major immediate goal of our foreign policy is to bring an end to the war in vietnam in a way that our generation will be remembered not so much as the generation that suffered in war , but more for the fact that we had the courage and character to win the kind of a just peace that the next generation was able to keep .
we are making progress toward that goal .
the prospects for peace are far greater today than they were a year ago .
a major part of the credit for this development goes to the members of this congress who , despite their differences on the conduct of the war , have overwhelmingly indicated their support of a just peace .
by this action , you have completely demolished the enemy 's hopes that they can gain in washington the victory our fighting men have denied them in vietnam .
no goal could be greater than to make the next generation the first in this century in which america was at peace with every nation in the world .
i shall discuss in detail the new concepts and programs designed to achieve this goal in a separate report on foreign policy , which i shall submit to the congress at a later date .
today , let me describe the directions of our new policies .
we have based our policies on an evaluation of the world as it is , not as it was 25 years ago at the conclusion of world war ii .
many of the policies which were necessary and fight then are obsolete today .
then , because of america 's overwhelming military and economic strength , because of the weakness of other major free world powers and the inability of scores of newly independent nations to defend , or even govern , themselves , america had to assume the major burden for the defense of freedom in the world .
in two wars , first in korea and now in vietnam , we furnished most of the money , most of the arms , most of the men to help other nations defend their freedom .
today the great industrial nations of europe , as well as japan , have regained their economic strength ; and the nations of latin america -- and many of the nations who acquired their freedom from colonialism after world war ii in asia and africa -- have a new sense of pride and dignity and a determination to assume the responsibility for their own defense .
that is the basis of the doctrine i announced at guam .
neither the defense nor the development of other nations can be exclusively or primarily an american undertaking .
the nations of each part of the world should assume the primary responsibility for their own well - being ; and they themselves should determine the terms of that well - being .
we shall be faithful to our treaty commitments , but we shall reduce our involvement and our presence in other nations ' affairs .
to insist that other nations play a role is not a retreat from responsibility ; it is a sharing of responsibility .
the result of this new policy has been not to weaken our alliances , but to give them new life , new strength , a new sense of common purpose .
relations with our european allies are once again strong and healthy , based on mutual consultation and mutual responsibility .
we have initiated a new approach to latin america in which we deal with those nations as partners rather than patrons .
the new partnership concept has been welcomed in asia .
we have developed an historic new basis for japanese - american friendship and cooperation , which is the linchpin for peace in the pacific .
if we are to have peace in the last third of the century , a major factor will be the development of a new relationship between the united states and the soviet union .
i would not underestimate our differences , but we are moving with precision and purpose from an era of confrontation to an era of negotiation .
our negotiations on strategic arms limitations and in other areas will have far greater chance for success if both sides enter them motivated by mutual self - interest rather than naive sentimentality .
it is with this same spirit that we have resumed discussions with communist china in our talks at warsaw .
our concern in our relations with both these nations is to avoid a catastrophic collision and to build a solid basis for peaceful settlement of our differences .
i would be the last to suggest that the road to peace is not difficult and dangerous , but i believe our new policies have contributed to the prospect that america may have the best chance since world war ii to enjoy a generation of uninterrupted peace .
and that chance will be enormously increased if we continue to have a relationship between congress and the executive in which , despite differences in detail , where the security of america and the peace of mankind are concerned , we act not as republicans , not as democrats , but as americans .
as we move into the decade of the ' 70s , we have the greatest opportunity for progress at home of any people in world history .
our gross national product will increase by $ 500 billion in the next 10 years .
this increase alone is greater than the entire growth of the american economy from 1790 to 1950 .
the critical question is not whether we will grow , but how we will use that growth .
the decade of the ' 60s was also a period of great growth economically .
but in that same 10-year period we witnessed the greatest growth of crime , the greatest increase in inflation , the greatest social unrest in america in 100 years .
never has a nation seemed to have had more and enjoyed it less .
at heart , the issue is the effectiveness of government .
ours has become -- as it continues to be , and should remain -- a society of large expectations .
government helped to generate these expectations .
it undertook to meet them .
yet , increasingly , it proved unable to do so .
as a people , we had too many visions -- and too little vision .
now , as we enter the ' 70s , we should enter also a great age of reform of the institutions of american government .
our purpose in this period should not be simply better management of the programs of the past .
the time has come for a new quest -- a quest not for a greater quantity of what we have , but for a new quality of life in america .
a major part of the substance for an unprecedented advance in this nation 's approach to its problems and opportunities is contained in more than two score legislative proposals which i sent to the congress last year and which still await enactment .
i will offer at least a dozen more major programs in the course of this session .
at this point i do not intend to through a detailed listing of what i have proposed or will propose , but i would like to mention three areas in which urgent priorities demand that we move and move now : first , we can not delay longer in accomplishing a total reform of our welfare system .
when a system penalizes work , breaks up homes , robs recipients of dignity , there is no alternative to abolishing that system and adopting in its place the program of income support , job training , and work incentives which i recommended to the congress last year .
second , the time has come to assess and reform all of our institutions of government at the federal , state , and local level .
it is time for a new federalism , in which , after 190 years of power flowing from the people and local and state governments to washington , d. c. , it will begin to flow from washington back to the states and to the people of the united states .
third , we must adopt reforms which will expand the range of opportunities for all americans .
we can fulfill the american dream only when each person has a fair chance to fulfill his own dreams .
this means equal voting rights , equal employment opportunity , and new opportunities for expanded ownership .
because in order to be secure in their human rights , people need access to property rights .
i could give similar examples of the need for reform in our programs for health , education , housing , transportation , as well as other critical areas which directly affect the well - being of millions of americans .
the people of the united states should wait no longer for these reforms that would so deeply enhance the quality of their life .
when i speak of actions which would be beneficial to the american people , i can think of none more important than for the congress to join this administration in the battle to stop the rise in the cost of living .
now , i realize it is tempting to blame someone else for inflation .
some blame business for raising prices .
some blame unions for asking for more wages .
but a review of the stark fiscal facts of the 1960s clearly demonstrates where the primary blame for rising prices must be placed .
in the decade of the ' 60s the federal government spent $ 57 billion more than it took in in taxes .
in that same decade the american people paid the bill for that deficit in price increases which raised the cost of living for the average family of four by $ 200 per month in america .
now millions of americans are forced to go into debt today because the federal government decided to go into debt yesterday .
we must balance our federal budget so that american families will have a better chance to balance their family budgets .
only with the cooperation of the congress can we meet this highest priority objective of responsible government .
we are on the right track .
we had a balanced budget in 1969 .
this administration cut more than $ 7 billion out of spending plans in order to produce a surplus in 1970 , and in spite of the fact that congress reduced revenues by $ 3 billion , i shall recommend a balanced budget for 1971 .
but i can assure you that not only to present , but to stay within , a balanced budget requires some very hard decisions .
it means rejecting spending programs which would benefit some of the people when their net effect would result in price increases for all the people .
it is time to quit putting good money into bad programs .
otherwise , we will end up with bad money and bad programs .
i recognize the political popularity of spending programs , and particularly in an election year .
but unless we stop the rise in prices , the cost of living for millions of american families will become unbearable and government 's ability to plan programs for progress for the future will become impossible .
in referring to budget cuts , there is one area where i have ordered an increase rather than a cut -- and that is the requests of those agencies with the responsibilities for law enforcement .
we have heard a great deal of overblown rhetoric during the ' 60s in which the word " war " has perhaps too often been used -- the war on poverty , the war on misery , the war on disease , the war on hunger .
but if there is one area where the word " war " is appropriate it is in the fight against crime .
we must declare and win the war against the criminal elements which increasingly threaten our cities , our homes , and our lives .
we have a tragic example of this problem in the nation 's capital , for whose safety the congress and the executive have the primary responsibility .
i doubt if many members of this congress who live more than a few blocks from here would dare leave their cars in the capitol garage and walk home alone tonight .
last year this administration sent to the congress 13 separate pieces of legislation dealing with organized crime , pornography , street crime , narcotics , crime in the district of columbia .
none of these bills has reached my desk for signature .
i am confident that the congress will act now to adopt the legislation i placed before you last year .
we in the executive have done everything we can under existing law , but new and stronger weapons are needed in that fight .
while it is true that state and local law enforcement agencies are the cutting edge in the effort to eliminate street crime , burglaries , murder , my proposals to you have embodied my belief that the federal government should play a greater role in working in partnership with these agencies .
that is why 1971 federal spending for local law enforcement will double that budgeted for 1970 .
the primary responsibility for crimes that affect individuals is with local and state rather than with federal government .
but in the field of organized crime , narcotics , pornography , the federal government has a special responsibility it should fulfill .
and we should make washington , d. c. , where we have the primary responsibility , an example to the nation and the world of respect for law rather than lawlessness .
i now turn to a subject which , next to our desire for peace , may well become the major concern of the american people in the decade of the seventies .
in the next 10 years we shall increase our wealth by 50 percent .
the profound question is : does this mean we will be 50 percent richer in a real sense , 50 percent better off , 50 percent happier ?
or does it mean that in the year 1980 the president standing in this place will look back on a decade in which 70 percent of our people lived in metropolitan areas choked by traffic , suffocated by smog , poisoned by water , deafened by noise , and terrorized by crime ?
these are not the great questions that concern world leaders at summit conferences .
but people do not live at the summit .
they live in the foothills of everyday experience , and it is time for all of us to concern ourselves with the way real people live in real life .
the great question of the seventies is , shall we surrender to our surroundings , or shall we make our peace with nature and begin to make reparations for the damage we have done to our air , to our land , and to our water ?
restoring nature to its natural state is a cause beyond party and beyond factions .
it has become a common cause of all the people of this country .
it is a cause of particular concern to young americans , because they more than we will reap the grim consequences of our failure to act on programs which are needed now if we are to prevent disaster later .
clean air , clean water , open spaces -- these should once again be the birthright of every american .
if we act now , they can be .
we still think of air as free .
but clean air is not free , and neither is clean water .
the price tag on pollution control is high .
through our years of past carelessness we incurred a debt to nature , and now that debt is being called .
the program i shall propose to congress will be the most comprehensive and costly program in this field in america 's history .
it is not a program for just one year .
a year 's plan in this field is no plan at all .
this is a time to look ahead not a year , but five years or 10 years -- whatever time is required to do the job .
i shall propose to this congress a $ 10 billion nationwide clean waters program to put modern municipal waste treatment plants in every place in america where they are needed to make our waters clean again , and do it now .
we have the industrial capacity , if we begin now , to build them all within five years .
this program will get them built within five years .
as our cities and suburbs relentlessly expand , those priceless open spaces needed for recreation areas accessible to their people are swallowed up -- often forever .
unless we preserve these spaces while they are still available , we will have none to preserve .
therefore , i shall propose new financing methods for purchasing open space and parklands now , before they are lost to us .
the automobile is our worst polluter of the air .
adequate control requires further advances in engine design and fuel composition .
we shall intensify our research , set increasingly strict standards , and strengthen enforcement procedures -- and we shall do it now .
we can no longer afford to consider air and water common property , free to be abused by anyone without regard to the consequences .
instead , we should begin now to treat them as scarce resources , which we are no more free to contaminate than we are free to throw garbage into our neighbor 's yard .
this requires comprehensive new regulations .
it also requires that , to the extent possible , the price of goods should be made to include the costs of producing and disposing of them without damage to the environment .
now , i realize that the argument is often made that there is a fundamental contradiction between economic growth and the quality of life , so that to have one we must forsake the other .
the answer is not to abandon growth , but to redirect it .
for example , we should turn toward ending congestion and eliminating smog the same reservoir of inventive genius that created them in the first place .
continued vigorous economic growth provides us with the means to enrich life itself and to enhance our planet as a place hospitable to man .
each individual must enlist in this fight if it is to be won .
it has been said that no matter how many national parks and historical monuments we buy and develop , the truly significant environment for each of us is that in which we spend 80 percent of our time -- in our homes , in our places of work , the streets over which we travel .
street litter , rundown parking strips and yards , dilapidated fences , broken windows , smoking automobiles , dingy working places , all should be the object of our fresh view .
we have been too tolerant of our surroundings and too willing to leave it to others to clean up our environment .
it is time for those who make massive demands on society to make some minimal demands on themselves .
each of us must resolve that each day he will leave his home , his property , the public places of the city or town a little cleaner , a little better , a little more pleasant for himself and those around him .
with the help of people we can do anything , and without their help , we can do nothing .
in this spirit , together , we can reclaim our land for ours and generations to come .
between now and the year 5000 , over 100 million children will be born in the united states .
where they grow up -- and how will , more than any one thing , measure the quality of american life in these years ahead .
this should be a warning to us .
for the past 30 years our population has also been growing and shifting .
the result is exemplified in the vast areas of rural america emptying out of people and of promise -- a third of our counties lost population in the ' 60s .
the violent and decayed central cities of our great metropolitan complexes are the most conspicuous area of failure in american life today .
i propose that before these problems become insoluble , the nation develop a national growth policy .
in the future , government decisions as to where to build highways , locate airports , acquire land , or sell land should be made with a clear objective of aiding a balanced growth for america .
in particular , the federal government must be in a position to assist in the building of new cities and the rebuilding of old ones .
at the same time , we will carry our concern with the quality of life in america to the farm as well as the suburb , to the village as well as to the city .
what rural america needs most is a new kind of assistance .
it needs to be dealt with , not as a separate nation , but as part of an overall growth policy for america .
we must create a new rural environment which will not only stem the migration to urban centers , but reverse it .
if we seize our growth as a challenge , we can make the 1970s an historic period when by conscious choice we transformed our land into what we want it to become .
america , which has pioneered in the new abundance , and in the new technology , is called upon today to pioneer in meeting the concerns which have followed in their wake -- in turning the wonders of science to the service of man .
in the majesty of this great chamber we hear the echoes of america 's history , of debates that rocked the union and those that repaired it , of the summons to war and the search for peace , of the uniting of the people , the building of a nation .
those echoes of history remind us of our roots and our strengths .
they remind us also of that special genius of american democracy , which at one critical turning point after another has led us to spot the new road to the future and given us the wisdom and the courage to take it .
as i look down that new road which i have tried to map out today , i see a new america as we celebrate our 200th anniversary six years from now .
i see an america in which we have abolished hunger , provided the means for every family in the nation to obtain a minimum income , made enormous progress in providing better housing , faster transportation , improved health , and superior education .
i see an america in which we have checked inflation , and waged a winning war against crime .
i see an america in which we have made great strides in stopping the pollution of our air , cleaning up our water , opening up our parks , continuing to explore in space .
most important , i see an america at peace with all the nations of the world .
this is not an impossible dream .
these goals are all within our reach .
in times past , our forefathers had the vision but not the means to achieve such goals .
let it not be recorded that we were the first american generation that had the means but not the vision to make this dream come true .
but let us , above all , recognize a fundamental truth .
we can be the best clothed , best fed , best housed people in the world , enjoying clean air , clean water , beautiful parks , but we could still be the unhappiest people in the world without an indefinable spirit -- the lift of a driving dream which has made america , from its beginning , the hope of the world .
two hundred years ago this was a new nation of three million people , weak militarily , poor economically .
but america meant something to the world then which could not be measured in dollars , something far more important than military might .
listen to president thomas jefferson in 1802 : we act not " for ourselves alone , but for the whole human race . "
we had a spiritual quality then which caught the imagination of millions of people in the world .
today , when we are the richest and strongest nation in the world , let it not be recorded that we lack the moral and spiritual idealism which made us the hope of the world at the time of our birth .
the demands of us in 1976 are even greater than in 1776 .
it is no longer enough to live and let live .
now we must live and help live .
we need a fresh climate in america , one in which a person can breathe freely and breathe in freedom .
our recognition of the truth that wealth and happiness are not the same thing requires us to measure success or failure by new criteria .
even more than the programs i have described today , what this nation needs is an example from its elected leaders in providing the spiritual and moral leadership which no programs for material progress can satisfy .
above all , let us inspire young americans with a sense of excitement , a sense of destiny , a sense of involvement , in meeting the challenges we face in this great period of our history .
only then are they going to have any sense of satisfaction in their lives .
the greatest privilege an individual can have is to serve in a cause bigger than himself .
we have such a cause .
how we seize the opportunities i have described today will determine not only our future , but the future of peace and freedom in this world in the last third of the century .
may god give us the wisdom , the strength and , above all , the idealism to be worthy of that challenge , so that america can fulfill its destiny of being the world 's best hope for liberty , for opportunity , for progress and peace for all peoples .

good evening : 
 i want to talk to you tonight from my heart on a subject of deep concern to every american .
in recent months , members of my administration and officials of the committee for the re - election of the president -- including some of my closest friends and most trusted aides -- have been charged with involvement in what has come to be known as the watergate affair .
these include charges of illegal activity during and preceding the 1972 presidential election and charges that responsible officials participated in efforts to cover up that illegal activity .
the inevitable result of these charges has been to raise serious questions about the integrity of the white house itself .
tonight i wish to address those questions .
last june 17 , while i was in florida trying to get a few days rest after my visit to moscow , i first learned from news reports of the watergate break - in .
i was appalled at this senseless , illegal action , and i was shocked to learn that employees of the re - election committee were apparently among those guilty .
i immediately ordered an investigation by appropriate government authorities .
on september 15 , as you will recall , indictments were brought against seven defendants in the case .
as the investigations went forward , i repeatedly asked those conducting the investigation whether there was any reason to believe that members of my administration were in any way involved .
i received repeated assurances that there were not .
because of these continuing reassurances , because i believed the reports i was getting , because i had faith in the persons from whom i was getting them , i discounted the stories in the press that appeared to implicate members of my administration or other officials of the campaign committee .
until march of this year , i remained convinced that the denials were true and that the charges of involvement by members of the white house staff were false .
the comments i made during this period , and the comments made by my press secretary in my behalf , were based on the information provided to us at the time we made those comments .
however , new information then came to me which persuaded me that there was a real possibility that some of these charges were true , and suggesting further that there had been an effort to conceal the facts both from the public , from you , and from me .
as a result , on march 21 , i personally assumed the responsibility for coordinating intensive new inquiries into the matter , and i personally ordered those conducting the investigations to get all the facts and to report them directly to me , right here in this office .
i again ordered that all persons in the government or at the re - election committee should cooperate fully with the fbi , the prosecutors , and the grand jury .
i also ordered that anyone who refused to cooperate in telling the truth would be asked to resign from government service .
and , with ground rules adopted that would preserve the basic constitutional separation of powers between the congress and the presidency , i directed that members of the white house staff should appear and testify voluntarily under oath before the senate committee which was investigating watergate .
i was determined that we should get to the bottom of the matter , and that the truth should be fully brought out -- no matter who was involved .
at the same time , i was determined not to take precipitate action and to avoid , if at all possible , any action that would appear to reflect on innocent people .
i wanted to be fair .
but i knew that in the final analysis , the integrity of this office -- public faith in the integrity of this office -- would have to take priority over all personal considerations .
today , in one of the most difficult decisions of my presidency , i accepted the resignations of two of my closest associates in the white house -- bob haldeman , john ehrlichman -- two of the finest public servants it has been my privilege to know .
i want to stress that in accepting these resignations , i mean to leave no implication whatever of personal wrongdoing on their part , and i leave no implication tonight of implication on the part of others who have been charged in this matter .
but in matters as sensitive as guarding the integrity of our democratic process , it is essential not only that rigorous legal and ethical standards be observed but also that the public , you , have total confidence that they are both being observed and enforced by those in authority and particularly by the president of the united states .
they agreed with me that this move was necessary in order to restore that confidence .
because attorney general kleindienst -- though a distinguished public servant , my personal friend for 20 years , with no personal involvement whatever in this matter -- has been a close personal and professional associate of some of those who are involved in this case , he and i both felt that it was also necessary to name a new attorney general .
the counsel to the president , john dean , has also resigned .
as the new attorney general , i have today named elliot richardson , a man of unimpeachable integrity and rigorously high principle .
i have directed him to do everything necessary to ensure that the department of justice has the confidence and the trust of every law - abiding person in this country .
i have given him absolute authority to make all decisions bearing upon the prosecution of the watergate case and related matters .
i have instructed him that if he should consider it appropriate , he has the authority to name a special supervising prosecutor for matters arising out of the case .
whatever may appear to have been the case before , whatever improper activities may yet be discovered in connection with this whole sordid affair , i want the american people , i want you to know beyond the shadow of a doubt that during my term as president , justice will be pursued fairly , fully , and impartially , no matter who is involved .
this office is a sacred trust and i am determined to be worthy of that trust .
looking back at the history of this case , two questions arise : 
 how could it have happened ?
who is to blame ?
political commentators have correctly observed that during my 27 years in politics i have always previously insisted on running my own campaigns for office .
but 1972 presented a very different situation .
in both domestic and foreign policy , 1972 was a year of crucially important decisions , of intense negotiations , of vital new directions , particularly in working toward the goal which has been my overriding concern throughout my political career -- the goal of bringing peace to america , peace to the world .
that is why i decided , as the 1972 campaign approached , that the presidency should come first and politics second .
to the maximum extent possible , therefore , i sought to delegate campaign operations , to remove the day - to - day campaign decisions from the president 's office and from the white house .
i also , as you recall , severely limited the number of my own campaign appearances .
who , then , is to blame for what happened in this case ?
for specific criminal actions by specific individuals , those who committed those actions must , of course , bear the liability and pay the penalty .
for the fact that alleged improper actions took place within the white house or within my campaign organization , the easiest course would be for me to blame those to whom i delegated the responsibility to run the campaign .
but that would be a cowardly thing to do .
i will not place the blame on subordinates -- on people whose zeal exceeded their judgment and who may have done wrong in a cause they deeply believed to be right .
in any organization , the man at the top must bear the responsibility .
that responsibility , therefore , belongs here , in this office .
i accept it .
and i pledge to you tonight , from this office , that i will do everything in my power to ensure that the guilty are brought to justice and that such abuses are purged from our political processes in the years to come , long after i have left this office .
some people , quite properly appalled at the abuses that occurred , will say that watergate demonstrates the bankruptcy of the american political system .
i believe precisely the opposite is true .
watergate represented a series of illegal acts and bad judgments by a number of individuals .
it was the system that has brought the facts to light and that will bring those guilty to justice -- a system that in this case has included a determined grand jury , honest prosecutors , a courageous judge , john sirica , and a vigorous free press .
it is essential now that we place our faith in that system -- and especially in the judicial system .
it .is essential that we let the judicial process go forward , respecting those safeguards that are established to protect the innocent as well as to convict the guilty .
it is essential that in reacting to the excesses of others , we not fall into excesses ourselves .
it is also essential that we not be so distracted by events such as this that we neglect the vital work before us , before this nation , before america , at a time of critical importance to america and the world .
since march , when i first learned that the watergate affair might in fact be far more serious than i had been led to believe , it has claimed far too much of my time and my attention .
whatever may now transpire in the case , whatever the actions of the grand jury , whatever the outcome of any eventual trials , i must now turn my full attention -- and i shall do so -- once again to the larger duties of this office .
i owe it to this great office that i hold , and i owe it to you -- to my country .
i know that as attorney general , elliot richardson will be both fair and he will be fearless in pursuing this case wherever it leads .
i am confident that with him in charge , justice will be done .
there is vital work to be done toward our goal of a lasting structure of peace in the world -- work that can not wait , work that i must do .
tomorrow , for example , chancellor brandt of west germany will visit the white house for talks that are a vital element of " the year of europe , " as 1973 has been called .
we are already preparing for the next soviet - american summit meeting later this year .
this is also a year in which we are seeking to negotiate a mutual and balanced reduction of armed forces in europe , which will reduce our defense budget and allow us to have funds for other purposes at home so desperately needed .
it is the year when the united states and soviet negotiators will seek to work out the second and even more important round of our talks on limiting nuclear arms and of reducing the danger of a nuclear war that would destroy civilization as we know it .
it is a year in which we confront the difficult tasks of maintaining peace in southeast asia and in the potentially explosive middle east .
there is also vital work to be done right here in america : to ensure prosperity , and that means a good job for everyone who wants to work ; to control inflation , that i know worries every housewife , everyone who tries to balance a family budget in america ; to set in motion new and better ways of ensuring progress toward a better life for all americans .
when i think of this office -- of what it means -- i think of all the things that i want to accomplish for this nation , of all the things i want to accomplish for you .
on christmas eve , during my terrible personal ordeal of the renewed bombing of north vietnam , which after 12 years of war finally helped to bring america peace with honor , i sat down just before midnight .
i wrote out some of my goals for my second term as president .
let me read them to you .
" to make it possible for our children , and for our children 's children , to live in a world of peace .
" to make this country be more than ever a land of opportunity -- of equal opportunity , full opportunity for every american .
" to provide jobs for all who can work , and generous help for those who can not work .
" to establish a climate of decency and civility , in which each person respects the feelings and the dignity and the godgiven rights of his neighbor .
" to make this a land in which each person can dare to dream , can live his dreams -- not in fear , but in hope -- proud of his community , proud of his country , proud of what america has meant to himself and to the world . "
these are great goals .
i believe we can , we must work for them .
we can achieve them .
but we can not achieve these goals unless we dedicate ourselves to another goal .
we must maintain the integrity of the white house , and that integrity must be real , not transparent .
there can be no whitewash at the white house .
we must reform our political process -- ridding it not only of the violations of the law but also of the ugly mob violence and other inexcusable campaign tactics that have been too often practiced and too readily accepted in the past , including those that may have been a response by one side to the excesses or expected excesses of the other side .
two wrongs do not make a right .
i have been in public life for more than a quarter of a century .
like any other calling , politics has good people and bad people .
and let me tell you , the great majority in politics in the congress , in the federal government , in the state government -- are good people .
i know that it can be very easy , under the intensive pressures of a campaign , for even well - intentioned people to fall into shady tactics -- to rationalize this on the grounds that what is at stake is of such importance to the nation that the end justifies the means .
and both of our great parties have been guilty of such tactics in the past .. 
 in recent years , however , the campaign excesses that have occurred on all sides have provided a sobering demonstration of how far this false doctrine can take us .
the lesson is clear : america , in its political campaigns , must not again fall into the trap of letting the end , however great that end is , justify the means .
i urge the leaders of both political parties , i urge citizens , all of you , everywhere , to join in working toward a new set of standards , new rules and procedures to ensure that future elections will be as nearly free of such abuses as they possibly can be made .
this is my goal .
i ask you to join in making it america 's goal .
when i was inaugurated for a second time this past january 20 , i gave each member of my cabinet and each member of my senior white house staff a special 4-year calendar , with each day marked to show the number of days remaining to the administration .
in the inscription on each calendar , i wrote these words : " the presidential term which begins today consists of 1,461 days -- no more , no less .
each can be a day of strengthening and renewal for america ; each can add depth and dimension to the american experience .
if we strive together , if we make the most of the challenge and the opportunity that these days offer us , they can stand out as great days for america , and great moments in the history of the world . "
i looked at my own calendar this morning up at camp david as i was working on this speech .
it showed exactly 1,361 days remaining in my term .
i want these to be the best days in america 's history , because i love america .
i deeply believe that america is the hope of the world .
and i know that in the quality and wisdom of the leadership america gives lies the only hope for millions of people all over the world that they can live their lives in peace and freedom .
we must be worthy of that hope , in every sense of the word .
tonight , i ask for your prayers to help me in everything that i do throughout the days of my presidency to be worthy of their hopes and of yours .
god bless america and god bless each and every one of you .

good evening : 
 this is the 37th time i have spoken to you from this office , where so many decisions have been made that shaped the history of this nation .
each time i have done so to discuss with you some matter that i believe affected the national interest .
in all the decisions i have made in my public life , i have always tried to do what was best for the nation .
throughout the long and difficult period of watergate , i have felt it was my duty to persevere , to make every possible effort to complete the term of office to which you elected me .
in the past few days , however , it has become evident to me that i no longer have a strong enough political base in the congress to justify continuing that effort .
as long as there was such a base , i felt strongly that it was necessary to see the constitutional process through to its conclusion , that to do otherwise would be unfaithful to the spirit of that deliberately difficult process and a dangerously destabilizing precedent for the future .
but with the disappearance of that base , i now believe that the constitutional purpose has been served , and there is no longer a need for the process to be prolonged .
i would have preferred to carry through to the finish , whatever the personal agony it would have involved , and my family unanimously urged me to do so .
but the interests of the nation must always come before any personal considerations .
from the discussions i have had with congressional and other leaders , i have concluded that because of the watergate matter , i might not have the support of the congress that i would consider necessary to back the very difficult decisions and carry out the duties of this office in the way the interests of the nation will require .
i have never been a quitter .
to leave office before my term is completed is abhorrent to every instinct in my body .
but as president , i must put the interests of america first .
america needs a full - time president and a full - time congress , particularly at this time with problems we face at home and abroad .
to continue to fight through the months ahead for my personal vindication would almost totally absorb the time and attention of both the president and the congress in a period when our entire focus should be on the great issues of peace abroad and prosperity without inflation at home .
therefore , i shall resign the presidency effective at noon tomorrow .
vice president ford will be sworn in as president at that hour in this office .
as i recall the high hopes for america with which we began this second term , i feel a great sadness that i will not be here in this office working on your behalf to achieve those hopes in the next 2 1/2 years .
but in turning over direction of the government to vice president ford , i know , as i told the nation when i nominated him for that office 10 months ago , that the leadership of america will be in good hands .
in passing this office to the vice president , i also do so with the profound sense of the weight of responsibility that will fall on his shoulders tomorrow and , therefore , of the understanding , the patience , the cooperation he will need from all americans .
as he assumes that responsibility , he will deserve the help and the support of all of us .
as we look to the future , the first essential is to begin healing the wounds of this nation , to put the bitterness and divisions of the recent past behind us and to rediscover those shared ideals that lie at the heart of our strength and unity as a great and as a free people .
by taking this action , i hope that i will have hastened the start of that process of healing which is so desperately needed in america .
i regret deeply any injuries that may have been done in the course of the events that led to this decision .
i would say only that if some of my judgments were wrong -- and some were wrong -- they were made in what i believed at the time to be the best interest of the nation .
to those who have stood with me during these past difficult months -- to my family , my friends , to many others who joined in supporting my cause because they believed it was right -- i will be eternally grateful for your support .
and to those who have not felt able to give me your support , let me say i leave with no bitterness toward those who have opposed me , because all of us , in the final analysis , have been concerned with the good of the country , however our judgments might differ .
so , let us all now join together in affirming that common commitment and in helping our new president succeed for the benefit of all americans .
i shall leave this office with regret at not completing my term , but with gratitude for the privilege of serving as your president for the past 5 1/2 years .
these years have been a momentous time in the history of our nation and the world .
they have been a time of achievement in which we can all be proud , achievements that represent the shared efforts of the administration , the congress , and the people .
but the challenges ahead are equally great , ' and they , too , will require the support and the efforts of the congress and the people working in cooperation with the new administration .
we have ended america 's longest war , but in the work of securing a lasting peace in the world , the goals ahead are even more far - reaching and more difficult .
we must ' complete a structure of peace so that it will be said of this generation , our generation of americans , by the people of all nations , not only that we ended one war but that we prevented future wars .
we have unlocked the doors that for a quarter of a century stood between the united states and the people 's republic of china .
we must now ensure that the one quarter of the world 's people who live in the people 's republic of china will be and remain not our enemies , but our friends .
in the middle east , 100 million people in the arab countries , many of whom have considered us their enemy for nearly 20 years , now look on us as their friends .
we must continue to build on that friendship so that peace can settle at last over the middle east and so that the cradle of civilization will not become its grave .
together with the soviet union , we have made the crucial breakthroughs that have begun the process of limiting nuclear arms .
but we must set as our goal not just limiting but reducing and , finally , destroying these terrible weapons so that they can not destroy civilization and so that ' the threat of nuclear war will no longer hang over the world and the people .
we have opened the new relation with the soviet union .
we must continue to develop and expand that new relationship so that the two strongest nations of the world will live together in cooperation , rather than confrontation .
around the world in asia , in africa , in latin america , in the middle east - there are millions of people who live in terrible poverty , even starvation .
we must keep as our goal turning away from production for war and expanding production for peace so that people everywhere on this earth can at last look forward in their children 's time , if not in our own time , to having the necessities for a decent life .
here in america , we are fortunate that most of our people have not only the blessings of liberty but also the means to live full and good and , by the world 's standards , even abundant lives .
we must press on , however , toward a goal , not only of more and better jobs but of full opportunity for every american and of what we are striving so hard right now to achieve , prosperity without inflation .
for more than a quarter of a century in public life , i have shared in the turbulent history of this era .
i have fought for what i believed in .
i have tried , to the best of my ability , to discharge those duties and meet those responsibilities that were entrusted to me .
sometimes i have succeeded and sometimes i have failed , but always i have taken heart from what theodore roosevelt once said about the man in the arena , " whose face is marred by dust and sweat and blood , who strives valiantly , who errs and comes short again and again because there is not effort without error and shortcoming , but who does actually strive to do the deed , who knows the great enthusiasms , the great devotions , who spends himself in a worthy cause , who at the best knows in the end the triumphs of high achievements and who at the worst , if he fails , at least fails while daring greatly . "
i pledge to you tonight that as long as i have a breath of life in my body , i shall continue in that spirit .
i shall continue to work for the great causes to which i have been dedicated throughout my years as a congressman , a senator , vice president , and president , the cause of peace , not just for america but among all nations - prosperity , justice , and opportunity for all of our people .
there is one cause above all to which i have been devoted and to which i shall always be devoted for as long as i live .
when i first took the oath of office as president 5 1/2 years ago , i made this sacred commitment : to " consecrate my office , my energies , and all the wisdom i can summon to the cause of peace among nations . "
i have done my very best in all the days since to be true to that pledge .
as a result of these efforts , i am confident that the world is a safer place today , not only for the people of america but for the people of all nations , and that all of our children have a better chance than before of living in peace rather than dying in war .
this , more than anything , is what i hoped to achieve when i sought the presidency .
this , more than anything , is what i hope will be my legacy to you , to our country , as i leave the presidency .
to have served in this office is to have felt a very personal sense of kinship with each and every american .
in leaving it , i do so with this prayer : may god 's grace be with you in all the days ahead .

good morning , my fellow americans : 
 over the past ten years , presidents of the united states have come before the american people in times of crisis to talk about war or the threat of war .
today i am able to talk to you in a more hopeful and positive vein -- about how we are moving this nation and the world toward a lasting peace .
we have brought ourselves to a time of transition , from war toward peace , and this is a good time to gain some perspective on where we are and where we are headed .
today i am sending to the congress my second annual comprehensive report on the conduct of our foreign affairs .
it discusses not only what we have done but why we have done it , and how we intend to proceed in the future .
i do not intend to summarize all that is in my detailed report on foreign policy at this time .
instead , i would like to focus on three key points : 
  -- how we are getting out of the war this nation has been in for the past six years ; 
  -- how we have created a new and different foreign policy approach for the united states in a greatly changed world ; and 
  -- how we are applying that approach in working with others to build a lasting peace .
the most immediate and anguishing problem that faced this administration two years ago was the war in vietnam .
we have come a long way since then .
two years ago , when this administration took office , there were almost 550,000 americans in vietnam .
within 60 days we will have brought home 260,000 men , and this spring i will announce a new schedule of withdrawals .
two years ago , our casualties each month were five times as high as they are today .
two years ago , the additional demands of the vietnam war cost us approximately $ 22 billion per year .
that cost has been cut in half .
much of the progress in vietnam was due to the success of the allied operations against the enemy sanctuaries in cambodia last spring .
the clear proof is in this figure : american casualties after cambodia have been half the rate they were before cambodia .
our decision to clean out the sanctuaries in cambodia saved thousands of american lives .
and it enabled us to continue withdrawing our men on schedule .
just as last year 's cutoff of supplies through cambodia has saved lives and insured our withdrawal program this year , the purpose of this year 's disruption of the ho chi minh trail in laos is to save lives and insure the success of our withdrawal program next year .
the disruption of the communist supply line through laos is being accomplished by south vietnamese troops , with no u. s. ground troops or advisers .
their army is doing the fighting , with our air support , and the intensity of the fighting is evidence of the importance of that supply line to the enemy .
consider this combination of events that many people thought was impossible only two years ago : 
 we have kept our commitments as we have taken out our troops .
south vietnam now has an excellent opportunity not only to survive but to build a strong , free society .
thanks to the disruption of so much of the enemy 's supplies , americans are leaving south vietnam in safety ; we would much prefer to leave south vietnam in peace .
negotiation remains the best and quickest way to end the war in a way that will not only end u. s. involvement and casualties but will mean an end to the fighting between north and south vietnamese .
on october 7 , we made a proposal that could open the door to that kind of peace .
we proposed : 
  -- an immediate standstill cease - fire throughout indochina to stop the fighting , 
  -- an indochina peace conference , 
  -- the withdrawal of all outside forces , 
  -- a political settlement fair to both sides , 
  -- the immediate release of all prisoners of war .
i reaffirm that proposal today .
it is supported by every government in indochina except one -- the government of north vietnam .
i once again urge hanoi to join us in this search for peace .
if north vietnam wishes to negotiate with the united states , they will have to recognize that time is running out .
with the exception of the prisoners - of - war issue , if north vietnam continues to refuse to discuss our peace proposals , they will soon find they have no choice but to negotiate only with the south vietnamese .
our eventual goal is a total withdrawal of all outside forces .
but as long as north vietnam continues to hold a single american prisoner , we shall have forces in south vietnam .
the american prisoners of war will not be forgotten by their government .
i am keeping my pledge to end america 's involvement in this war .
but the main point i want to discuss with you today -- and the main theme of my report to the congress -- is the future , not the past .
it matters very much how we end this war .
to end a war is simple .
but to end a war in a way that will not bring on another war is far from simple .
in southeast asia today , aggression is failing -- thanks to the determination of the south vietnamese people and to the courage and sacrifice of america 's fighting men .
that brings us to a point that we have been at several times before in this century : aggression trained back , a war ending .
we are at a critical moment in history : what america does -- or fails to do -- will determine whether peace and freedom can be won in the coming generation .
that is why the way in which we end this conflict is so crucial to our efforts to build a lasting peace in coming decades .
the right way out of vietnam is crucial to our changing role in the world and to peace in the world .
to understand the nature of the new american role we must consider the great historical changes that have taken place .
for 25 years after world war ii , the united states was not only the leader of the non - communist world , it was the primary supporter and defender of this free world as well .
-- but today our allies and friends have gained new strength and self - confidence .
they are now able to participate much more fully not only in their own defense but in adding their moral and spiritual strength to the creation of a stable world order .
-- today our adversaries no longer present a solidly united front ; we can now differentiate in our dealings with them .
-- today neither the united states nor the soviet union has a clear - cut nuclear advantage ; the time is therefore ripe to come to an agreement on the control of arms .
the world has changed .
our foreign policy must change with it .
we have learned in recent years the dangers of over - involvement .
the other danger -- a grave risk we are equally determined to avoid -- is under - involvement .
after a long and unpopular war , there is temptation to turn inward -- to withdraw from the world , to back away from our commitments .
that deceptively smooth road of the new isolationism is surely the road to war .
our foreign policy today steers a steady course between the past danger of over involvement and the new temptation of under - involvement .
that policy , which i first enunciated in guam 19 months ago represents our basic approach to the world : 
 we will maintain our commitments , but we will make sure our own troop levels or any financial support to other nations is appropriate to current threats and needs .
we shall provide a shield if a nuclear power threatens the freedom of a nation allied with us or of a nation whose survival we consider vital to our security .
but we will look to threatened countries and their neighbors to assume primary responsibility for their own defense , and we will provide support where our interests call for that support and where it can make a difference .
these principles are not limited to security matters .
we shall pursue economic policies at home and abroad that encourage trade wherever possible and that strengthen political ties between nations .
as we actively seek to help other nations expand their economies , we can legitimately expect them to work with us in averting economic problems of our own .
as we continue to send economic aid to developing nations , we will expect countries on the receiving end to mobilize their resources ; we will look to other developed nations to do more in furnishing assistance ; and we will channel our aid increasingly through groups of nations banded together for mutual support .
this new sharing of responsibility requires not less american leadership than in the past , but rather a new , more subtle , form of leadership .
no single nation can build a peace alone ; peace can only be built by the willing hands -- and minds -- of all .
in the modern world , leadership can not be " do - it - yourself " -- the path of leadership is in providing the help , the motive , the inspiration to do it together .
in carrying out what is referred to as the nixon doctrine , we recognize that we can not transfer burdens too swiftly .
we must strike a balance between doing too much and preventing self - reliance , and suddenly doing too little and undermining self - confidence .
we intend to give our friends the time and the means to adjust , materially and psychologically , to a new form of american participation in the world .
how have we applied our new foreign policy during the past year ?
and what is our future agenda as we work with others to build a stable world order ?
in western europe , we have shifted from predominance to partnership with our allies .
our ties with western europe are central to the structure of peace because its nations are rich in tradition and experience , strong economically , vigorous in diplomacy and culture ; they are in a position to take a major part in building a world of peace .
our ties were strengthened on my second trip to europe this summer and reflected in our close consultation on arms control negotiations .
at our suggestion , the nato alliance made a thorough review of its military strategy and posture .
as a result , we have reached new agreement on a strong defense and the need to share the burden more fairly .
in eastern europe , our exchange of state visits with romania and my meeting last fall with marshal tito in yugoslavia are examples of our search for wider reconciliation with the nations that used to be considered behind an iron curtain .
looking ahead in europe : 
  -- we shall cooperate in our political and economic relations across the atlantic as the common market grows .
-- we and our allies will make the improvements necessary to carry out our common defense strategy .
-- together we stand ready to reduce forces in western europe in exchange for mutual reductions in eastern europe .
the problems of africa are great , but so is her potential .
the united states will support her peoples ' efforts to build a continent that provides social justice and economic expansion .
turning to our own hemisphere : in latin america , there was too much tendency in the past to take our closest friends and neighbors for granted .
recently , we have paid new respect to their proud traditions .
our trade , credit , and economic policies have been reexamined and reformed to respond to their concerns and their ideas , as well as to our own interests .
our new latin american policy is designed to help them help themselves ; our new attitude will not only aid their progress but add to their dignity .
great changes are brewing throughout the american hemisphere .
we can have no greater goal than to help provide the means for necessary change to be accomplished in peace and for all change to be in the direction of greater self - reliance .
turning to the far east : a new asia is emerging .
the old enmities of world war ii are dead or dying .
asian states are stronger and are joining together in vigorous regional groupings .
here the doctrine that took shape last year is taking hold today , helping to spur self - reliance and cooperation between states .
in japan , south korea , thailand , and the philippines , we have consolidated bases and reduced american forces .
we have relaxed trade and travel restrictions to underline our readiness for greater contact with communist china .
looking ahead in that area : 
  -- while continuing to help our friends help themselves , we must begin to consider how regional associations can work together with the major powers in the area for a durable peace .
-- we will work to build a strong partnership with japan that will accommodate our mutual interests .
-- we will search for consecutive discussions with communist china while maintaining our defense commitment to taiwan .
when the government of the people 's republic of china is ready to engage in talks , it will find us receptive to agreements that further the legitimate national interests of china and its neighbors .
in asia , we can see tomorrow 's world in microcosm .
an economically powerful democratic free nation , japan , is seeking new markets ; a potentially powerful communist nation , china , will one day seek new outlets and new relations ; a communist competitor , the soviet union , has interests there as well ; and the independent non - communist nations of southeast asia are already working together in regional association .
these great forces are bound to interact in the not too distant future .
in the way they work together and in the way we cooperate with their relationship is the key to permanent peace in that area -- the far east , the scene of such a painful legacy of the recent past , can become an example of peace and stability in the future .
in the middle east , the united states took the initiative to stop the fighting and start the process of peace .
along the suez canal a year ago , there was daily combat on the ground and in the air .
diplomacy was at an impasse .
the danger of local conflict was magnified by growing soviet involvement and the possibility of great powers being drawn into confrontation .
america took the lead in arranging a cease - fire and getting negotiations started .
we are seeing to it that the balance of power , so necessary to discourage a new outbreak of fighting , is not upset .
working behind the scenes , when a crisis arose in jordan , the united states played a key role in seeing that order was restored and an invasion was abandoned .
we recognize that centuries of suspicion and decades of hostility can not be ended overnight .
there are great obstacles in the way of a permanent , peaceful settlement , and painful compromise is required by all concerned .
we are encouraged by the willingness of each of the parties to begin to look to the larger interest of peace and stability throughout the middle east .
there is still the risk of war , but now -- for the first time in years -- the parties are actively calculating the risks of peace .
the policy of the united states will continue to be to promote peace talks -- not to try to impose a peace from the outside , but to support the peace efforts of the parties in the region themselves .
one way to support these efforts is for the united states to discourage any outside power from trying to exploit the situation for its own advantage .
another way for us to help turn a tenuous truce into a permanent settlement is this : the united states is fully prepared to play a responsible and cooperative role in keeping the peace arrived at through negotiation between the parties .
we know what our vital interests are in the middle east .
those interests include friendly and constructive relations with all nations in the area .
other nations know that we are ready to protect those vital interests .
and one good reason why other nations take us at our word in the middle east is because the united states has kept its word in southeast asia .
we now come to a matter that affects every nation : the relations between the world 's two great super powers .
over the past years , in some fields the soviet union and the united states have moved ahead together .
we have taken the first step toward cooperation in outer space .
we have both ratified the treaty limiting the spread of nuclear weapons .
just two weeks ago , we signed a treaty to prohibit nuclear weapons from the seabeds .
these are hopeful signs , but certain other soviet actions are reason for concern .
there is need for much more cooperation in reducing tensions in the middle east and in ending harassment of berlin .
we must also discourage the temptation to raise new challenges in sensitive areas such as the caribbean .
in the long run , the most significant result of negotiations between the super powers in the past year could be in the field of arms control .
the strategic arms limitation talks with the soviet union have produced the most searching examination of the nature of strategic competition ever conducted between our two nations .
each side has had the chance to explain at length the concerns caused by the posture of the other side .
the talks have been conducted in a serious way without the old lapses into propaganda .
if both sides continue in this way , there is reason to hope that specific agreements will be reached to curb the arms race .
taking a first step in limiting the capacity of mankind to destroy itself would mark a turning point in the history of the postwar world ; it would add to the security of both the soviet union and the united states , and it would add to the world 's peace of mind .
in all our relations with the soviets , we shall make the most progress by recognizing that in many cases our national interests are not the same .
it serves no purpose to pretend they are ; our differences are not matters of mood , they are matters of substance .
but in many other cases , our separate national interests can best be pursued by a sober consideration of the world interest .
the united states will deal , as it must , from strength : we will not reduce our defenses below the level i consider essential to our national security .
a strong america is essential to the cause of peace today .
until we have the kind of agreements we can rely on , we shall remain strong .
but america 's power will always be used for building a peace , never for breaking it -- only for defending freedom , never for destroying it .
america 's strength will be , as it must be , second to none ; but the strength that this nation is proudest of is the strength of our determination to create a peaceful world .
we all know how every town or city develops a sense of community when its citizens come together to meet a common need .
the common needs of the world today , about which there can be no disagreement or conflict of national interest , are plain to see .
we know that we must act as one world in restoring the world 's environment , before pollution of the seas and skies overwhelms every nation .
we know we must stop the flow of narcotics ; we must counter the outbreaks of hijacking and kidnaping ; we must share the great discoveries about the oceans and outer space .
the united states is justly proud of the lead it has taken in working within the united nations , and within the nato alliance , to come to grips with these problems and with these opportunities .
our work here is a beginning , not only in coping with the new challenges of technology and modern life but of developing a worldwide " sense of community " that will ease tension , reduce suspicion , and thereby promote the process of peace .
that process can only flourish in a climate of mutual respect .
we can have that mutual respect with our friends , without dominating them or without letting them down .
we can have that mutual respect with our adversaries , without compromising our principles or weakening our resolve .
and we can have that mutual respect among ourselves , without stifling dissent or losing our capacity for action .
our goal is something americans have not enjoyed in this century : a full generation of peace .
a full generation of peace depends not only on the policy of one party or of one nation or one alliance or one bloc of nations .
peace for the next generation depends on our ability to make certain that each nation has a share in its shaping , and that every nation has a stake in its lasting .
this is the hard way , requiring patience , restraint , understanding , and -- when necessary -- bold , decisive action .
but history has taught us that the old diplomacy of imposing a peace by the fiat of great powers simply does not work .
i believe that the new diplomacy of partnership , of mutual respect , of dealing with strength and determination will work .
i believe that the right degree of american involvement -- not too much and not too little -- will evoke the right response from our other partners on this globe in building for our children the kind of world they deserve : a world of opportunity in a world without war .

good evening : 
 i have asked for this television time tonight to make public a plan for peace that can end the war in vietnam .
the offer that i shall now present , on behalf of the government of the united states and the government of south vietnam , with the full knowledge and approval of president thieu , is both generous and far - reaching .
it is a plan to end the war now ; it includes an offer to withdraw all american forces within 6 months of an agreement ; its acceptance would mean the speedy return of all the prisoners of war to their homes .
three years ago when i took office , there were 550,000 americans in vietnam ; the number killed in action was running as high as 300 a week ; there were no plans to bring any americans home , and the only thing that had been settled in paris was the shape of the conference table .
i immediately moved to fulfill a pledge i had made to the american people : to bring about a peace that could last , not only for the united states , but for the long - suffering people of southeast asia .
there were two honorable paths open to us .
the path of negotiation was , and is , the path we prefer .
but it takes two to negotiate ; there had to be another way in case the other side refused to negotiate .
that path we called vietnamization .
what it meant was training and equipping the south vietnamese to defend themselves , and steadily withdrawing americans , as they developed the capability to do so .
the path of vietnamization has been successful .
two weeks ago , you will recall , i announced that by may 1 , american forces in vietnam would be down to 69,000 .
that means almost one - half million americans will have been brought home from vietnam over the past 3 years .
in terms of american lives , the losses of 300 a week have been reduced by over 95 percent -- to less than 10 a week .
but the path of vietnamization has been the long voyage home .
it has strained the patience and tested the perseverance of the american people .
what of the shortcut , the shortcut we prefer , the path of negotiation ?
progress here has been disappointing .
the american people deserve an accounting of why it has been disappointing .
tonight i intend to give you that accounting , and in so doing , i am going to try to break the deadlock in the negotiations .
we have made a series of public proposals designed to bring an end to the conflict .
but early in this administration , after 10 months of no progress in the public paris talks , i became convinced that it was necessary to explore the possibility of negotiating in private channels , to see whether it would be possible to end the public deadlock .
after consultation with secretary of state rogers , our ambassador in saigon , and our chief negotiator in paris , and with the full knowledge and approval of president thieu , i sent dr. kissinger to paris as my personal representative on august 4 , 1969 , 30 months ago , to begin these secret peace negotiations .
since that time , dr. kissinger has traveled to paris 12 times on these secret missions .
he has met seven times with le duc tho , one of hanoi 's top political leaders , and minister xuan thuy , head of the north vietnamese delegation to the paris talks , and he has met with minister xuan thuy five times alone .
i would like , incidentally , to take this opportunity to thank president pompidou of france for his personal assistance in helping to make the arrangements for these secret talks .
this is why i initiated these private negotiations : privately , both sides can be more flexible in offering new approaches and also private discussions allow both sides to talk frankly , to take positions free from the pressure of public debate .
in seeking peace in vietnam , with so many lives at stake , i felt we could not afford to let any opportunity go by - private or public -- to negotiate a settlement .
as i have stated on a number of occasions , i was prepared and i remain prepared to explore any avenue , public or private , to speed negotiations to end the war .
for 30 months , whenever secretary rogers , dr. kissinger , or i were asked about secret negotiations we would only say we were pursuing every possible channel in our search for peace .
there was never a leak , because we were determined not to jeopardize the secret negotiations .
until recently , this course showed signs of yielding some progress .
now , however , it is my judgment that the purposes of peace will best be served by bringing out publicly the proposals we have been making in private .
nothing is served by silence when the other side exploits our good faith to divide america and to avoid the conference table .
nothing is served by silence when it misleads some americans into accusing their own government of failing to do what it has already done .
nothing is served by silence when it enables the other side to imply possible solutions publicly that it has already flatly rejected privately .
the time has come to lay the record of our secret negotiations on the table .
just as secret negotiations can sometimes break a public deadlock , public disclosure may help to break a secret deadlock .
some americans , who believed what the north vietnamese led them to believe , have charged that the united states has not pursued negotiations intensively .
as the record that i now will disclose will show , just the opposite is true .
questions have been raised as to why we have not proposed a deadline for the withdrawal of all american forces in exchange for a cease - fire and the return of our prisoners of war ; why we have not discussed the seven - point proposal made by the vietcong last july in paris ; why we have not submitted a new plan of our own to move the negotiations off dead center .
as the private record will show , we have taken all these steps and more -- and have been flatly rejected or ignored by the other side .
on may 31 , 1971 , 8 months ago , at one of the secret meetings in paris , we offered specifically to agree to a deadline for the withdrawal of all american forces in exchange for the release of all prisoners of war and a cease - fire .
at the next private meeting , on june 26 , the north vietnamese rejected our offer .
they privately proposed instead their own nine - point plan which insisted that we overthrow the government of south vietnam .
five days later , on july 1 , the enemy publicly presented a different package of proposals -- the seven - point vietcong plan .
that posed a dilemma : which package should we respond to , the public plan or the secret plan ?
on july 12 , at another private meeting in paris , dr. kissinger put that question to the north vietnamese directly .
they said we should deal with their nine - point secret plan , because it covered all of indochina including laos and cambodia , while the vietcong seven - point proposal was limited to vietnam .
so that is what we did .
but we went even beyond that , dealing with some of the points in the public plan that were not covered in the secret plan .
on august 16 , at another private meeting , we went further .
we offered the complete withdrawal of u. s. and allied forces within 9 months after an agreement on an overall settlement .
on september 13 , the north vietnamese rejected that proposal .
they continued to insist that we overthrow the south vietnamese government .
now , what has been the result of these private efforts ?
for months , the north vietnamese have been berating us at the public sessions for not responding to their side 's publicly presented seven - point plan .
the truth is that we did respond to the enemy 's plan , in the manner they wanted us to respond -- secretly .
in full possession of our complete response , the north vietnamese publicly denounced us for not having responded at all .
they induced many americans in the press and the congress into echoing their propaganda -- americans who could not know they were being falsely used by the enemy to stir up divisiveness in this country .
i decided in october that we should make another attempt to break the deadlock .
i consulted with president thieu , who concurred fully in a new plan .
on october 11 , i sent a private communication to the north vietnamese that contained new elements that could move negotiations forward .
i urged a meeting on november 1 between dr. kissinger and special adviser le due tho , or some other appropriate official from hanoi .
on october 25 , the north vietnamese agreed to meet and suggested november 20 as the time for a meeting .
on november 17 , just three days before the scheduled meeting , they said le duc tho was ill .
we offered to meet as soon as he recovered , either with him , or immediately with any other authorized leader who could come from hanoi .
two months have passed since they called off that meeting .
the only reply to our plan has been an increase in troop infiltration from north vietnam and communist military offensives in laos and cambodia .
our proposal for peace was answered by a step - up in the war on their part .
that is where matters stand today .
we are being asked publicly to respond to proposals that we answered , and in some respects accepted , months ago in private .
we are being asked publicly to set a terminal date for our withdrawals when we already offered one in private .
and the most comprehensive peace plan of this conflict lies ignored in a secret channel , while the enemy tries again for military victory .
that is why i have instructed ambassador porter to present our plan publicly at this thursday 's session of the paris peace talks , along with alternatives to make it even more flexible .
we are publishing the full details of our plan tonight .
it will prove beyond doubt which side has made every effort to make these negotiations succeed .
it will show unmistakably that hanoi not washington or saigon -- has made the war go on .
here is the essence of our peace plan ; public disclosure may gain it the attention it deserves in hanoi .
within six months of an agreement : 
  -- we shall withdraw all u. s. and allied forces from south vietnam .
-- we shall exchange all prisoners of war .
-- there shall be a cease - fire throughout indochina .
-- there shall be a new presidential election in south vietnam .
president thieu will announce the elements of this election .
these include international supervision and an independent body to organize and run the election , representing all political forces in south vietnam , including the national liberation front .
furthermore , president thieu has informed me that within the framework of the agreement outlined above , he makes the following offer : he and vice president huong would be ready to resign one month before the new election .
the chairman of the senate , as caretaker head of the government , would assume administrative responsibilities in south vietnam , but the election would be the sole responsibility of the independent election body i have just described .
there are several other proposals in our new peace plan ; for example , as we offered privately on july 26 of last year , we remain prepared to undertake a major re .
construction program throughout indochina , including north vietnam , to help all these peoples recover from the ravages of a generation of war .
we will pursue any approach that will speed negotiations .
we are ready to negotiate the plan i have outlined tonight and conclude a comprehensive agreement on all military and political issues .
because some parts of this agreement could prove more difficult to negotiate than others , we would be willing to begin implementing certain military aspects while negotiations continue on the implementation of other issues , just as we suggested in our private proposal in october .
or , as we proposed last may , we remain willing to settle only the military issues and leave the political issues to the vietnamese alone .
under this approach , we would withdraw all u. s. and allied forces within 6 months in exchange for an indochina cease - fire and the release of all prisoners .
the choice is up to the enemy .
this is a settlement offer which is fair to north vietnam and fair to south vietnam .
it deserves the light of public scrutiny by these nations and by other nations throughout the world .
and it deserves the united support of the american people .
we made the substance of this generous offer privately over 3 months ago .
it has not been rejected , but it has been ignored .
i reiterate that peace offer tonight .
it can no longer be ignored .
the only thing this plan does not do is to join our enemy to overthrow our ally , which the united states of america will never do .
if the enemy wants peace , it will have to recognize the important difference between settlement and surrender .
this has been a long and agonizing struggle .
but it is difficult to see how anyone , regardless of his past position on the war , could now say that we have not gone the extra mile in offering a settlement that is fair , fair to everybody concerned .
by the steadiness of our withdrawal of troops , america has proved its resolution to end our involvement in the war ; by our readiness to act in the spirit of conciliation , america has proved its desire to be involved in the building of a permanent peace throughout indochina .
we are ready to negotiate peace immediately .
if the enemy rejects our offer to negotiate , we shall continue our program of ending american involvement in the war by withdrawing our remaining forces as the south vietnamese develop the capability to defend themselves .
if the enemy 's answer to our peace offer is to step up their military attacks , i shall fully meet my responsibility as commander in chief of our armed forces to protect our remaining troops .
we do not prefer this course of action .
we want to end the war not only for america but for all the people of indochina .
the plan i have proposed tonight can accomplish that goal .
some of our citizens have become accustomed to thinking that whatever our government says must be false , and whatever our enemies say must be true , as far as this war is concerned .
well , the record i have revealed tonight proves the contrary .
we can now demonstrate publicly what we have long been demonstrating privately -- that america has taken the initiative not only to end our participation in this war , but to end the war itself for all concerned .
this has been the longest , the most difficult war in american history .
honest and patriotic americans have disagreed as to whether we should have become involved at all nine years ago ; and there has been disagreement on the conduct of the war .
the proposal i have made tonight is one on which we all can agree .
let us unite now , unite in our search for peace -- a peace that is fair to both sides -- a peace that can last .
thank you and good night .

good evening : 
 five weeks ago , on easter weekend , the communist armies of north vietnam launched a massive invasion of south vietnam , an invasion that was made possible by tanks , artillery , and other advanced offensive weapons supplied to hanoi by the soviet union and other communist nations .
the south vietnamese have fought bravely to repel this brutal assault .
casualties on both sides have been very high .
most tragically , there have been over 20,000 civilian casualties , including women and children , in the cities which the north vietnamese have shelled in wanton disregard of human life .
as i announced in my report to the nation 12 days ago , the role of the united states in resisting this invasion has been limited to air and naval strikes on military targets in north and south vietnam .
as i also pointed out in that report , we have responded to north vietnam 's massive military offensive by undertaking wide - ranging new peace efforts aimed at ending the war through negotiation .
on april 20 , i sent dr. kissinger to moscow for 4 days of meetings with general secretary brezhnev and other soviet leaders .
i instructed him to emphasize our desire for a rapid solution to the war and our willingness to look at all possible approaches .
at that time , the soviet leaders showed an interest in bringing the war to an end on a basis just to both sides .
they urged resumption of negotiations in paris , and they indicated they would use their constructive influence .
i authorized dr. kissinger to meet privately with the top north vietnamese negotiator , le duc tho , on tuesday , may 2 , in paris .
ambassador porter , as you know , resumed the public peace negotiations in paris on april 27 and again on may 4 .
at those meetings , both public and private , all we heard from the enemy was bombastic rhetoric and a replaying of their demands for surrender .
for example , at the may 2 secret meeting , i authorized dr. kissinger to talk about every conceivable avenue toward peace .
the north vietnamese flatly refused to consider any of these approaches .
they refused to offer any new approach of their own .
instead , they simply read verbatim their previous public demands .
here is what over 3 years of public and private negotiations with hanoi has come down to : the united states , with the full concurrence of our south vietnamese allies , has offered the maximum of what any president of the united states could offer .
we have offered a deescalation of the fighting .
we have offered a cease - fire with a deadline for withdrawal of all american forces .
we have offered new elections which would be internationally supervised with the communists participating both in the supervisory body and in the elections themselves .
president thieu has offered to resign one month before the elections .
we have offered an exchange of prisoners of war in a ratio of 10 north vietnamese prisoners for every one american prisoner that they release .
and north vietnam has met each of these offers with insolence and insult .
they have flatly and arrogantly refused to negotiate an end to the war and bring peace .
their answer to every peace offer we have made has been to escalate the war .
in the 2 weeks alone since i offered to resume negotiations , hanoi has launched three new military offensives in south vietnam .
in those 2 weeks the risk that a communist government may be imposed on the 17 million people of south vietnam has increased , and the communist offensive has now reached the point that it gravely threatens the lives of 60,000 american troops who are still in vietnam .
there are only two issues left for us in this war .
first , in the face of a massive invasion do we stand by , jeopardize the lives of 60,000 americans , and leave the south vietnamese to a long night of terror ?
this will not happen .
we shall do whatever is required to safeguard american lives and american honor .
second , in the face of complete intransigence at the conference table do we join with our enemy to install a communist government in south vietnam ?
this , too , will not happen .
we will not cross the line from generosity to treachery .
we now have a clear , hard choice among three courses of action : immediate withdrawal of all american forces , continued attempts at negotiation , or decisive military action to end the war .
i know that many americans favor the first course of action , immediate withdrawal .
they believe the way to end the war is for the united states to get out , and to remove the threat to our remaining forces by simply withdrawing them .
from a political standpoint , this would be a very easy choice for me to accept .
after all , i did not send over one - half million americans to vietnam .
i have brought 500,000 men home from vietnam since i took office .
but , abandoning our commitment in vietnam here and now would mean turning 17 million south vietnamese over to communist tyranny and terror .
it would mean leaving hundreds of american prisoners in communist hands with no bargaining leverage to get them released .
an american defeat in vietnam would encourage this kind of aggression all over the world , aggression in which smaller nations armed by their major allies , could be tempted to attack neighboring nations at will in the mideast , in europe , and other areas .
world peace would be in grave jeopardy .
the second course of action is to keep on trying to negotiate a settlement .
now this is the course we have preferred from the beginning and we shall continue to pursue it .
we want to negotiate , but we have made every reasonable offer and tried every possible path for ending this war at the conference table .
the problem is , as you all know , it takes two to negotiate and now , as throughout the past four years , the north vietnamese arrogantly refuse to negotiate anything but an imposition , an ultimatum that the united states impose a communist regime on 17 million people in south vietnam who do not want a communist government .
it is plain then that what appears to be a choice among three courses of action for the united states is really no choice at all .
the killing in this tragic war must stop .
by simply getting out , we would only worsen the bloodshed .
by relying solely on negotiations , we would give an intransigent enemy the time he needs to press his aggression on the battlefield .
there is only one way to stop the killing .
that is to keep the weapons of war out of the hands of the international outlaws of north vietnam .
throughout the war in vietnam , the united states has exercised a degree of restraint unprecedented in the annals of war .
that was our responsibility as a great nation , a nation which is interested -- and we can be proud of this as americans -- as america has always been , in peace not conquest .
however , when the enemy abandons all restraint , throws its whole army into battle in the territory of its neighbor , refuses to negotiate , we simply face a new situation .
in these circumstances , with 60,000 americans threatened , any president who failed to act decisively would have betrayed the trust of his country and betrayed the cause of world peace .
i therefore concluded that hanoi must be denied the weapons and supplies it needs to continue the aggression .
in full coordination with the republic of vietnam , i have ordered the following measures which are being implemented as i am speaking to you .
all entrances to north vietnamese ports will be mined to prevent access to these ports and north vietnamese naval operations from these ports .
united states forces have been directed to take appropriate measures within the internal and claimed territorial waters of north vietnam to interdict the delivery of any supplies .
rail and all other communications will be cut off to the maximum extent possible .
air and naval strikes against military targets in north vietnam will continue .
these actions are not directed against any other nation .
countries with ships presently in north vietnamese ports have already been notified that their ships will have three daylight periods to leave in safety .
after that time , the mines will become active and any ships attempting to leave or enter these ports will do so at their own risk .
these actions i have ordered will cease when the following conditions are met : 
 first , all american prisoners of war must be returned .
second , there must be an internationally supervised cease - fire throughout indochina .
once prisoners of war are released , once the internationally supervised cease - fire has begun , we will stop all acts of force throughout indochina , and at that time we will proceed with a complete withdrawal of all american forces from vietnam within four months .
now , these terms are generous terms .
they are terms which would not require surrender and humiliation on the part of anybody .
they would permit the united states to withdraw with honor .
they would end the killing .
they would bring our pow 's home .
they would allow negotiations on a political settlement between the vietnamese themselves .
they would permit all the nations which have suffered in this long war -- cambodia , laos , north vietnam , south vietnam -- to turn at last to the urgent works of healing and of peace .
they deserve immediate acceptance by north vietnam .
it is appropriate to conclude my remarks tonight with some comments directed individually to each of the major parties involved in the continuing tragedy of the vietnam war .
first , to the leaders of hanoi , your people have already suffered too much in your pursuit of conquest .
do not compound their agony with continued arrogance ; choose instead the path of a peace that redeems your sacrifices , guarantees true independence for your country , and ushers in an era of reconciliation .
to the people of south vietnam , you shall continue to have our firm support in your resistance against aggression .
it is your spirit that will determine the outcome of the battle .
it is your will that will shape the future of your country .
to other nations , especially those which are allied with north vietnam , the actions i have announced tonight are not directed against you .
their sole purpose is to protect the lives of 60,000 americans , who would be gravely endangered in the event that the communist offensive continues to roll forward , and to prevent the imposition of a communist government by brutal aggression upon 17 million people .
i particularly direct my comments tonight to the soviet union .
we respect the soviet union as a great power .
we recognize the right of the soviet union to defend its interests when they are threatened .
the soviet union in turn must recognize our right to defend our interests .
no soviet soldiers are threatened in vietnam .
sixty thousand americans are threatened .
we expect you to help your allies , and you can not expect us to do other than to continue to help our allies , but let us , and let all great powers , help our allies only for the purpose of their defense , not for the purpose of launching invasions against their neighbors .
otherwise the cause of peace , the cause in which we both have so great a stake , will be seriously jeopardized .
our two nations have made significant progress in our negotiations in recent months .
we are near major agreements on nuclear arms limitation , on trade , on a host of other issues .
let us not slide back toward the dark shadows of a previous age .
we do not ask you to sacrifice your principles , or your friends , but neither should you permit hanoi 's intransigence to blot out the prospects we together have so patiently prepared .
we , the united states and the soviet union , are on the threshold of a new relationship that can serve not only the interests of our two countries , but the cause of world peace .
we are prepared to continue to build this relationship .
the responsibility is yours if we fail to do so .
and finally , may i say to the american people , i ask you for the same strong support you have always given your president in difficult moments .
it is you most of all that the world will be watching .
i know how much you want to end this war .
i know how much you want to bring our men home .
and i think you know from all that i have said and done these past 3 1/2 years how much i , too , want to end the war to bring our men home .
you want peace .
i want peace .
but , you also want honor and not defeat .
you want a genuine peace , not a peace that is merely a prelude to another war .
at this moment , we must stand together in purpose and resolve .
as so often in the past , we americans did not choose to resort to war .
it has been forced upon us by an enemy that has shown utter contempt toward every overture we have made for peace .
and that is why , my fellow americans , tonight i ask for your support of this decision , a decision which has only one purpose , not to expand the war , not to escalate the war , but to end this war and to win the kind of peace that will last .
with god 's help , with your support , we will accomplish that great goal .
thank you and good night .

good evening : 
 tomorrow , 100 million americans will have an opportunity to participate in a decision that will affect the future of america and the future of the world for generations to come .
regardless of how you vote , i urge each of you to vote .
by your vote , you can make sure that this great decision is made by a majority of americans eligible to vote , and not simply left to the minority who bother to vote .
i am not going to insult your intelligence tonight or impose upon your time by rehashing all the issues of the campaign or making any last - minute charges against our opponents .
you know what the issues are .
you know that this is a choice which is probably the clearest choice between the candidates for president ever presented to the american people in this century .
i would , however , urge you to have in mind tomorrow one overriding issue , and that is the issue of peace -- peace in vietnam and peace in the world at large for a generation to come .
as you know , we have made a breakthrough in the negotiations which will lead to peace in vietnam .
we have agreed on the major principles that i laid down in my speech to the nation of may 8 .
we have agreed that there will be a cease - fire , we have agreed that our prisoners of war will be returned and that the missing in action will be accounted for , and we have agreed that the people of south vietnam shall have the right to determine their own future without having a communist government or a coalition government imposed upon them against their will .
there are still some details that i am insisting be worked out and nailed down because i want this not to be a temporary peace .
i want , and i know you want , it to be a lasting peace .
but i can say to you with complete confidence tonight that we will soon reach agreement on all the issues and bring this long and difficult war to an end .
you can help achieve that goal .
by your votes , you can send a message to those with whom we are negotiating , and to the leaders of the world , that you back the president of the united states in his insistence that we in the united states seek peace with honor and never peace with surrender .
i will not go into the other issues tonight , except to say that as we move to peace , we will open doors to progress on many fronts here at home .
it means that we can have something we have n't had since president eisenhower was president 15 years ago -- prosperity without war and without inflation .
it means we can have progress toward better education , better health -- in all the areas that i have presented to the american people over these past four years .
it means that we can move toward a goal that every american wants : that is , opportunity for each person in this great and good land to go to the top in whatever particular activity he chooses regardless of his background .
those , then , are the issues you will have in mind .
let me say , finally , i want to thank you for the honor of serving as president for the past four years , and , regardless of your decision tomorrow , i can assure you that i shall continue to work for a goal that every american has : let 's make the next four years the best four years in america 's history .
thank you .
good evening .

my fellow americans : 
 i come before you tonight as a candidate for the vice presidency and as a man whose honesty and integrity have been questioned .
the usual political thing to do when charges are made against you is to either ignore them or to deny them without giving details .
i believe we 've had enough of that in the united states , particularly with the present administration in washington , d. c. to me the office of the vice presidency of the united states is a great office and i feel that the people have got to have confidence in the integrity of the men who run for that office and who might obtain it .
i have a theory , too , that the best and only answer to a smear or to an honest misunderstanding of the facts is to tell the truth .
and that 's why i 'm here tonight .
i want to tell you my side of the case .
i am sure that you have read the charge and you 've heard that i , senator nixon , took $ 18,000 from a group of my supporters .
now , was that wrong ?
and let me say that it was wrong -- i 'm saying , incidentally , that it was wrong and not just illegal .
because it is n't a question of whether it was legal or illegal , that is n't enough .
the question is , was it morally wrong ?
i say that it was morally wrong if any of that $ 18,000 went to senator nixon for my personal use .
i say that it was morally wrong if it was secretly given and secretly handled .
and i say that it was morally wrong if any of the contributors got special favors for the contributions that they made .
and now to answer those questions let me say this : 
 not one cent of the $ 18,000 or any other money of that type ever went to me for my personal use .
every penny of it was used to pay for political expenses that i did not think should be charged to the taxpayers of the united states .
it was not a secret fund .
as a matter of fact , when i was on " meet the press , " some of you may have seen it last sunday -- peter edson came up to me after the program and he said , " dick , what about this fund we hear about ? "
and i said , " well , there 's no secret about it .
go out and see dana smith , who was the administrator of the fund . "
and i gave him his address , and i said that you will find that the purpose of the fund simply was to defray political expenses that i did not feel should be charged to the government .
and third , let me point out , and i want to make this particularly clear , that no contributor to this fund , no contributor to any of my campaign , has ever received any consideration that he would not have received as an ordinary constituent .
i just do n't believe in that and i can say that never , while i have been in the senate of the united states , as far as the people that contributed to this fund are concerned , have i made a telephone call for them to an agency , or have i gone down to an agency in their behalf .
and the records will show that , the records which are in the hands of the administration .
but then some of you will say and rightly , " well , what did you use the fund for , senator ?
why did you have to have it ? "
let me tell you in just a word how a senate office operates .
first of all , a senator gets $ 15,000 a year in salary .
he gets enough money to pay for one trip a year , a round trip that is , for himself and his family between his home and washington , d. c. 
 and then he gets an allowance to handle the people that work in his office , to handle his mail .
and the allowance for my state of california is enough to hire thirteen people .
and let me say , incidentally , that that allowance is not paid to the senator -- it 's paid directly to the individuals that the senator puts on his payroll , but all of these people and all of these allowances are for strictly official business .
business , for example , when a constituent writes in and wants you to go down to the veterans administration and get some information about his gi policy .
items of that type for example .
but there are other expenses which are not covered by the government .
and i think i can best discuss those expenses by asking you some questions .
do you think that when i or any other senator makes a political speech , has it printed , should charge the printing of that speech and the mailing of that speech to the taxpayers ?
do you think , for example , when i or any other senator makes a trip to his home state to make a purely political speech that the cost of that trip should be charged to the taxpayers ?
do you think when a senator makes political broadcasts or political television broadcasts , radio or television , that the expense of those broadcasts should be charged to the taxpayers ?
well , i know what your answer is .
it is the same answer that audiences give me whenever i discuss this particular problem .
the answer is , " no . "
the taxpayers should n't be required to finance items which are not official business but which are primarily political business .
but then the question arises , you say , " well , how do you pay for l these and how can you do it legally ? "
and there are several ways that it can be done , incidentally , and that it is done legally in the united states senate and in the congress .
the first way is to be a rich man .
i do n't happen to be a rich man so i could n't use that one .
another way that is used is to put your wife on the payroll .
let me say , incidentally , my opponent , my opposite number for the vice presidency on the democratic ticket , does have his wife on the payroll .
and has had her on his payroll for the ten years -- the past ten years .
now just let me say this .
that 's his business and i 'm not critical of him for doing that .
you will have to pass judgment on that particular point .
but i have never done that for this reason .
i have found that there are so many deserving stenographers and secretaries in washington that needed the work that i just did n't feel it was right to put my wife on the payroll .
my wife 's sitting over here .
she 's a wonderful stenographer .
she used to teach stenography and she used to teach shorthand in high school .
that was when i met her .
and i can tell you folks that she 's worked many hours at night and many hours on saturdays and sundays in my office and she 's done a fine job .
and i 'm proud to say tonight that in the six years i 've been in the house and the senate of the united states , pat nixon has never been on the government payroll .
there are other ways that these finances can be taken care of .
some who are lawyers , and i happen to be a lawyer , continue to practice law .
but i have n't been able to do that .
i 'm so far away from california that i 've been so busy with my senatorial work that i have not engaged in any legal practice .
and also as far as law practice is concerned , it seemed to me that the relationship between an attorney and the client was 80 personal that you could n't possibly represent a man as an attorney and then have an unbiased view when he presented his case to you in the event that he had one before the government .
and so i felt that the best way to handle these necessary political expenses of getting my message to the american people and the speeches i made , the speeches that i had printed , for the most part , concerned this one message -- of exposing this administration , the communism in it , the corruption in it -- the only way that i could do that was to accept the aid which people in my home state of california who contributed to my campaign and who continued to make these contributions after i was elected were glad to make .
and let me say i am proud of the fact that not one of them has ever asked me for a special favor .
i 'm proud of the fact that not one of them has ever asked me to vote on a bill other than as my own conscience would dictate .
and i am proud of the fact that the taxpayers by subterfuge or otherwise have never paid one dime for expenses which i thought were political and should n't be charged to the taxpayers .
let me say , incidentally , that some of you may say , " well , that 's all right , senator ; that 's your explanation , but have you got any proof7 " 
 and i 'd like to tell you this evening that just about an hour ago we received an independent audit of this entire fund .
i suggested to gov. sherman adams , who is the chief of staff of the dwight eisenhower campaign , that an independent audit and legal report be obtained .
and i have that audit here in my hand .
it 's an audit made by the price , waterhouse and co. firm , and the legal opinion by gibson , dunn and crutcher , lawyers in los angeles , the biggest law firm and incidentally one of the best ones in los angeles .
i 'm proud to be able to report to you tonight that this audit and this legal opinion is being forwarded to general eisenhower .
and i 'd like to read to you the opinion that was prepared by gibson , dunn and crutcher and based on all the pertinent laws and statutes , together with the audit report prepared by the certified public accountants .
it is our conclusion that senator nixon did not obtain any financial gain from the collection and disbursement of the fund by dana smith ; that senator nixon did not violate any federal or state law by reason of the operation of the fund , and that neither the portion of the fund paid by dana smith directly to third persons nor the portion paid to senator nixon to reimburse him for designated office expenses constituted income to the senator which was either reportable or taxable as income under applicable tax laws .
gibson , dunn and crutcher by alma h. conway . "
now that , my friends , is not nixon speaking , but that 's an independent audit which was requested because i want the american people to know all the facts and i 'm not afraid of having independent people go in and check the facts , and that is exactly what they did .
but then i realize that there are still some who may say , and rightly so , and let me say that i recognize that some will continue to smear regardless of what the truth may be , but that there has been understandably some honest misunderstanding on this matter , and there 's some that will say : 
 " well , maybe you were able , senator , to fake this thing .
how can we believe what you say ?
after all , is there a possibility that maybe you got some sums in cash ?
is there a possibility that you may have feathered your own nest ? "
and so now what i am going to do - and incidentally this is unprecedented in the history of american politics - i am going at this time to give this television and radio audience a complete financial history ; everything i 've earned ; everything i 've spent ; everything i owe .
and i want you to know the facts .
i 'll have to start early .
i was born in 1913 .
our family was one of modest circumstances and most of my early life was spent in a store out in east whittier .
it was a grocery store -- one of those family enterprises .
he only reason we were able to make it go was because my mother and dad had five boys and we all worked in the store .
i worked my way through college and to a great extent through law school .
and then , in 1940 , probably the best thing that ever happened to me happened , i married pat -- who is sitting over here .
we had a rather difficult time after we were married , like so many of the young couples who may be listening to us .
i practiced law ; she continued to teach school .
then in 1942 i went into the service .
let me say that my service record was not a particularly unusual one .
i went to the south pacific .
i guess i 'm entitled to a couple of battle stars .
i got a couple of letters of commendation but i was just there when the bombs were falling and then i returned .
i returned to the united states and in 1946 i ran for the congress .
when we came out of the war , pat and i -- pat during the war ad worked as a stenographer and in a bank and as an economist for government agency -- and when we came out the total of our saving from both my law practice , her teaching and all the time that i as in the war -- the total for that entire period was just a little less than $ 10,000 .
every cent of that , incidentally , was in government bonds .
well , that 's where we start when i go into politics .
now what i 've i earned since i went into politics ?
well , here it is -- i jotted it down , let me read the notes .
first of all i 've had my salary as a congressman and as a senator .
second , i have received a total in this past six years of $ 1600 from estates which were in my law firm the time that i severed my connection with it .
and , incidentally , as i said before , i have not engaged in any legal practice and have not accepted any fees from business that came to the firm after i went into politics .
i have made an average of approximately $ 1500 a year from nonpolitical speaking engagements and lectures .
and then , fortunately , we 've inherited a little money .
pat sold her interest in her father 's estate for $ 3,000 and i inherited $ l500 from my grandfather .
we live rather modestly .
for four years we lived in an apartment in park fairfax , in alexandria , va. the rent was $ 80 a month .
and we saved for the time that we could buy a house .
now , that was what we took in .
what did we do with this money ?
what do we have today to show for it ?
this will surprise you , because it is so little , i suppose , as standards generally go , of people in public life .
first of all , we 've got a house in washington which cost $ 41,000 and on which we owe $ 20,000 .
we have a house in whittier , california , which cost $ 13,000 and on which we owe $ 3000 . *
my folks are living there at the present time .
i have just $ 4,000 in life insurance , plus my g. i. policy which i 've never been able to convert and which will run out in two years .
i have no insurance whatever on pat .
i have no life insurance on our our youngsters , patricia and julie .
i own a 1950 oldsmobile car .
we have our furniture .
we have no stocks and bonds of any type .
we have no interest of any kind , direct or indirect , in any business .
now , that 's what we have .
what do we owe ?
well , in addition to the mortgage , the $ 20,000 mortgage on the house in washington , the $ 10,000 one on the house in whittier , i owe $ 4,500 to the riggs bank in washington , d. c. with interest 4 1/2 per cent .
i owe $ 3,500 to my parents and the interest on that loan which i pay regularly , because it 's the part of the savings they made through the years they were working so hard , i pay regularly 4 per cent interest .
and then i have a $ 500 loan which i have on my life insurance .
well , that 's about it .
that 's what we have and that 's what we owe .
it is n't very much but pat and i have the satisfaction that every dime that we 've got is honestly ours .
i should say this -- that pat does n't have a mink coat .
but she does have a respectable republican cloth coat .
and i always tell her that she 'd look good in anything .
one other thing i probably should tell you because if we do n't they 'll probably be saying this about me too , we did get something - a gift - after the election .
a man down in texas heard pat on the radio mention the fact that our two youngsters would like to have a dog .
and , believe it or not , the day before we left on this campaign trip we got a message from union station in baltimore saying they had a package for us .
we went down to get it .
you know what it was .
it was a little cocker spaniel dog in a crate that he 'd sent all the way from texas .
black and white spotted .
and our little girl - tricia , the 6-year old - named it checkers .
and you know , the kids , like all kids , love the dog and i just want to say this right now , that regardless of what they say about it , we 're gon na keep it .
it is n't easy to come before a nation - wide audience and air your life as i 've done .
but i want to say some things before i conclude that i think most of you will agree on .
mr. mitchell , the chairman of the democratic national committee , made the statement that if a man could n't afford to be in the united states senate he should n't run for the senate .
and i just want to make my position clear .
i do n't agree with mr. mitchell when he says that only a rich man should serve his government in the united states senate or in the congress .
i do n't believe that represents the thinking of the democratic party , and i know that it does n't represent the thinking of the republican party .
i believe that it 's fine that a man like governor stevenson who inherited a fortune from his father can run for president .
but i also feel that it 's essential in this country of ours that a man of modest means can also run for president .
because , you know , remember abraham lincoln , you remember what he said : " god must have loved the common people -- he made so many of them . "
and now i 'm going to suggest some courses of conduct .
first of all , you have read in the papers about other funds now .
mr. stevenson , apparently , had a couple .
one of them in which a group of business people paid and helped to supplement the salaries of state employees .
here is where the money went directly into their pockets .
and i think that what mr. stevenson should do is come before the american people as i have , give the names of the people that have contributed to that fund ; give the names of the people who put this money into their pockets at the same time that they were receiving money from their state government , and see what favors , if any , they ave out for that .
i do n't condemn mr. stevenson for what he did .
but until the facts are in there is a doubt that will be raised .
and as far as mr. sparkman is concerned , i would suggest the same thing .
he 's had his wife on the payroll .
i do n't condemn him for that .
but i think that he should come before the american people and indicate what outside sources of income he has had .
i would suggest that under the circumstances both mr. parkman and mr. stevenson should come before the american people as i have and make a complete financial statement as to their financial history .
and if they do n't , it will be an admission that they have something to hide .
and i think that you will agree with me .
because , folks , remember , a man that 's to be president of the united states , a man that 's to be vice president of the united states must have the confidence of all the people .
and that 's why i 'm doing what i 'm doing , and that 's why i suggest that mr. stevenson and mr. sparkman since they are under attack should do what i am doing .
now , let me say this : i know that this is not the last of the smears .
in spite of my explanation tonight other smears will be made ; others have been made in the past .
and the purpose of the mears , i know , is this -- to silence me , to make me let up .
well , they just do n't know who they 're dealing with .
i 'm going l tell you this : i remember in the dark days of the hiss case some of the same columnists , some of the same radio commentators who are attacking me now and misrepresenting my position were violently opposing me at the time i was after alger hiss .
but i continued the fight because i knew i was right .
and i an say to this great television and radio audience that i have no pologies to the american people for my part in putting alger hiss vhere he is today .
and as far as this is concerned , i intend to continue the fight .
why do i feel so deeply ?
why do i feel that in spite of the mears , the misunderstandings , the necessity for a man to come up here and bare his soul as i have ?
why is it necessary for me to continue this fight ?
and i want to tell you why .
because , you see , i love my country .
and i think my country is in danger .
and i think that the only man that can save america at this time is the man that 's runing for president on my ticket -- dwight eisenhower .
you say , " why do i think it 's in danger ? "
and i say look at the record .
seven years of the truman - acheson administration and that 's happened ?
six hundred million people lost to the communists , and a war in korea in which we have lost 117,000 american casualties .
and i say to all of you that a policy that results in a loss of six hundred million people to the communists and a war which costs us 117,000 american casualties is n't good enough for america .
and i say that those in the state department that made the mistakes which caused that war and which resulted in those losses should be kicked out of the state department just as fast as we can get 'em out of there .
and let me say that i know mr. stevenson wo n't do that .
because he defends the truman policy and i know that dwight eisenhower will do that , and that he will give america the leadership that it needs .
take the problem of corruption .
you 've read about the mess in washington .
mr. stevenson ca n't clean it up because he was picked by the man , truman , under whose administration the mess was made .
you would n't trust a man who made the mess to clean it up -- that 's truman .
and by the same token you ca n't trust the man who was picked by the man that made the mess to clean it up -- and that 's stevenson .
and so i say , eisenhower , who owes nothing to truman , nothing to the big city bosses , he is the man that can clean up the mess in washington .
take communism .
i say that as far as that subject is concerned , the danger is great to america .
in the hiss case they got the secrets which enabled them to break the american secret state department code .
they got secrets in the atomic bomb case which enabled them to get the secret of the atomic bomb , five years before they would have gotten it by their own devices .
and i say that any man who called the alger hiss case a " red herring " is n't fit to be president of the united states .
i say that a man who like mr. stevenson has pooh - poohed and ridiculed the communist threat in the united states -- he said that they are phantoms among ourselves ; he 's accused us that have attempted to expose the communists of looking for communists in the bureau of fisheries and wildlife -- i say that a man who says that is n't qualified to be president of the united states .
and i say that the only man who can lead us in this fight to rid the government of both those who are communists and those who have corrupted this government is eisenhower , because eisenhower , you can be sure , recognizes the problem and he knows how to deal with it .
now let me say that , finally , this evening i want to read to you just briefly excerpts from a letter which i received , a letter which , after all this is over , no one can take away from us .
it reads as follows : 
 dear senator nixon : 
 since i 'm only 19 years of age i ca n't vote in this presidential election but believe me if i could you and general eisenhower would certainly get my vote .
my husband is in the fleet marines in korea .
he 's a corpsman on the front lines and we have a two - month - old son he 's never seen .
and i feel confident that with great americans like you and general eisenhower in the white house , lonely americans like myself will be united with their loved ones now in korea .
i only pray to god that you wo n't be too late .
enclosed is a small check to help you in your campaign .
living on $ 85 a month it is all i can afford at present .
but let me know what else i can do .
folks , it 's a check for $ 10 , and it 's one that i will never cash .
and just let me say this .
we hear a lot about prosperity these days but i say , why ca n't we have prosperity built on peace rather than prosperity built on war ?
why ca n't we have prosperity and an honest government in washington , d. c. , at the same time .
believe me , we can .
and eisenhower is the man that can lead this crusade to bring us that kind of prosperity .
and , now , finally , i know that you wonder whether or not i am going to stay on the republican ticket or resign .
let me say this : i do n't believe that i ought to quit because i 'm not a quitter .
and , incidentally , pat 's not a quitter .
after all , her name was patricia ryan and she was born on st. patrick 's day , and you know the irish never quit .
but the decision , my friends , is not mine .
i would do nothing that would harm the possibilities of dwight eisenhower to become president of the united states .
and for that reason i am submitting to the republican national committee tonight through this television broadcast the decision which it is theirs to make .
let them decide whether my position on the ticket will help or hurt .
and i am going to ask you to help them decide .
wire and write the republican national committee whether you think i should stay on or whether i should get off .
and whatever their decision is , i will abide by it .
but just let me say this last word .
regardless of what happens i 'm going to continue this fight .
i 'm going to campaign up and down america until we drive the crooks and the communists and those that defend them out of washington .
and remember , folks , eisenhower is a great man .
believe me .
he 's a great man .
and a vote for eisenhower is a vote for what 's good for america .

