my fellow americans : 
 i have just returned from berlin , the city from which the germans intended to rule the world .
it is a ghost city .
the buildings are in ruins , its economy and its people are in ruins .
our party also visited what is left of frankfurt and darmstadt .
we flew over the remains of kassel , magdeburg , and other devastated cities .
german women and children and old men were wandering over the highways , returning to bombed - out homes or leaving bombed out cities , searching for food and shelter .
war has indeed come home to germany and to the german people .
it has come home in all the frightfulness with which the german leaders started and waged it .
the german people are beginning to atone for the crimes of the gangsters whom they placed in power and whom they wholeheartedly approved and obediently followed .
we also saw some of the terrific destruction which the war had brought to the occupied countries of western europe and to england .
how glad i am to be home again !
and how grateful to almighty god that this land of ours has been spared !
we must do all we can to spare her from the ravages of any future breach of the peace .
that is why , though the united states wants no territory or profit or selfish advantage out of this war , we are going to maintain the military bases necessary for the complete protection of our interests and of world peace .
bases which our military experts deem to be essential for our protection , and which are not now in our possession , we will acquire .
we will acquire them by arrangements consistent with the united nations charter .
no one can foresee what another war would mean to our own cities and our own people .
what we are doing to japan now -- even with the new atomic bomb -- is only a small fraction of what would happen to the world in a third world war .
that is why the united nations are determined that there shall be no next war .
that is why the united nations are determined to remain united and strong .
we can never permit any aggressor in the future to be clever enough to divide us or strong enough to defeat us .
that was the guiding spirit in the conference at san francisco .
that was the guiding spirit in the conference of berlin .
that will be the guiding spirit in the peace settlements to come .
in the conference of berlin , it was easy for me to get along in mutual understanding and friendship with generalissimo stalin , with prime minister churchill , and later with prime minister attlee .
strong foundations of good will and cooperation had been laid by president roosevelt .
and it was clear that those foundations rested upon much more than the personal friendships of three individuals .
there was a fundamental accord and agreement upon the objectives ahead of us .
two of the three conferees of teheran and yalta were missing by the end of this conference .
each of them was sorely missed .
each had done his work toward winning this war .
each had made a great contribution toward establishing and maintaining a lasting world peace .
each of them seems to have been ordained to lead his country in its hour of greatest need .
and so thoroughly had they done their jobs that we were able to carry on and to reach many agreements essential to the future peace and security of the world .
the results of the berlin conference have been published .
there were no secret agreements or commitments -- apart from current military arrangements .
and it was made perfectly plain to my colleagues at the conference that , under our constitution , the president has no power to make any treaties without ratification by the senate of the united states .
i want to express my thanks for the excellent services which were rendered at this conference by secretary of state byrnes , and which were highly commended by the leaders of the other two powers .
am thankful also to the other members of the american delegation - admiral leahy and ambassadors harriman , davies , and pauley -- and to the entire american staff .
without their hard work and sound advice the conference would have been unable to accomplish as much as it did .
the conference was concerned with many political and economic questions .
but there was one strictly military matter uppermost in the minds of the american delegates .
it was the winning of the war against japan .
on our program , that was the most important item .
the military arrangements made at berlin were of course secret .
one of those secrets was revealed yesterday , when the soviet union declared war on japan .
the soviet union , before she had been informed of our new weapon , agreed to enter the war in the pacific .
we gladly welcome into this struggle against the last of the axis aggressors our gallant and victorious ally against the nazis .
the japs will soon learn some more of the other military secrets agreed upon at berlin .
they will learn them firsthand -- and they will not like them .
before we met at berlin , the united states government had sent to the soviet and british governments our ideas of what should be taken up at the conference .
at the first meeting our delegation submitted these proposals for discussion .
subjects were added by the soviet and british governments , but in the main the conference was occupied with the american proposals .
our first nonmilitary agreement in berlin was the establishment of the council of foreign ministers .
the council is going to be the continuous meeting ground of the five principal governments , on which to reach common understanding regarding the peace settlements .
this does not mean that the five governments are going to try to dictate to , or dominate , other nations .
it will be their duty to apply , so far as possible , the fundamental principles of justice underlying the charter adopted at san francisco .
just as the meeting at dumbarton oaks drew up the proposals to be placed before the conference at san francisco , so this council of foreign ministers will lay the groundwork for future peace settlements .
this preparation by the council will make possible speedier , more orderly , more efficient , and more cooperative peace settlements than could otherwise be obtained .
one of the first tasks of the council of foreign ministers is to draft proposed treaties of peace with former enemy countries -- italy , rumania , bulgaria , hungary , and finland .
these treaties , of course , will have to be passed upon by all the nations concerned .
in our own country the senate will have to ratify them .
but we shall begin at once the necessary preparatory work .
adequate study now may avoid the planting of the seeds of future wars .
i am sure that the american people will agree with me that this council of foreign ministers will be effective in hastening the day of peace and reconstruction .
we are anxious to settle the future of italy first among the former enemy countries .
italy was the first to break away from the axis .
she helped materially in the final defeat of germany .
she has now joined us in the war against japan .
she is making real progress toward democracy .
a peace treaty with a democratic italian government will make it possible for us to receive italy as a member of the united nations .
the council of foreign ministers will also have to start the preparatory work for a german peace settlement .
but its final acceptance will have to wait until germany has developed a government with which a peace treaty can be made .
in the meantime , the conference of berlin laid down the specific political and economic principles under which germany will be governed by the occupying powers .
those principles have been published .
i hope that all of you will read them.1 
 1see item 91 .
they seek to rid germany of the forces which have made her so long feared and hated , and which have now brought her to complete disaster .
they are intended to eliminate nazisre , armaments , war industries , the german general staff and all its military tradition .
they seek to rebuild democracy by control of german education , by reorganizing local government and the judiciary , by encouraging free speech , free press , freedom of religion , and the right of labor to organize .
german industry is to be decentralized in order to do away with concentration of economic power in cartels and monopolies .
chief emphasis is to be on agriculture and peaceful industry .
german economic power to make war is to be eliminated .
the germans are not to have a higher standard of living than their former victims , the people of the defeated and occupied countries of europe .
we are going to do what we can to make germany over into a decent nation , so that it may eventually work its way from the economic chaos it has brought upon itself , back into a place in the civilized world .
the economic action taken against germany at the berlin conference included another most important item -- reparations .
we do not intend again to make the mistake of exacting reparations in money and then lending germany the money with which to pay .
reparations this time are to be paid in physical assets from those resources of germany which are not required for her peacetime subsistence .
the first purpose of reparations is to take out of germany everything with which she can prepare for another war .
its second purpose is to help the devastated countries to bring about their own recovery by means of the equipment and material taken from germany .
at the crimea conference a basis for fixing reparations had been proposed for initial discussion and study by the reparations commission .
that basis was a total amount of reparations of twenty billions of dollars .
of this sum , one half was to go to russia , which had suffered more heavily in the loss of life and property than any other country .
but at berlin the idea of attempting to fix a dollar value on the property to be removed from germany was dropped .
to fix a dollar value on the share of each nation would be a sort of guarantee of the amount each nation would get -- a guarantee which might not be fulfilled .
therefore , it was decided to divide the property by percentages of the total amount available .
we still generally agreed that russia should get approximately half of the total for herself and poland , and that the remainder should be divided among all the other nations entitled to reparations .
under our agreement at berlin , the reparations claims of the soviet union and poland are to be met from the property located in the zone of germany occupied by the soviet union , and from the german assets in bulgaria , finland , hungary , rumania and east austria .
the reparations claims of all the other countries are to be met from property located in the western zones of occupation in germany , and from the german assets in all other countries .
the soviet waives all claim to gold captured by the allied troops in germany .
this formula of taking reparations by zones will lead to less friction among the allies than the tentative basis originally proposed for study at yalta .
the difficulty with this formula , however , is that the industrial capital equipment not necessary for german peace economy is not evenly divided among the zones of occupation .
the western zones have a much higher percentage than the eastern zone , which is mostly devoted to agriculture and to the production of raw materials .
in order to equalize the distribution and to give russia and poland their fair share of approximately 50 percent , it was decided that they should receive , without any reimbursement , 10 percent of the capital equipment in the western zones available for reparations .
as you will note from the communique , a further 15 percent of the capital equipment in the western zones not necessary for germany 's peace economy is also to be turned over to russia and poland .
but this is not free .
for this property , poland and russia will give to the western zones an equal amount in value in food , coal , and other raw materials .
this 15 percent , therefore , is not additional reparations for russia and poland .
it is a means of maintaining a balanced economy in germany and providing the usual exchange of goods between the eastern part and the western part .
it was agreed at berlin that the payment of reparations , from whatever zones taken , should always leave enough resources to enable the german people to subsist without sustained support from other nations .
the question of poland was a most difficult one .
certain compromises about poland had already been agreed upon at the crimea conference .
they obviously were binding upon us at berlin .
by the time of the berlin conference , the polish provisional government of national unity had already been formed ; and it had been recognized by all of us .
the new polish government had agreed to hold free and unfettered elections as soon as possible , on the basis of universal suffrage and the secret ballot .
in acceptance -- in accordance with the crimea agreement , we did seek the opinion of the polish provisional government of national unity with respect to its western and northern boundaries .
they agreed , as did we all , that the final determination of the borders could not be accomplished at berlin , but must await the peace settlement .
however , a considerable portion of what was the russian zone of occupation in germany was turned over to poland at the berlin conference for administrative purposes until the final determination of the peace settlement .
nearly every international agreement has in it the element of compromise .
the agreement on poland is no exception .
no one nation can expect to get everything that it wants .
it is a question of give and take -- of being willing to meet your neighbor half - way .
in this instance , there is much to justify the action taken .
the agreement on some line -- even provisionally -- was necessary to enable the new poland to organize itself , and to permit the speedier withdrawal of the armed forces which had liberated her from the germans .
in the area east of the curzon line there are over 3,000,000 poles who are to be returned to poland .
they need room , room to settle .
the new area in the west was formerly populated by germans .
but most of them have already left in the face of the invading soviet army .
we were informed that there were only about a million and a half left .
the territory the poles are to administer will enable poland better to support its population .
it will provide a short and more easily defensible frontier between poland and germany .
settled by poles , it will provide a more homogeneous nation .
the three powers also agreed to help bring about the earliest possible return to poland of all poles who wish to return , including soldiers , with the assurance that they would have all the rights of other polish citizens .
the action taken at berlin will help carry out the basic policy of the united nations toward poland -- to create a strong , independent , and prosperous nation with a government to be selected by the people themselves .
it was agreed to recommend that in the peace settlement a portion of east prussia should be turned over to russia .
that , too , was agreed upon at yalta .
it will provide the soviet union , which did so much to bring about victory in europe , with an ice - free port at the expense of germany .
at yalta it was agreed , you will recall , that the three governments would assume a common responsibility in helping to reestablish in the liberated and satellite nations of europe governments broadly representative of democratic elements in the population .
that responsibility still stands .
we all recognize it as a joint responsibility of the three governments .
it was reaffirmed in the berlin declarations on rumania , bulgaria , and hungary .
these nations are not to be spheres of influence of any one power .
they are now governed by allied control commissions composed of representatives of the three governments which met at yalta and berlin .
these control commissions , it is true , have not been functioning completely to our satisfaction ; but improved procedures were agreed upon at berlin .
until these states are reestablished as members of the international family , they are the joint concern of all of us .
the american delegation was much disturbed over the inability of the representatives of a free press to get information out of the former german satellite nations .
the three governments agreed at berlin that the allied press would enjoy full freedom from now on to report to the world upon all developments in rumania , bulgaria , hungary , and finland .
the same agreement was reaffirmed also as to poland .
one of the persistent causes for wars in europe in the last two centuries has been the selfish control of the waterways of europe .
i mean the danube , the black sea straits , the rhine , the kiel canal , and all the inland waterways of europe which border upon two or more states .
the united states proposed at berlin that there be free and unrestricted navigation of these inland waterways .
we think this is important to the future peace and security of the world .
we proposed that regulations for such navigation be provided by international authorities .
the function of the agencies would be to develop the use of the waterways and assure equal treatment on them for all nations .
membership on the agencies would include the united states , great britain , the soviet union , and france , plus those states which border on the waterways .
our proposal was considered by the conference and was referred to the council of ministers .
there , the united states intends to press for its adoption .
any man who sees europe now must realize that victory in a great war is not something you win once and for all , like victory in a ball game .
victory in a great war is something that must be won and kept won .
it can be lost after you have won it -- if you are careless or negligent or indifferent .
europe today is hungry .
i am not talking about germans .
i am talking about the people of the countries which were overrun and devastated by the germans , and particularly about the people of western europe .
many of them lack clothes and fuel and tools and shelter and raw materials .
they lack the means to restore their cities and their factories .
as the winter comes on , the distress will increase .
unless we do what we can to help , we may lose next winter what we won at such terrible cost last spring .
desperate men are liable to destroy the structure of their society to find in the wreckage some substitute for hope .
if we let europe go cold and hungry , we may lose some of the foundations of order on which the hope for worldwide peace must rest .
we must help to the limits of our strength .
and we will .
our meeting at berlin was the first meeting of the great allies since victory was won in europe .
naturally our thoughts now turn to the day of victory in japan .
the british , chinese , and united states governments have given the japanese people adequate warning of what is in store for them .
we have laid down the general terms on which they can surrender .
our warning went unheeded ; our terms were rejected .
since then the japanese have seen what our atomic bomb can do .
they can foresee what it will do in the future .
the world will note that the first atomic bomb was dropped on hiroshima , a military base .
that was because we wished in this first attack to avoid , insofar as possible , the killing of civilians .
but that attack is only a warning of things to come .
if japan does not surrender , bombs will have to be dropped on her war industries and , unfortunately , thousands of civilian lives will be lost .
i urge japanese civilians to leave industrial cities immediately , and save themselves from destruction .
i realize the tragic significance of the atomic bomb .
its production and its use were not lightly undertaken by this government .
but we knew that our enemies were on the search for it .
we know now how close they were to finding it .
and we knew the disaster which would come to this nation , and to all peace - loving nations , to all civilization , if they had found it first .
that is why we felt compelled to undertake the long and uncertain and costly labor of discovery and production .
we won the race of discovery against the germans .
having found the bomb we have used it .
we have used it against those who attacked us without warning at pearl harbor , against those who have starved and beaten and executed american prisoners of war , against those who have abandoned all pretense of obeying international laws of warfare .
we have used it in order to shorten the agony of war , in order to save the lives of thousands and thousands of young americans .
we shall continue to use it until we completely destroy japan 's power to make war .
only a japanese surrender will stop us .
the atomic bomb is too dangerous to be loose in a lawless world .
that is why great britain , canada , and the united states , who have the secret of its production , do not intend to reveal that secret until means have been found to control the bomb so as to protect ourselves and the rest of the world from the danger of total destruction .
as far back as last may , secretary of war stimson , at my suggestion , appointed a committee upon which secretary of state byrnes served as my personal representative , to prepare plans for the future control of this bomb .
i shall ask the congress to cooperate to the end that its production and use be controlled , and that its power be made an overwhelming influence towards world peace .
we must constitute ourselves trustees of this new force -- to prevent its misuse , and to turn it into the channels of service to mankind .
it is an awful responsibility which has come to us .
we thank god that it has come to us , instead of to our enemies ; and we pray that he may guide us to use it in his ways and for his purposes .
our victory in europe was more than a victory of arms .
it was a victory of one way of life over another .
it was a victory of an ideal founded on the rights of the common man , on the dignity of the human being , on the conception of the state as the servant -- and not the master -- of its people .
a free people showed that it was able to defeat professional soldiers whose only moral arms were obedience and the worship of force .
we tell ourselves that we have emerged from this war the most powerful nation in the world -- the most powerful nation , perhaps , in all history .
that is true , but not in the sense some of us believe it to be true .
the war has shown us that we have tremendous resources to make all the materials for war .
it has shown us that we have skillful workers and managers and able generals , and a brave people capable of bearing arms .
all these things we knew before .
the new thing -- the thing which we had not known -- the thing we have learned now and should never forget , is this : that a society of self - governing men is more powerful , more enduring , more creative than any other kind of society , however disciplined , however centralized .
we know now that the basic proposition of the worth and dignity of man is not a sentimental aspiration or a vain hope or a piece of rhetoric .
it is the strongest , most creative force now present in this world .
now let us use that force and all our resources and all our skills in the great cause of a just and lasting peace !
the three great powers are now more closely than ever bound together in determination to achieve that kind of peace .
from teheran , and the crimea , from san francisco and berlin -- we shall continue to march together to a lasting peace and a happy world !

i am sorry that the microphones are in the way , but i must leave them the way they are because i have got to be able to see what i am doing -- as i am always able to see what i am doing .
i ca n't tell you how very much i appreciate the honor which you have just conferred upon me .
i shall continue to try to deserve it .
i accept the nomination .
and i want to thank this convention for its unanimous nomination of my good friend and colleague , senator barkley of kentucky .
he is a great man , and a great public servant .
senator barkley and i will win this election and make these republicans like it -- do n't you forget that !
we will do that because they are wrong and we are right , and i will prove it to you in just a few minutes .
this convention met to express the will and reaffirm the beliefs of the democratic party .
there have been differences of opinion , and that is the democratic way .
those differences have been settled by a majority vote , as they should be .
now it is time for us to get together and beat the common enemy .
and that is up to you .
we have been working together for victory in a great cause .
victory has become a habit of our party .
it has been elected four times in succession , and i am convinced it will be elected a fifth time next november .
the reason is that the people know that the democratic party is the people 's party , and the republican party is the party of special interest , and it always has been and always will be .
the record of the democratic party is written in the accomplishments of the last 16 years .
i do n't need to repeat them .
they have been very ably placed before this convention by the keynote speaker , the candidate for vice president , and by the permanent chairman .
confidence and security have been brought to the people by the democratic party .
farm income has increased from less than $ 2 billion in 1932 to more than $ 18 billion in 1947 .
never in the world were the farmers of any republic or any kingdom or any other country as prosperous as the farmers of the united states ; and if they do n't do their duty by the democratic party , they are the most ungrateful people in the world !
wages and salaries in this country have increased from $ 29 billion in 1933 to more than $ 128 billion in 1947 .
that 's labor , and labor never had but one friend in politics , and that is the democratic party and franklin d. roosevelt .
and i say to labor what i have said to the farmers : they are the most ungrateful people in the world if they pass the democratic party by this year .
the total national income has increased from less than $ 40 billion in 1933 to $ 203 billion in 1947 , the greatest in all the history of the world .
these benefits have been spread to all the people , because it is the business of the democratic party to see that the people get a fair share of these things .
this last , worst 80th congress proved just the opposite for the republicans .
the record on foreign policy of the democratic party is that the united states has been turned away permanently from isolationism , and we have converted the greatest and best of the republicans to our viewpoint on that subject .
the united states has to accept its full responsibility for leadership in international affairs .
we have been the backers and the people who organized and started the united nations , first started under that great democratic president , woodrow wilson , as the league of nations .
the league was sabotaged by the republicans in 1920 .
and we must see that the united nations continues a strong and growing body , so we can have everlasting peace in the world .
we removed trade barriers in the world , which is the best asset we can have for peace .
those trade barriers must not be put back into operation again .
we have started the foreign aid program , which means the recovery of europe and china , and the far east .
we instituted the program for greece and turkey , and i will say to you that all these things were done in a cooperative and bipartisan manner .
the foreign relations committees of the senate and house were taken into the full confidence of the president in every one of these moves , and do n't let anybody tell you anything else .
as i have said time and time again , foreign policy should be the policy of the whole nation and not the policy of one party or the other .
partisanship should stop at the water 's edge ; and i shall continue to preach that through this whole campaign .
i would like to say a word or two now on what i think the republican philosophy is ; and i will speak from actions and from history and from experience .
the situation in 1932 was due to the policies of the republican party control of the government of the united states .
the republican party , as i said a while ago , favors the privileged few and not the common everyday man .
ever since its inception , that party has been under the control of special privilege ; and they have completely proved it in the 80th congress .
they proved it by the things they did to the people , and not for them .
they proved it by the things they failed to do .
now , let 's look at some of them -- just a few .
time and time again i recommended extension of price control before it expired june 30 , 1946 .
i asked for that extension in september 1945 , in november 1945 , in a message on the state of the union in 1946 ; and that price control legislation did not come to my desk until june 30 , 1946 , on the day on which it was supposed to expire .
and it was such a rotten bill that i could n't sign it .
and 30 days after that , they sent me one just as bad .
i had to sign it , because they quit and went home .
they said , when opa died , that prices would adjust themselves for the benefit of the country .
they have been adjusting themselves all right !
they have gone all the way off the chart in adjusting themselves , at the expense of the consumer and for the benefit of the people that hold the goods .
i called a special session of the congress in november 1947 -- november 17 , 1947 -- and i set out a 10-point program for the welfare and benefit of this country , among other things standby controls .
i got nothing .
congress has still done nothing .
way back 4 1/2 years ago , while i was in the senate , we passed a housing bill in the senate known as the wagner - ellender - taft bill .
it was a bill to clear the slums in the big cities and to help to erect low - rent housing .
that bill , as i said , passed the senate 4 years ago .
it died in the house .
that bill was reintroduced in the 80th congress as the taft - ellender - wagner bill .
the name was slightly changed , but it is practically the same bill .
and it passed the senate , but it was allowed to die in the house of representatives ; and they sat on that bill , and finally forced it out of the banking and currency committee , and the rules committee took charge , and it still is in the rules committee .
but desperate pleas from philadelphia in that convention that met here 3 weeks ago could n't get that housing bill passed .
they passed a bill they called a housing bill , which is n't worth the paper it 's written on .
in the field of labor we needed moderate legislation to promote labor - management harmony , but congress passed instead that so - called taft - hartley act , which has disrupted labor - management relations and will cause strife and bitterness for years to come if it is not repealed , as the democratic platform says it ought to be repealed .
on the labor department , the republican platform of 1944 said , if they were in power , that they would build up a strong labor department .
they have simply torn it up .
only one bureau is left that is functioning , and they cut the appropriation of that so it can hardly function .
i recommended an increase in the minimum wage .
what did i get ?
nothing .
absolutely nothing .
i suggested that the schools in this country are crowded , teachers underpaid , and that there is a shortage of teachers .
one of our greatest national needs is more and better schools .
i urged the congress to provide $ 300 million to aid the states in the present educational crisis .
congress did nothing about it .
time and again i have recommended improvements in the social security law , including extending protection to those not now covered , and increasing the amount of benefits , to reduce the eligibility age of women from 65 to 60 years .
congress studied the matter for 2 years , but could n't find the time to extend or increase the benefits .
but they did find time to take social security benefits away from 750,000 people , and they passed that over my veto .
i have repeatedly asked the congress to pass a health program .
the nation suffers from lack of medical care .
that situation can be remedied any time the congress wants to act upon it .
everybody knows that i recommended to the congress the civil rights program .
i did that because i believed it to be my duty under the constitution .
some of the members of my own party disagree with me violently on this matter .
but they stand up and do it openly !
people can tell where they stand .
but the republicans all professed to be for these measures .
but congress failed to 
 act .
they had enough men to do it , they could have had cloture , they did n't have to have a filibuster .
they had enough people in that congress that would vote for cloture .
now everybody likes to have low taxes , but we must reduce the national debt in times of prosperity .
and when tax relief can be given , it ought to go to those who need it most , and not those who need it least , as this republican rich man 's tax bill did when they passed it over my veto on the third try .
the first one of these was so rotten that they could n't even stomach it themselves .
they finally did send one that was somewhat improved , but it still helps the rich and sticks a knife into the back of the poor .
now the republicans came here a few weeks ago , and they wrote a platform .
i hope you have all read that platform .
they adopted the platform , and that platform had a lot of promises and statements of what the republican party is for , and what they would do if they were in power .
they promised to do in that platform a lot of things i have been asking them to do that they have refused to do when they had the power .
the republican platform cries about cruelly high prices .
i have been trying to get them to do something about high prices ever since they met the first time .
now listen !
this is equally as bad , and as cynical .
the republican platform comes out for slum clearance and low - rental housing .
i have been trying to get them to pass that housing bill ever since they met the first time , and it is still resting in the rules committee , that bill .
the republican platform favors educational opportunity and promotion of education .
i have been trying to get congress to do something about that ever since they came there , and that bill is at rest in the house of representatives .
the republican platform is for extending and increasing social security benefits .
think of that !
increasing social security benefits !
yet when they had the opportunity , they took 750,000 off the social security rolls !
i wonder if they think they can fool the people of the united states with such poppycock as that !
there is a long list of these promises in that republican platform .
if it were n't so late , i would tell you all about them .
i have discussed a number of these failures of the republican 80th congress .
every one of them is important .
two of them are of major concern to nearly every american family .
they failed to do anything about high prices , they failed to do anything about housing .
my duty as president requires that i use every means within my power to get the laws the people need on matters of such importance and urgency .
i am therefore calling this congress back into session july 26th .
on the 26th day of july , which out in missouri we call " turnip day , " i am going to call congress back and ask them to pass laws to halt rising prices , to meet the housing crisis -- which they are saying they are for in their platform .
at the same time i shall ask them to act upon other vitally needed measures such as aid to education , which they say they are for ; a national health program ; civil rights legislation , which they say they are for ; an increase in the minimum wage , which i doubt very much they are for ; extension of the social security coverage and increased benefits , which they say they are for ; funds for projects needed in our program to provide public power and cheap electricity .
by indirection , this 80th congress has tried to sabotage the power policies the united states has pursued for 14 years .
that power lobby is as bad as the real estate lobby , which is sitting on the housing bill .
i shall ask for adequate and decent laws for displaced persons in place of this anti - semitic , anti - catholic law which this 80th congress passed .
now , my friends , if there is any reality behind that republican platform , we ought to get some action from a short session of the 80th congress .
they can do this job in 15 days , if they want to do it .
they will still have time to go out and run for office .
they are going to try to dodge their responsibility .
they are going to drag all the red herrings they can across this campaign , but i am here to say that senator barkley and i are not going to let them get away with it .
now , what that worst 80th congress does in this special session will be the test .
the american people will not decide by listening to mere words , or by reading a mere platform .
they will decide on the record , the record as it has been written .
and in the record is the stark truth , that the battle lines of 1948 are the same as they were in 1932 , when the nation lay prostrate and helpless as a result of republican misrule and inaction .
in 1932 we were attacking the citadel of special privilege and greed .
we were fighting to drive the money changers from the temple .
today , in 1948 , we are now the defenders of the stronghold of democracy and of equal opportunity , the haven of the ordinary people of this land and not of the favored classes or the powerful few .
the battle cry is just the same now as it was in 1932 , and i paraphrase the words of franklin d. roosevelt as he issued the challenge , in accepting nomination in chicago : " this is more than a political call to arms .
give me your help , not to win votes alone , but to win in this new crusade to keep america secure and safe for its own people . "
now my friends , with the help of god and the wholehearted push which you can put behind this campaign , we can save this country from a continuation of the 80th congress , and from misrule from now on .
i must have your help .
you must get in and push , and win this election .
the country ca n't afford another republican congress .

mr. chairman , mrs. roosevelt , senator morse , distinguished guests , ladies and gentlemen : 
 i am happy to be present at the closing session of the 38th annual conference of the national association for the advancement of colored people .
the occasion of meeting with you here at the lincoln memorial affords me the opportunity to congratulate the association upon its effective work for the improvement of our democratic processes .
i should like to talk to you briefly about civil rights and human freedom .
it is my deep conviction that we have reached a turning point in the long history of our country 's efforts to guarantee freedom and equality to all our citizens .
recent events in the united states and abroad have made us realize that it is more important today than ever before to insure that all americans enjoy these rights .
when i say all americans i mean all americans .
the civil rights laws written in the early years of our republic , and the traditions which have been built upon them , are precious to us .
those laws were drawn up with the memory still fresh in men 's minds of the tyranny of an absentee government .
they were written to protect the citizen against any possible tyrannical act by the new government in this country .
but we can not be content with a civil liberties program which emphasizes only the need of protection against the possibility of tyranny by the government .
we can not stop there .
we must keep moving forward , with new concepts of civil rights to safeguard our heritage .
the extension of civil rights today means , not protection of the people against the government , but protection of the people by the government .
we must make the federal government a friendly , vigilant defender of the rights and equalities of all americans .
and again i mean all americans .
as americans , we believe that every man should be free to live his life as he wishes .
he should be limited only by his responsibility to his fellow countrymen .
if this freedom is to be more than a dream , each man must be guaranteed equality of opportunity .
the only limit to an american 's achievement should be his ability , his industry , and his character .
these rewards for his effort should be determined only by those truly relevant qualifies .
our immediate task is to remove the last remnants of the barriers which stand between millions of our citizens and their birthright .
there is no justifiable reason for discrimination because of ancestry , or religion , or race , or color .
we must not tolerate such limitations on the freedom of any of our people and on their enjoyment of basic rights which every citizen in a truly democratic society must possess .
every man should have the right to a decent home , the right to an education , the right to adequate medical care , the right to a worthwhile job , the right to an equal share in making the public decisions through the ballot , and the fight to a fair trial in a fair court .
we must insure that these rights -- on equal terms -- are enjoyed by every citizen .
to these principles i pledge my full and continued support .
many of our people still suffer the indignity of insult , the narrowing fear of intimidation , and , i regret to say , the threat of physical injury and mob violence .
prejudice and intolerance in which these evils are rooted still exist .
the conscience of our nation , and the legal machinery which enforces it , have not yet secured to each citizen full freedom from fear .
we can not wait another decade or another generation to remedy these evils .
we must work , as never before , to cure them now .
the aftermath of war and the desire to keep faith with our nation 's historic principles make the need a pressing one .
the support of desperate populations of battle - ravaged countries must be won for the free way of life .
we must have them as allies in our continuing struggle for the peaceful solution of the world 's problems .
freedom is not an easy lesson to teach , nor an easy cause to sell , to peoples beset by every kind of privation .
they may surrender to the false security offered so temptingly by totalitarian regimes unless we can prove the superiority of democracy .
our case for democracy should be as strong as we can make it .
it should rest on practical evidence that we have been able to put our own house in order .
for these compelling reasons , we can no longer afford the luxury of a leisurely attack upon prejudice and discrimination .
there is much that state and local governments can do in providing positive safeguards for civil rights .
but we can not , any longer , await the growth of a will to action in the slowest state or the most backward community .
our national government must show the way .
this is a difficult and complex undertaking .
federal laws and administrative machineries must be improved and expanded .
we must provide the government with better tools to do the job .
as a first step , i appointed an advisory committee on civil rights last december .
its members , fifteen distinguished private citizens , have been surveying our civil rights difficulties and needs for several months .
i am confident that the product of their work will be a sensible and vigorous program for action by all of us .
we must strive to advance civil rights wherever it lies within our power .
for example , i have asked the congress to pass legislation extending basic civil rights to the people of guam and american samoa so that these people can share our ideals of freedom and self - government .
this step , with others which will follow , is evidence to the rest of the world of our confidence in the ability of all men to build free institutions .
the way ahead is not easy .
we shall need all the wisdom , imagination and courage we can muster .
we must and shall guarantee the civil rights of all our citizens .
never before has the need been so urgent for skillful and vigorous action to bring us closer to our ideal .
we can reach the goal .
when past difficulties faced our nation we met the challenge with inspiring charters of human rights - the declaration of independence , the constitution , the bill of rights , and the emancipation proclamation .
today our representatives , and those of other liberty - loving countries on the united nations commission on human rights , are preparing an international bill of rights .
we can be confident that it will be a great landmark in man 's long search for freedom since its members consist of such distinguished citizens of the world as mrs. franklin d. roosevelt .
with these noble charters to guide us , and with faith in our hearts , we shall make our land a happier home for our people , a symbol of hope for all men , and a rock of security in a troubled world .
abraham lincoln understood so well the ideal which you and i seek today .
as this conference closes we would do well to keep in mind his words , when he said , 
 " if it shall please the divine being who determines the destinies of nations , we shall remain a united people , and we will , humbly seeking the divine guidance , make their prolonged national existence a source of new benefits to themselves and their successors , and to all classes and conditions of mankind . "

my fellow americans : 
 i want to talk to you plainly tonight about what we are doing in korea and about our policy in the far east .
in the simplest terms , what we are doing in korea is this : we are trying to prevent a third world war .
i think most people in this country recognized that fact last june .
and they warmly supported the decision of the government to help the republic of korea against the communist aggressors .
now , many persons , even some who applauded our decision to defend korea , have forgotten the basic reason for our action .
it is right for us to be in korea now .
it was right last june .
it is right today .
i want to remind you why this is true .
the communists in the kremlin are engaged in a monstrous conspiracy to stamp out freedom all over the world .
if they were to succeed , the united states would be numbered among their principal victims .
it must be clear to everyone that the united states can not -- and will not -- sit idly by and await foreign conquest .
the only question is : what is the best time to meet the threat and how is the best way to meet it ?
the best time to meet the threat is in the beginning .
it is easier to put out a fire in the beginning when it is small than after it has become a roaring blaze .
and the best way to meet the threat of aggression is for the peace - loving nations to act together .
if they do n't act together , they are likely to be picked off , one by one .
if they had followed the right policies in the 1930 's -- if the free countries had acted together to crush the aggression of the dictators , and if they had acted in the beginning when the aggression was small -- there probably would have been no world war ii .
if history has taught us anything , it is that aggression anywhere in the world is a threat to the peace everywhere in the world .
when that aggression is supported by the cruel and selfish rulers of a powerful nation who are bent on conquest , it becomes a dear and present danger to the security and independence of every free nation .
this is a lesson that most people in this country have learned thoroughly .
this is the basic reason why we joined in creating the united nations .
and , since the end of world war ii , we have been putting that lesson into practice -- we have been working with other free nations to check the aggressive designs of the soviet union before they can result in a third world war .
that is what we did in greece , when that nation was threatened by the aggression of international communism .
the attack against greece could have led to general war .
but this country came to the aid of greece .
the united nations supported greek resistance .
with our help , the determination and efforts of the greek people defeated the attack on the spot .
another big communist threat to peace was the berlin blockade .
that too could have led to war .
but again it was settled because free men would not back down in an emergency .
the aggression against korea is the boldest and most dangerous move the communists have yet made .
the attack on korea was part of a greater plan for conquering all of asia .
i would like to read to you from a secret intelligence report which came to us after the attack on korea .
it is a report of a speech a communist army officer in north korea gave to a group of spies and saboteurs last may , 1 month before south korea was invaded .
the report shows in great detail how this invasion was part of a carefully prepared plot .
here , in part , is what the communist officer , who had been trained in moscow , told his men : " our forces , " he said , " are scheduled to attack south korean forces about the middle of june .... the coming attack on south korea marks the first step toward the liberation of asia . "
notice that he used the word " liberation . "
this is communist double - talk meaning " conquest . "
i have another secret intelligence report here .
this one tells what another communist officer in the far east told his men several months before the invasion of korea .
here is what he said : " in order to successfully undertake the long - awaited world revolution , we must first unify asia .... lava , indochina , malaya , india , tibet , thailand , philippines , and japan are our ultimate targets .... the united states is the only obstacle on our road for the liberation of all the countries in southeast asia .
in other words , we must unify the people of asia and crush the united states . "
again , " liberation " in " commie " language means conquest .
that is what the communist leaders are telling their people , and that is what they have been trying to do .
they want to control all asia from the kremlin .
this plan of conquest is in flat contradiction to what we believe .
we believe that korea belong to the koreans , we believe that india belongs to the indians , we believe that all the nations of asia should be free to work out their affairs in their own way .
this is the basis of peace in the far east , and it is the basis of peace everywhere else .
the whole communist imperialism is back of the attack on peace in the far east .
it was the soviet union that trained and equipped the north koreans for aggression .
the chinese communists massed 44 well - trained and well - equipped divisions on the korean frontier .
these were the troops they threw into battle when the north korean communists were beaten .
the question we have had to face is whether the communist plan of conquest can be stopped without a general war .
our government and other countries associated with us in the united nations believe that the best chance of stopping it without a general war is to meet the attack in korea and defeat it there .
that is what we have been doing .
it is a difficult and bitter task .
but so far it has been successful .
so far , we have prevented world war iii .
so far , by fighting a limited war in korea , we have prevented aggression from succeeding , and bringing on a general war .
and the ability of the whole free world to resist communist aggression has been greatly improved .
we have taught the enemy a lesson .
he has found that aggression is not cheap or easy , moreover , men all over the world who want to remain free have been given new courage and new hope .
they know now that the champions of freedom can stand up and fight , and that they will stand up and fight .
our resolute stand in korea is helping the forces of freedom now fighting in indochina and other countries in that part of the world .
it has already slowed down the timetable of conquest .
in korea itself there are signs that the enemy is building up his ground forces for a new mass offensive .
we also know that there have been large increases in the enemy 's available air forces .
if a new attack comes , i feel confident it will be turned back .
the united nations fighting forces are tough and able and well equipped .
they are fighting for a just cause .
they are proving to all the world that the principle of collective security will work .
we are proud of all these forces for the magnificent job they have done against heavy odds .
we pray that their efforts may succeed , for upon their success may hinge the peace of the world .
the communist side must now choose its course of action .
the communist rulers may press the attack against us .
they may take further action which will spread the conflict .
they have that choice , and with it the awful responsibility for what may follow .
the communists also have the choice of a peaceful settlement which could lead to a general relaxation of the tensions in the far east .
the decision is theirs , because the forces of the united nations will strive to limit the conflict if possible .
we do not want to see the conflict in korea extended .
we are trying to prevent a world war -- not to start one .
and the best way to do that is to make it plain that we and the other free countries will continue to resist the attack .
but you may ask why ca n't we take other steps to punish the aggressor .
why do n't we bomb manchuria and china itself ?
why do n't we assist the chinese nationalist troops to land on the mainland of china ?
if we were to do these things we would be running a very grave risk of starting a general war .
if that were to happen , we would have brought about the exact situation we are trying to prevent .
if we were to do these things , we would become entangled in a vast conflict on the continent of asia and our task would become immeasurably more difficult all over the world .
what would suit the ambitions of the kremlin better than for our military forces to be committed to a full - scale war with red china ?
it may well be that , in spite of our best efforts , the communists may spread the war .
but it would be wrong -- tragically wrong -- for us to take the initiative in extending the war .
the dangers are great .
make no mistake about it .
behind the north koreans and chinese communists in the front lines stand additional millions of chinese soldiers .
and behind the chinese stand the tanks , the planes , the submarines , the soldiers , and the scheming rulers of the soviet union .
our aim is to avoid the spread of the conflict .
the course we have been following is the one best calculated to avoid an all - out war .
it is the course consistent with our obligation to do all we can to maintain international peace and security .
our experience in greece and berlin shows that it is the most effective course of action we can follow .
first of all , it is clear that our efforts in korea can blunt the will of the chinese communists to continue the struggle .
the united nations forces have put up a tremendous fight in korea and have inflicted very heavy casualties on the enemy .
our forces are stronger now than they have been before .
these are plain facts which may discourage the chinese communists from continuing their attack .
second , the free world as a whole is growing in military strength every day .
in the united states , in western europe , and throughout the world , free men are alert to the soviet threat and are building their defenses .
this may .
discourage the communist rulers from continuing the war in korea -- and from undertaking new acts of aggression elsewhere .
if the communist authorities realize that they can not defeat us in korea , if they realize it would be foolhardy to widen the hostilities beyond korea , then they may recognize the folly of continuing their aggression .
a peaceful settlement may then be possible .
the door is always open .
then we may achieve a settlement in korea which will not compromise the principles and purposes of the united nations .
i have thought long and hard about this question of extending the war in asia .
i have discussed it many times with the ablest military advisers in the country .
i believe with all my heart that the course we are following is the best course .
i believe that we must try to limit the war to korea for these vital reasons : to make sure that the precious lives of our fighting men are not wasted ; to see that the security of our country and the free world is not needlessly jeopardized ; and to prevent a third world war .
a number of events have made it evident that general macarthur did not agree with that policy .
i have therefore considered it essential to relieve general macarthur so that there would be no doubt or confusion as to the real purpose and aim of our policy .
it was with the deepest personal regret that i found myself compelled to take this action .
general macarthur is one of our greatest military commanders .
but the cause of world peace is much more important than any individual .
the change in commands in the far east means no change whatever in the policy of the united states .
we will carry on the fight in korea with vigor and determination in an effort to bring the war to a speedy and successful conclusion .
the new commander , lt .
gen. matthew ridgway , has already demonstrated that he has the great qualities of military leadership needed for this task .
we are ready , at any time , to negotiate for a restoration of peace in the area .
but we will not engage in appeasement .
we are only interested in real peace .
real peace can be achieved through a settlement based on the following factors : 
 one : the fighting must stop .
two : concrete steps must be taken to insure that the fighting will not break out again .
three : there must be an end to the aggression .
a settlement founded upon these elements would open the way for the unification of korea and the withdrawal of all foreign forces .
in the meantime , i want to be clear about our military objective .
we are fighting to resist an outrageous aggression in korea .
we are trying to keep the korean conflict from spreading to other areas .
but at the same time we must conduct our military activities so as to insure the security of our forces .
this is essential if they are to continue the fight until the enemy abandons its ruthless attempt to destroy the republic of korea .
that is our military objective -- to repel attack and to restore peace .
in the hard fighting in korea , we are proving that collective action among nations is not only a high principle but a workable means of resisting aggression .
defeat of aggression in korea may be the turning point in the world 's search for a practical way of achieving peace and security .
the struggle of the united nations in korea is a struggle for peace .
free nations have united their strength in an effort to prevent a third world war .
that war can come if the communist rulers want it to come .
but this nation and its allies will not be responsible for its coming .
we do not want to widen the conflict .
we will use every effort to prevent that disaster .
and in so doing , we know that we are following the great principles of peace , freedom , and justice .

mr. speaker , mr. president , members of the congress : 
 it is with a heavy heart that i stand before you , my friends and colleagues , in the congress of the united states .
only yesterday , we laid to rest the mortal remains of our beloved president , franklin delano roosevelt .
at a time like this , words are inadequate .
the most eloquent tribute would be a reverent silence .
yet , in this decisive hour , when world events are moving so rapidly , our silence might be misunderstood and might give comfort to our enemies .
in his infinite wisdom , almighty god has seen fit to take from us a great man who loved , and was beloved by , all humanity .
no man could possibly fill the tremendous void left by the passing of that noble soul .
no words can ease the aching hearts of untold millions of every race , creed and color .
the world knows it has lost a heroic champion of justice and freedom .
tragic fate has thrust upon us grave responsibilities .
we must carry on .
our departed leader never looked backward .
he looked forward and moved forward .
that is what he would want us to do .
that is what america will do .
so much blood has already been shed for the ideals which we cherish , and for which franklin delano roosevelt lived and died , that we dare not permit even a momentary pause in the hard fight for victory .
today , the entire world is looking to america for enlightened leadership to peace and progress .
such a leadership requires vision , courage and tolerance .
it can be provided only by a united nation deeply devoted to the highest ideals .
with great humility i call upon all americans to help me keep our nation united in defense of those ideals which have been so eloquently proclaimed by franklin roosevelt .
i want in turn to assure my fellow americans and all of those who love peace and liberty throughout the world that i will support and defend those ideals with all my strength and all my heart .
that is my duty and i shall not shirk it .
so that there can be no possible misunderstanding , both germany and japan can be certain , beyond any shadow of a doubt , that america will continue the fight for freedom until no vestige of resistance remains !
we are deeply conscious of the fact that much hard fighting is still ahead of us .
having to pay such a heavy price to make complete victory certain , america will never become a party to any plan for partial victory !
to settle for merely another temporary respite would surely jeopardize the future security of all the world .
our demand has been , and it remains -- unconditional surrender !
we will not traffic with the breakers of the peace on the terms of the peace .
the responsibility for making of the peace -- and it is a very grave responsibility -- must rest with the defenders of the peace .
we are not unconscious of the dictates of humanity .
we do not wish to see unnecessary or unjustified suffering .
but the laws of god and of man have been violated and the guilty must not go unpunished .
nothing shall shake our determination to punish the war criminals even though we must pursue them to the ends of the earth .
lasting peace can never be secured if we permit our dangerous opponents to plot future wars with impunity at any mountain retreat -- however distant .
in this shrinking world , it is futile to seek safety behind geographical barriers .
real security will be found only in law and in justice .
here in america , we have labored long and hard to achieve a social order worthy of our great heritage .
in our time , tremendous progress has been made toward a really democratic way of life .
let me assure the forward - looking people of america that there will be no relaxation in our efforts to improve the lot of the common people .
in the difficult days ahead , unquestionably we shall face problems of staggering proportions .
however , with the faith of our fathers in our hearts , we do not fear the future .
on the battlefields , we have frequently faced overwhelming odds -- and won !
at home , americans will not be less resolute !
we shall never cease our struggle to preserve and maintain our american way of life .
at this moment , america , along with her brave allies , is paying again a heavy price for the defense of our freedom .
with characteristic energy , we are assisting in the liberation of entire nations .
gradually , the shackles of slavery are being broken by the forces of freedom .
all of us are praying for a speedy victory .
every day peace is delayed costs a terrible toll .
the armies of liberation today are bringing to an end hitler 's ghastly threat to dominate the world .
tokyo rocks under the weight of our bombs .
the grand strategy of the united nations ' war has been determined -- due in no small measure to the vision of our departed commander in chief .
we are now carrying out our part of that strategy under the able direction of admiral leahy , general marshall , admiral king , general arnold , general eisenhower , admiral nimitz and general macarthur .
i want the entire world to know that this direction must and will remain -- unchanged and unhampered !
our debt to the heroic men and valiant women in the service of our country can never be repaid .
they have earned our undying gratitude .
america will never forget their sacrifices .
because of these sacrifices , the dawn of justice and freedom throughout the world slowly casts its gleam across the horizon .
our forefathers came to our rugged shores in search of religious tolerance , political freedom and economic opportunity .
for those fundamental rights , they risked their lives .
we well know today that such rights can be preserved only by constant vigilance , the eternal price of liberty !
within an hour after i took the oath of office , i announced that the san francisco conference would proceed .
we will face the problems of peace with the same courage that we have faced and mastered the problems of war .
in the memory of those who have made the supreme sacrifice -- in the memory of our fallen president -- we shall not fail !
it is not enough to yearn for peace .
we must work , and if necessary , fight for it .
the task of creating a sound international organization is complicated and difficult .
yet , without such organization , the rights of man on earth can not be protected .
machinery for the just settlement of international differences must be found .
without such machinery , the entire world will have to remain an armed camp .
the world will be doomed to deadly conflict , devoid of hope for real peace .
fortunately , people have retained hope for a durable peace .
thoughtful people have always had faith that ultimately justice must triumph .
past experience surely indicates that , without justice , an enduring peace becomes impossible .
in bitter despair , some people have come to believe that wars are inevitable .
with tragic fatalism , they insist that wars have always been , of necessity , and of necessity wars always will be .
to such defeatism , men and women of good will must not and can not yield .
the outlook for humanity is not so hopeless .
during the dark hours of this horrible war , entire nations were kept going by something intangible -- hope !
when warned that abject submission offered the only salvation against overwhelming power , hope showed the way to victory .
hope has become the secret weapon of the forces of liberation !
aggressors could not dominate the human mind .
as long as hope remains , the spirit of man will never be crushed .
but hope alone was not and is not sufficient to avert war .
we must not only have hope but we must have faith enough to work with other peace - loving nations to maintain the peace .
hope was not enough to beat back the aggressors as long as the peace - loving nations were unwilling to come to each other 's defense .
the aggressors were beaten back only when the peace - loving nations united to defend themselves .
if wars in the future are to be prevented the nations must be united in their determination to keep the peace under law .
nothing is more essential to the future peace of the world than continued cooperation of the nations which had to muster the force necessary to defeat the conspiracy of the axis powers to dominate the world .
while these great states have a special responsibility to enforce the peace , their responsibility is based upon the obligations resting upon all states , large and small , not to use force in international relations except in the defense of law .
the responsibility of the great states is to serve and not to dominate the world .
to build a foundation of enduring peace we must not only work in harmony with our friends abroad , but we must have the united support of our own people .
even the most experienced pilot can not bring a ship safely into harbor , unless he has the full cooperation of the crew .
for the benefit of all , every individual must do his duty .
i appeal to every american , regardless of party , race , creed , or color , to support our efforts to build a strong and lasting united nations organization .
you , the members of the congress , surely know how i feel .
only with your help can i hope to complete one of the greatest tasks ever assigned to a public servant .
with divine guidance , and your help , we will find the new passage to a far better world , a kindly and friendly world , with just and lasting peace .
with confidence , i am depending upon all of you .
to destroy greedy tyrants with dreams of world domination , we can not continue in successive generations to sacrifice our finest youth .
in the name of human decency and civilization , a more rational method of deciding national differences must and will be found !
america must assist suffering humanity back along the path of peaceful progress .
this will require time and tolerance .
we shall need also an abiding faith in the people , the kind of faith and courage which franklin delano roosevelt always had !
today , america has become one of the most powerful forces for good on earth .
we must keep it so .
we have achieved a world leadership which does not depend solely upon our military and naval might .
we have learned to fight with other nations in common defense of our freedom .
we must now learn to live with other nations for our mutual good .
we must learn to trade more with other nations so that there may be for our mutual advantage -- increased production , increased employment and better standards of living throughout the world .
may we americans all live up to our glorious heritage .
in that way , america may well lead the world to peace and prosperity .
at this moment , i have in my heart a prayer .
as i have assumed my heavy duties , i humbly pray almighty god , in the words of king solomon : 
 " give therefore thy servant an understanding heart to judge thy people , that i may discern between good and bad ; for who is able to judge this thy so great a people ? "
i ask only to be a good and faithful servant of my lord and my people .

i am more than happy to be with you here today .
i remember very well that wonderful reception you gave me when i was here in 1948 .
i appreciated that , and i also appreciate the way johnstown voted .
i want you to do as well or better for adlai stevenson .
wo n't you do that for me ?
i have been going around the country telling the people the facts and the truth about what is at stake in this election .
i think it is one of the most important we have had .
in fact , i think it is the most important since the civil war .
i have been pointing out the real and the essential differences between the two parties .
the democratic party has a heart for the plain everyday people of the country .
that is what franklin roosevelt 's new deal was all about , and that is what harry truman 's fair deal is all about .
the republican party , on the other hand , is the servant of the big banks , big industry , the real estate lobby , the oil lobby , and the rest of that crew .
with them profits come first ahead of the people .
and you know the reason you have to be so careful in this election , they have the oil lobby and the real estate lobby and the china lobby and the national association of manufacturers , and the only man in washington who represents all the people and is elected by all the people and who is the people 's lobbyist is the president of the united states .
so you will have to be mighty careful who you put in there .
these special interests , these special lobbies , have fought the new deal and the fair deal from the beginning .
they are fighting still , and they will go back on all the progress we have made if you are foolish enough to give them a chance .
that is not what they are telling you now during this campaign , but it is the way they have been voting in the congress .
of course , there is a whole generation of young people now who do not remember much about what happened to this country the last time the republicans ran the national government .
well , anybody who ca n't remember had better ask and find out , because the same thing may happen again if you let them into power this time .
there are a lot of people here who know exactly what it was like .
i am told that in the bethlehem plant here at johnstown , the mills are 8 miles long .
i am also told that from 1930 to 1934 no smoke came from even one of the hundreds of stacks in all those miles of mills .
now they will tell you that that just happened .
well , why is it that they have been expanding and growing and have people working at jobs ?
i will tell you why .
it is because we had a change of administration that had a heart for the people .
i was told , at that same time , that twothirds of the homes in cambria county were up for sale for delinquent taxes 20 years ago .
conditions were just that desperate all over the country , it was not confined to your place in this county , in this city .
now , any time i mention the great depression , the republicans yell that we are just running against herbert hoover .
well , for one thing , they keep bringing him up .
it was not our idea .
it was not our idea at all .
they had him turn up at their republican convention , to remind everybody that he was still a power in the republican party .
we did n't take him there .
and for another thing , the republican record in congress during all the years since hoover 's time , shows they have n't learned a thing , and probably will act as they did before , and just like he did , if they got in again .
they are the people who vote against social security , they vote against -- housing , they vote against rent controls , they vote against minimum wages .
they are the people who voted for taft - hartley and for the labor injunction in the steel case .
they are the people that want to take over the government .
that is the reason i am going around the country , trying to remind the people to do a little thinking for themselves .
and it was n't 1932 when they did these things .
it was 1946 , it was 1947 , it was 1949 , and even 1952 .
you know , you ought to read the fine print in the congressional record and find out how these birds behave when they think you do n't know what they are doing , and then you will know what to do .
the republicans never have looked after the interests of the common people -- and they never will , no matter what their five - star candidate may tell you at election time .
it is clear by now that any relation between what he says about the republican party and its actual record is just purely coincidental .
it is n't necessary to " pour it on . "
all that is necessary for me to do is to tell you the truth and get you to think a little bit .
signs like that young man is wearing " give 'em hell , harry " -- i do n't have to give 'em hell , it 's a lot worse for me to tell the truth on 'em , because they ca n't stand the truth .
now you people are intelligent .
you are a cross - section of this united states of america .
you are educated .
you understand the english language .
you understand what words mean when they are put together in a proper way .
i want you to read the democratic platform .
the democratic platform says exactly what the democratic party stands for .
it says exactly what we have done and what we hope to do .
then i want you to read the republican platform , and if you can make anything out of it but gobbledegook , i 'll pay for lying .
it 's about the lousiest platform that has ever been presented to this country of intelligent people to expect them to support it .
then they go around and tell you what they are going to do , and how they love you , and they have been for this and that , and what they will do in the future .
but i am asking you to read the republican platform , and read the fine print in the congressional record , and see how these birds voted .
and then you ca n't do anything else but use your heads .
if you do that , you will vote for the welfare of the free world .
you will vote for the welfare of the free world .
and the greatest nation in the history of the world is the leader of the free world -- that is the united states of america .
then you will vote for the interests of this great country -- which is your interest .
then you will look after yourselves .
you will remember what happened -- you will remember 1932 , and you will also remember that awful " do - nothing good - for - nothing " both congress that i put under the sod in 1948 .
and if you do that , then my trip around the country has not been in vain .
i am trying to wake you up to just think -- to think in your own interest .
and when you do that , on november the 4th you will go to the polls and you will send adlai stevenson to the white house and we will have 4 more years of good government and prosperity .
thank you very much .

dr. murphy , distinguished guests , mr. mayor , delegates to the 29th annual convention of the columbia scholastic press association : 
 you know , i was very much afraid that you were going to take that admonition of dr. murphy seriously , but i am very glad that you did n't -- when he told you not to make any noise after the broadcast went on .
i am happy to be with you today .
it is a pleasure to talk to the young people who run the school papers of this great country of ours .
you probably do n't know it , but i was a school editor myself once of the high school paper in independence , mo. and it was a first edition , too .
charlie ross , and four or five other kids and myself got out the first number of " the gleam , " named after the admonition in tennyson 's poem , " after it , follow it , follow the gleam . "
i have been trying to follow it ever since .
from then on i kept going , and you know the trouble that i am in today .
so you see , if you are not very careful , you may end up by living in the white house , and i say to you that it is a wonderful experience indeed , in spite of all its troubles .
all my life i have been interested in the presidency , and the way presidents are chosen .
i remember very well the first presidential nominating convention that i attended .
it was in kansas city , mo. , in 1900 , when bryan was nominated the second time for the democratic nomination for the presidency .
i was 16 , and i enjoyed that convention very much , because i thought old man bryan was the greatest orator of the time .
and i still think so .
president roosevelt said he was one of the great progressives of our times , but he was ahead of his time .
a lot of us are in that condition .
now , besides being nominated for the presidency three times , mr. bryan became an editor .
and you know , i am very much interested in editors and publishers .
it is a very great responsibility to be the editor of a great newspaper , or a great periodical .
and we have some wonderfully great magazines and newspapers in this country .
it is the duty of the editors of those great publications to 
 see that the news is the truth , the whole truth , and nothing but the truth .
and these great ones do just that .
but we do have among us some publications which do not care very much for the truth in the news , and sometimes make propaganda out of it , and then write editorials about it .
but an editorial written on misrepresentation in the news and on propaganda is just as bad as the foundation on which it rests .
i hope that if any of you become editors of great publications -- and you are now editors of great publications in your sphere -- that you will stick strictly to the truth and nothing but the truth when you publish the news .
i heard mr. bryan say one time that the first convention he attended was at philadelphia in 1876 , and he crawled in through a window , and that ever since that time they had been trying to put him out over the transom but never had succeeded .
the first convention that i attended was the one i referred to in 1900 , when i walked into that convention .
i also later walked into the white house , which mr. bryan never did do .
and i do n't know who got the best of it , because mr. bryan got his message over just as well as if he had been elected president , and i do n't know whether i am getting mine over or not .
another convention that i remember very well was the one at baltimore when woodrow wilson was nominated .
i was running a binder around a quarter section of land -- took 2 miles to make that circuit .
and at one corner there was a little telegraph station about a quarter - mile from where i was working , and i would get down and go over to the telegraph station to see how the convention was coming on .
and that is how i found out that woodrow wilson had been nominated .
did n't have any radio or television in those days , and we did n't have any pollsters or false political prophets , either .
i voted for wilson that year , and i have believed ever since in the policies which he followed .
he was one of our very greatest presidents .
and i sincerely believe that if we had followed him in what he wanted to do , we would certainly have avoided the second world war .
i hope that we will not make that same mistake after this last world war .
now i understand that a lot of people are mystified and wonder why i came all the way up here from key west to talk to you today .
the answer is very simple .
i came because the future of this great republic of ours depends upon young people like you , and also for the reason that for the last 7 years young people have been coming to see me at the white house .
there is hardly a week goes by that i do n't see some delegation of young people , who pass through my office and shake hands with me , and i usually have a word or two to say to them .
and now i am here , and you are in exactly the same position you would be at the white house : you would have to listen .
the united states of america is the greatest republic in the history of the world .
we want to keep it the greatest republic .
it will be up to you young people to do that job in the future .
youth , the hope of the world .
that was the motto on the front door of the high school from which i was graduated , only it was written in latin , juventus spes mundi .
i will never forget it .
i never have forgotten it , and i still think that youth is the hope of the world , and that they always will be .
it is just as true now as it was when i came out of that small town high school .
it is necessary for the young people to understand the road to be followed , if this country is to accomplish the mission which god intended it to accomplish in this world .
i hope i can give you some idea of how to follow that road into tomorrow and the future of the world .
i hope you will go back to your schools and talk about it and discuss it .
i hope you will write about it in your publications , because it is your responsibility as editors to work for the good of your great country , and for the future of the world .
both are in your hands .
now , the thing i want to impress upon you is that government must be operated on the basis of the greatest good for the greatest number of its citizens .
that is the fundamental basis of the domestic program and the foreign policy of this government of yours and mine .
no nation is good and can last unless it is built upon our ideals .
our nation is built upon ideals -- ideals of unselfishness and respect for the rights and welfare of others .
the fundamental basis of this nation 's ideals was given to moses on mount sinai .
the fundamental basis of the bill of rights of our constitution comes from the teachings which we get from exodus , st. matthew , isaiah , and st. paul .
the sermon on the mount gives us a way of life , and maybe some day men will understand it as the real way of life .
the basis of all great moral codes is " do unto others as you would have others do unto you . "
treat others as you would like to be treated .
some of you may think that such a philosophy as that has no place in politics and government .
but it is the only philosophy on which you can base a lasting government .
governments built on that philosophy are built on a rock , and will not fail .
when our own government has looked after the average man first , we have grown and prospered .
but when those in power have used our government to increase the privileges of the few at the top , the life and spirit of our country have declined .
thank god most of the time we have been on the right road .
in the lifetime of everyone here , we have had a chance to see how this works , although some of you may not be old enough -- and i am sure none of you is old enough -- to remember the great depression .
in the last 20 years the government of the united states has made great progress in measures to help and protect the average man .
we have not been ashamed to work for human welfare at home and abroad .
now , i just want you to examine the facts and see for yourselves what the results have been in better living conditions for the american people , and in strengthening the base of our democracy .
more and more people have been able to have better and better living conditions .
in 1939 only one out of four families had an income of more than $ 2,000 .
in 1949 it was two out of three .
there are fewer poor people and more well - to - do people in this country now than ever before -- not only in this country but in the history of the world .
we have been reducing inequality , not by pulling down those at the top , but by lifting up those at the bottom .
this great record of progress is the result of our policy of the fair deal .
under that policy we look out for the other fellow as well as for ourselves .
that same program applies to our foreign policy .
we can not isolate ourselves from our neighbors in the rest of the world .
when something hurts them , it hurts us , when something helps them , it helps us .
the way to keep our own country strong and prosperous is to encourage and develop prosperity in the rest of the world .
we can learn a lot from the rest of the world .
there are many things that even the people of undeveloped countries in the world can teach us .
we must exchange ideas .
we must exchange goods .
we must exchange friendships .
we are not imperialists .
we do not want any more territory .
we do not want to conquer any people , or to dominate them .
the russian propaganda says that we are imperialists and want to conquer the world .
that just is n't true .
we know the soviet government is a menace to us and to all the free world .
that is why we are building up our strength , not to march against them but to discourage them from marching against us and the free world .
we want to help the people in other countries to help themselves , because that makes for prosperity for us all .
i want you young people to understand that if we accomplish the purpose which we propose to accomplish , it means the greatest age in the history of the world -- you will live in the grandest and most peaceful time that the world has ever seen .
it is up to you to help carry on that purpose .
it may take more than one generation to accomplish it .
but we can accomplish it .
we are going to accomplish it , and i know that you will help to accomplish it .
i appreciate again being here .
may god bless you all .

mr. president , mr. speaker , members of the congress of the united states : 
 the gravity of the situation which confronts the world today necessitates my appearance before a joint session of the congress .
the foreign policy and the national security of this country are involved .
one aspect of the present situation , which i present to you at this time for your consideration and decision , concerns greece and turkey .
the united states has received from the greek government an urgent appeal for financial and economic assistance .
preliminary reports from the american economic mission now in greece and reports from the american ambassador in greece corroborate the statement of the greek government that assistance is imperative if greece is to survive as a free nation .
i do not believe that the american people and the congress wish to turn a deaf ear to the appeal of the greek government .
greece is not a rich country .
lack of sufficient natural resources has always forced the greek people to work hard to make both ends meet .
since 1940 , this industrious , peace loving country has suffered invasion , four years of cruel enemy occupation , and bitter internal strife .
when forces of liberation entered greece they found that the retreating germans had destroyed virtually all the railways , roads , port facilities , communications , and merchant marine .
more than a thousand villages had been burned .
eighty - five percent of the children were tubercular .
livestock , poultry , and draft animals had almost disappeared .
inflation had wiped out practically all savings .
as a result of these tragic conditions , a militant minority , exploiting human want and misery , was able to create political chaos which , until now , has made economic recovery impossible .
greece is today without funds to finance the importation of those goods which are essential to bare subsistence .
under these circumstances the people of greece can not make progress in solving their problems of reconstruction .
greece is in desperate need of financial and economic assistance to enable it to resume purchases of food , clothing , fuel and seeds .
these are indispensable for the subsistence of its people and are obtainable only from abroad .
greece must have help to import the goods necessary to restore internal order and security so essential for economic and political recovery .
the greek government has also asked for the assistance of experienced american administrators , economists and technicians to insure that the financial and other aid given to greece shall be used effectively in creating a stable and self - sustaining economy and in improving its public administration .
the very existence of the greek state is today threatened by the terrorist activities of several thousand armed men , led by communists , who defy the government 's authority at a number of points , particularly along the northern boundaries .
a commission appointed by the united nations security council is at present investigating disturbed conditions in northern greece and alleged border violations along the frontier between greece on the one hand and albania , bulgaria , and yugoslavia on the other .
meanwhile , the greek government is unable to cope with the situation .
the greek army is small and poorly equipped .
it needs supplies and equipment if it is to restore authority to the government throughout greek territory .
greece must have assistance if it is to become a self - supporting and self - respecting democracy .
the united states must supply this assistance .
we have already extended to greece certain types of relief and economic aid but these are inadequate .
there is no other country to which democratic greece can turn .
no other nation is willing and able to provide the necessary support for a democratic greek government .
the british government , which has been helping greece , can give no further financial or economic aid after march 31 .
great britain finds itself under the necessity of reducing or liquidating its commitments in several parts of the world , including greece .
we have considered how the united nations might assist in this crisis .
but the situation is an urgent one requiring immediate action , and the united nations and its related organizations are not in a position to extend help of the kind that is required .
it is important to note that the greek government has asked for our aid in utilizing effectively the financial and other assistance we may give to greece , and in improving its public administration .
it is of the utmost importance that we supervise the use of any funds made available to greece , in such a manner that each dollar spent will count toward making greece self - supporting , and will help to build an economy in which a healthy democracy can flourish .
no government is perfect .
one of the chief virtues of a democracy , however , is that its defects are always visible and under democratic processes can be pointed out and corrected .
the government of greece is not perfect .
nevertheless it represents 85 percent of the members of the greek parliament who were chosen in an election last year .
foreign observers , including 692 americans , considered this election to be a fair expression of the views of the greek people .
the greek government has been operating in an atmosphere of chaos and extremism .
it has made mistakes .
the extension of aid by this country does not mean that the united states condones everything that the greek government has done or will do .
we have condemned in the past , and we condemn now , extremist measures of the right or the left .
we have in the past advised tolerance , and we advise tolerance now .
greece 's neighbor , turkey , also deserves our attention .
the future of turkey as an independent and economically sound state is clearly no less important to the freedom - loving peoples of the world than the future of greece .
the circumstances in which turkey finds itself today are considerably different from those of greece .
turkey has been spared the disasters that have beset greece .
and during the war , the united states and great britain furnished turkey with material aid .
nevertheless , turkey now needs our support .
since the war turkey has sought additional financial assistance from great britain and the united states for the purpose of effecting that modernization necessary for the maintenance of its national integrity .
that integrity is essential to the preservation of order in the middle east .
the british government has informed us that , owing to its own difficulties , it can no longer extend financial or economic aid to turkey .
as in the case of greece , if turkey is to have the assistance it needs , the united states must supply it .
we are the only country able to provide that help .
i am fully aware of the broad implications involved if the united states extends assistance to greece and turkey , and i shall discuss these implications with you at this time .
one of the primary objectives of the foreign policy of the united states is the creation of conditions in which we and other nations will be able to work out a way of life free from coercion .
this was a fundamental issue in the war with germany and japan .
our victory was won over countries which sought to impose their will , and their way of life , upon other nations .
to ensure the peaceful development of nations , free from coercion , the united states has taken a leading part in establishing the united nations .
the united nations is designed to make possible lasting freedom and independence for all its members .
we shall not realize our objectives , however , unless we are willing to help free peoples to maintain their free institutions and their national integrity against aggressive movements that seek to impose upon them totalitarian regimes .
this is no more than a frank recognition that totalitarian regimes imposed upon free peoples , by direct or indirect aggression , undermine the foundations of international peace and hence the security of the united states .
the peoples of a number of countries of the world have recently had totalitarian regimes forced upon them against their will .
the government of the united states has made frequent protests against coercion and intimidation , in violation of the yalta agreement , in poland , rumania , and bulgaria .
i must also state that in a number of other countries there have been similar developments .
at the present moment in world history nearly every nation must choose between alternative ways of life .
the choice is too often not a free one .
one way of life is based upon the will of the majority , and is distinguished by free institutions , representative government , free elections , guarantees of individual liberty , freedom of speech and religion , and freedom from political oppression .
the second way of life is based upon the will of a minority forcibly imposed upon the majority .
it relies upon terror and oppression , a controlled press and radio , fixed elections , and the suppression of personal freedoms .
i believe that it must be the policy of the united states to support free peoples who are resisting attempted subjugation by armed minorities or by outside pressures .
i believe that we must assist free peoples to work out their own destinies in their own way .
i believe that our help should be primarily through economic and financial aid which is essential to economic stability and orderly political processes .
the world is not static , and the status quo is not sacred .
but we can not allow changes in the status quo in violation of the charter of the united nations by such methods as coercion , or by such subterfuges as political infiltration .
in helping free and independent nations to maintain their freedom , the united states will be giving effect to the principles of the charter of the united nations .
it is necessary only to glance at a map to realize that the survival and integrity of the greek nation are of grave importance in a much wider situation .
if greece should fall under the control of an armed minority , the effect upon its neighbor , turkey , would be immediate and serious .
confusion and disorder might well spread throughout the entire middle east .
moreover , the disappearance of greece as an independent state would have a profound effect upon those countries in europe whose peoples are struggling against great difficulties to maintain their freedoms and their independence while they repair the damages of war .
it would be an unspeakable tragedy if these countries , which have struggled so long against overwhelming odds , should lose that victory for which they sacrificed so much .
collapse of free institutions and loss of independence would be disastrous not only for them but for the world .
discouragement and possibly failure would quickly be the lot of neighboring peoples striving to maintain their freedom and independence .
should we fail to aid greece and turkey in this fateful hour , the effect will be far reaching to the west as well as to the east .
we must take immediate and resolute action .
i therefore ask the congress to provide authority for assistance to greece and turkey in the amount of $ 400,000,000 for the period ending june 30 , 1948 .
in requesting these funds , i have taken into consideration the maximum amount of relief assistance which would be furnished to greece out of the $ 350,000,000 which i recently requested that the congress authorize for the prevention of starvation and suffering in countries devastated by the war .
in addition to funds , i ask the congress to authorize the detail of american civilian and military personnel to greece and turkey , at the request of those countries , to assist in the tasks of reconstruction , and for the purpose of supervising the use of such financial and material assistance as may be furnished .
i recommend that authority also be provided for the instruction and raining of selected greek and turkish personnel .
finally , i ask that the congress provide authority which will permit the speediest and most effective use , in terms of needed commodities , supplies , and equipment , of such funds as may be authorized .
if further funds , or further authority , should be needed for the purposes indicated in this message , i shall not hesitate to bring the situation before the congress .
on this subject the executive and legislative branches of the government must work together .
this is a serious course upon which we embark .
i would not recommend it except that the alternative is much more serious .
the united states contributed $ 341,000,000,000 toward winning world war ii .
this is an investment in world freedom and world peace .
the assistance that i am recommending for greece and turkey amounts to little more than 1/10 of 1 percent of this investment .
it is only common sense that we should safeguard this investment and make sure that it was not in vain .
the seeds of totalitarian regimes are nurtured by misery and want .
they spread and grow in the evil soil of poverty and strife .
they reach their full growth when the hope of a people for a better life has died .
we must keep that hope alive .
the free peoples of the world look to us for support in maintaining their freedoms .
if we falter in our leadership , we may endanger the peace of the world -- and we shall surely endanger the welfare of this nation .
great responsibilities have been placed upon us by the swift movement of events .
i am confident that the congress will face these responsibilities squarely .

mr. mayor , and my fellow townsmen and citizens of this great county named after andrew jackson : 
 i ca n't tell you how very much i appreciate this turnout to celebrate a victory -- not my victory , but a victory of the democratic party for the people .
i want to inform you , mr. mayor , that protocol goes out the window when i am in independence .
i am a citizen of this town , and a taxpayer , and i want to be treated just like the rest of the taxpayers in this community are treated , whether you extend the city limits or not .
and i thank you very much indeed for this celebration , which is not for me .
it is for the whole country .
it is for the whole world , for the simple reason that you have given me a tremendous responsibility .
now , since you have given me that responsibility , i want every single one of you to help carry out that responsibility , for the welfare of this great republic , and for the welfare and peace of the world at large .
and i am sure that is what you are going to do .
i ca n't begin to thank the people who are responsible for the democratic party winning this great election .
of course , i am indebted to everybody for that win , and i will have to just say to every single one of you individually that i am going to do the very best i can to carry out the democratic platform , as i promised to do in my speeches over this country .
and we have a congress now , and i am sure we will make some progress in the next 4 years .
thank you all very much .

the thoughts and hopes of all america -- indeed of all the civilized world -- are centered tonight on the battleship missouri .
there on that small piece of american soil anchored in tokyo harbor the japanese have just officially laid down their arms .
they have signed terms of unconditional surrender .
four years ago , the thoughts and fears of the whole civilized world were centered on another piece of american soil -- pearl harbor .
the mighty threat to civilization which began there is now laid at rest .
it was a long road to tokyo -- and a bloody one .
we shall not forget pearl harbor .
the japanese militarists will not forget the u.s.s. missouri .
the evil done by the japanese war lords can never be repaired or forgotten .
but their power to destroy and kill has been taken from them .
their armies and what is left of their navy are now impotent .
to all of us there comes first a sense of gratitude to almighty god who sustained us and our allies in the dark days of grave danger , who made us to grow from weakness into the strongest fighting force in history , and who has now seen us overcome the forces of tyranny that sought to destroy his civilization .
god grant that in our pride of the hour , we may not forget the hard tasks that are still before us ; that we may approach these with the same courage , zeal , and patience with which we faced the trials and problems of the past four years .
our first thoughts , of course -- thoughts of gratefulness and deep obligation -- go out to those of our loved ones who have been killed or maimed in this terrible war .
on land and sea and in the air , american men and women have given their lives so that this day of ultimate victory might come and assure the survival of a civilized world .
no victory can make good their loss .
we think of those whom death in this war has hurt , taking from them fathers , husbands , sons , brothers , and sisters whom they loved .
no victory can bring back the faces they longed to see .
only the knowledge that the victory , which these sacrifices have made possible , will be wisely used , can give them any comfort .
it is our responsibility -- ours , the living -- to see to it that this victory shall be a monument worthy of the dead who died to win it .
we think of all the millions of men and women in our armed forces and merchant marine all over the world who , after years of sacrifice and hardship and peril , have been spared by providence from harm .
we think of all the men and women and children who during these years have carried on at home , in lonesomeness and anxiety and fear .
our thoughts go out to the millions of american workers and businessmen , to our farmers and miners -- to all those who have built up this country 's fighting strength , and who have shipped to our allies the means to resist and overcome the enemy .
our thoughts go out to our civil servants and to the thousands of americans who , at personal sacrifice , have come to serve in our government during these trying years ; to the members of the selective service boards and ration boards ; to the civilian defense and red cross workers ; to the men and women in the uso and in the entertainment world -- to all those who have helped in this cooperative struggle to preserve liberty and decency in the world .
we think of our departed gallant leader , franklin d. roosevelt , defender of democracy , architect of world peace and cooperation .
and our thoughts go out to our gallant allies in this war : to those who resisted the invaders ; to those who were not strong enough to hold out , but who , nevertheless , kept the fires of resistance alive within the souls of their people ; to those who stood up against great odds and held the line , until the united nations together were able to supply the arms and the men with which to overcome the forces of evil .
this is a victory of more than arms alone .
this is a victory of liberty over tyranny .
from our war plants rolled the tanks and planes which blasted their way to the heart of our enemies ; from our shipyards sprang the ships which bridged all the oceans of the world for our weapons and supplies ; from our farms came the food and fiber for our armies and navies and for our allies in all the corners of the earth ; from our mines and factories came the raw materials and the finished products which gave us the equipment to overcome our enemies .
but back of it all were the will and spirit and determination of a free people -- who know what freedom is , and who know that it is worth whatever price they had to pay to preserve it .
it was the spirit of liberty which gave us our armed strength and which made our men invincible in battle .
we now know that that spirit of liberty , the freedom of the individual , and the personal dignity of man , are the strongest and toughest and most enduring forces in all the world .
and so on v - j day we take renewed faith and pride in our own way of life .
we have had our day of rejoicing over this victory .
we have had our day of prayer and devotion .
now let us set aside v - j day as one of renewed consecration to the principles which have made us the strongest nation on earth and which , in this war , we have striven so mightily to preserve .
those principles provide the faith , the hope , and the opportunity which help men to improve themselves and their lot .
liberty does not make all men perfect nor all society secure .
but it has provided more solid progress and happiness and decency for more people than any other philosophy of government in history .
and this day has shown again that it provides the greatest strength and the greatest power which man has ever reached .
we know that under it we can meet the hard problems of peace which have come upon us .
a free people with free allies , who can develop an atomic bomb , can use the same skill and energy and determination to overcome all the difficulties ahead .
victory always has its burdens and its responsibilities as well as its rejoicing .
but we face the future and all its dangers with great confidence and great hope .
america can build for itself a future of employment and security .
together with the united nations , it can build a world of peace rounded on justice , fair dealing , and tolerance .
as president of the united states , i proclaim sunday , september the second , 1945 , to be v - j day -- the day of formal surrender by japan .
it is not yet the day for the formal proclamation of the end of the war nor of the cessation of hostilities .
but it is a day which we americans shall always remember as a day of retribution -- as we remember that other day , the day of infamy .
from this day we move forward .
we move toward a new era of security at home .
with the other united nations we move toward a new and better world of cooperation , of peace and international good will and cooperation .
god 's help has brought us to this day of victory .
with his help we will attain that peace and prosperity for ourselves and all the world in the years ahead .

i appreciate that introduction very much , and i think he is a good prophet .
i have had a wonderful tour today beginning at rock island , ill. , and they tell me this is the last town in iowa i 'll stop at , and i 'll regret that because at every place i have been the crowds have been just like this , and they 've been exceedingly cordial .
i feel that iowa is beginning to wake up to the situation , and on november 2 i wo n't have to say much more about them voting democratic .
you know , the reason for that is that the democratic party gave the farmers the price support program , soil conservation , rural electrification , crop insurance , and other progressive measures of this kind .
they have led to the greatest prosperity for the farmer that the farmer has ever had in the history of the world .
in 1932 , 123,000 farmers in the united states had lost their farms .
in 1947 , less than 800 farms were foreclosed .
that 's the greatest record in history .
in 1932 , the farmers were hopelessly in debt .
their indebtedness has been reduced by more than 50 percent and they have $ 18 billion in assets .
think of that !
just think of that !
now , there are people in this united states that would like to go back to that condition , when labor was receiving an average of 45 cents an hour and when the farmer was getting 3 cents for hogs and 15 cents for corn and burning the corn because it was n't worth the price .
those same people now have made an attempt to do away with the price support program which is responsible for this immense production which we have had in the last 7 years and which has kept millions of people in this world alive .
i 'm asking you just to read history , to use your own judgment , and to decide whether you want to go forward with the democratic party or whether you want to turn the clock back to the horse and buggy days with such people that made up that " do - nothing " 80th congress .
that congress tried its level best to take all the rights away from labor .
that congress tried its level best to put the farmer back to 1932 .
that congress tried its level best to put small business out of business .
for what purpose ?
to help the big interests which they represented .
do you know that there were more and bigger lobbies in washington than at any time in the history of the congress of the united states ?
some time a little later on i 'm going to tell you about those terrible lobbies : the association of manufacturers ' and the speculators ' lobbies and several others that i could name right now ; and i 've got the facts and figures on them .
they spent more money lobbying for special privilege in this " do - nothing " 80th congress than has been spent in washington in the whole history of the country .
now , why did they do that ?
because they wanted to take you to town .
i 'll tell you  you're going to get taken to town if you do n't use your privilege on election day .
you stayed at home in 1946 and you got the 80th congress , and you got just exactly what you deserved .
you did n't exercise your god - given right to control this country .
now you 're going to have another chance .
if you let that chance slip , you wo n't have my sympathy .
if you do n't let that chance slip , you 'll do me a very great favor , for i 'll live in the white house another 4 years .
it 's been a very great pleasure to be in iowa , and i appreciate it .
i have had the privilege of riding with all your public officials today .
it 's been a very great pleasure to ride with your candidate for governor , who is a wonderful man , the democratic candidate for governor .
and i was with guy gillette , with whom i served in the senate , and there never was a better senator in the senate than guy gillette .
i 'm extremely fond of him , and i hope , for your own welfare and for the welfare of this great state , that you 'll send guy gillette back to the senate , and that you 'll elect the democratic candidate for governor and all the democratic congressmen and public officials you possibly can .
i like democrats no matter what office they 're running for .
i hope that everything will go well with you .
i ca n't tell you how i appreciate this wonderful turnout , this wonderful reception .
it 's been just like this all day long .
i have come to the conclusion that the people in iowa like their president and appreciate what he 's trying to do for the common people .

mr. chairman , mr. vice president , mr. speaker , mr. chairman of the democratic committee , distinguished guests and fellow democrats : 
 i am very happy to be here tonight .
this makes seven jefferson - jackson dinners that i have spoken to in the city of washington .
i hope to attend several more , in one capacity or another .
they have all been wonderful dinners .
one of the things i like about the dinners is the fact that they are political meetings .
i like political meetings , and i like politics .
politics -- good politics -- is public service .
there is no life or occupation in which a man can find a greater opportunity to serve his community or his country .
i have been in politics more than 30 years , and i know that nothing else could have given me greater satisfaction .
i have had a career from precinct to president , and i am a little bit proud of that career .
i am sure all of you here tonight are very much interested in the presidential election this year .
in view of that fact , i thought i would give you a little analysis of the political situation as i see it .
the political situation in this country may look complicated , but you can find the key to it in a simple thing : the republicans have been out of office for 20 long years -- and they are desperate to get back in office so they can control the country again .
for 20 years the republicans have been wandering in a political desert -- like camels looking for an oasis .
they do n't drink the same thing that camels do , though .
and if they do n't find it pretty soon , the republican party may die out , altogether .
and you know , i would just hate to see that happen .
i would like to help keep the republican party alive , if that is at all possible .
so i am going to offer them a little advice about the error of their ways .
there are some very good reasons why the republicans have been out of office so long and have n't been able to get back in control .
the first reason is that they were voted out in 1932 because they had brought the country to the brink of ruin .
in the 1920 's the republican administrations drew back in petrified isolation from our world responsibilities .
they spent all their time trying to help the rich get richer , and paid no attention to the welfare of the workers and the farmers .
all in all , they paved the way for the biggest economic smashup this country has ever seen .
that is the reason the republicans were thrown out of office in 1932 and one of the very good reasons why they have been kept out ever since .
people do n't want any more " great depressions . "
the second reason why the republicans have been out of office for 20 years is that the democratic party has been giving the country good government .
instead of trying to build up the prosperity of the favored few , and letting some of it trickle down to the rest , we have been working to raise the incomes of the vast majority of the people .
and we have been steadily expanding the base for prosperity and freedom in this country .
the people have kept right on reelecting democrats because we have been serving them well and they know it .
the third reason the republicans have been kept out of power for an years is because they have never been able to agree on a sensible program to put before the country .
they have been on almost every side of every question , but they have seldom or never been on the right side .
in 1936 they said the new deal was terrible and they were against it and all its works .
and in the election that fall they just lost by a landslide .
in 1940 they admitted there might be some good in some parts of the new deal , but they said you needed a republican to run it .
and they were overwhelmingly beaten again .
in 1944 the republicans said the new deal might have been good in its day , but it had gotten old and tired and it was no good any more .
but the people did n't agree , and the republicans were snowed under once more .
now in 1948 they said -- well , as a matter of fact , by 1948 they were so sure of winning that they really did n't bother to take a position on anything .
and they got just exactly what they deserved -- they got another good licking .
and by now the republicans ca n't figure out what to do .
every day you hear a new republican theory of how to win the election of 1952 .
one theory they have is that they ought to come right out and say they are against all advances the country has made since 1932 .
this is the kind of dinosaur school of republican strategy .
they want to go back to prehistoric times .
republicans of this school say : " let 's stop beating about the bush -- and let 's say what we really believe .
let 's say we 're against social security -- and we 're against the labor unions and good wages -- and we 're opposed to price supports for farmers -- that we 're against the government doing anything for anybody except big business . "
now , i have a lot of sympathy for these republicans .
they have been hushed up for a long time .
they would certainly be happier if they could tell the truth for once and campaign for what they really believe .
it would be good for their souls .
but it would n't be good for their party , or for the country either .
this dinosaur school of republican strategy would only get the dinosaur vote -- and there are not many of them left , except over at the smithsonian .
next , there is the republican theory that the republicans can win if they oppose the foreign policy of the united states .
they ca n't agree among themselves as to how they want to oppose it , but most of them want to oppose it somehow .
some republicans seem to think it would be popular to pull out of korea , and to abandon europe , and to let the united nations go to smash .
they reason this way : " the american people are n't very bright .
let 's tell them they do n't have to build up defenses , or serve in the army , or strengthen our allies overseas .
if they fall for that , then we republicans will be in -- and that 's all that matters . "
the trouble with the republican theory is that the american people are a lot smarter than the republicans who thought it up .
the american people have learned a lot from two world wars and from the last 7 years of working to keep the peace .
they know that as long as communism is loose in the world we must have allies and we must resist aggression .
the american people are living in the atomic age , and they know that the ideas of the stone age wo n't work any more -- if they ever did work .
and there is another group of republicans who attack our foreign policy by advocating the " all - out " or " let 's get it over with " theory .
these are the republicans who say they want to expand the fighting in korea , and start dropping atomic bombs , and invite a new world war .
they figure it 's good politics to talk that way .
they do n't stop to count the cost .
they think people do n't understand that the hardest and bravest thing in the world is to work for peace -- and not for war .
but if war comes -- and god forbid that it comes -- if the showdown comes , these loud talkers would be the first people to run for the bomb shelters .
and the voters know it .
none of these republican theories of how to win the election holds much promise of success this year .
all they show is that the platform that the republicans write in chicago in july will have to be a fearful and wonderful thing to cover all these different theories .
it will have to be a bigger tent than the ringling brothers circus -- and it will have to cover just about as many freaks .
it has even become fashionable for the republican candidates to saw themselves in half and put part on each side of the fence .
that would fit under the tent , too .
the real republican campaign is not going to be fought on the issues .
the republicans are going to wage a campaign of phony propaganda .
they are going to try what we might call the " white is black " and the " black is white " strategy .
the reasoning behind it is this : the republicans know that the nation is strong and prosperous , that we are building up defenses against communism , that the democratic administration has worked for the good of the people .
the only chance for the republicans , therefore , is to make the people think the facts are n't so .
the job for the republicans is to make people believe that white is black and black is white .
this is a pretty difficult way to win an election .
it would n't appeal to anybody but very desperate republican politicians .
but the republicans have some reason for thinking it might succeed .
they will have the support of most of the press , and most of the radio commentators .
and they may have the professional poll - takers with them again -- as they were in 1948 .
the republicans , as always , will have a lot of money .
they have slick advertising experts .
and they do n't have too many scruples about how they use them .
remember that carpetbagger from chicago who got convicted for the way he elected a republican senator in maryland in 1950 ?
they will try that all over the country .
the republicans are all set to try this " white is black " technique .
and this is the way it will work .
first of all , they will try to make people believe that everything the government has done for the country is socialism .
they will go to the people and say : " did you see that social security check you received the other day -- you thought that was good for you , did n't you ?
that 's just too bad !
that 's nothing in the world but socialism .
did you see that new flood control dam the government is building over there for the protection of your property ?
sorry -- that 's awful socialism !
that new hospital that they are building is socialism .
price supports , more socialism for the farmers !
minimum wage laws ?
socialism for labor !
socialism is bad for you , my friend .
everybody knows that .
and here you are , with your new car , and your home , and better opportunities for the kids , and a television set -- you are just surrounded by socialism ! "
now the republicans say , " that 's a terrible thing , my friend , and the only way out of this sinkhole of socialism is to vote for the republican ticket . "
and if you do that , you will probably have a garage and no car , a crystal radio set and no television -- and probably not even a garage to live in , but a secondhand tent out on the lawn .
i do n't believe people are going to be fooled into that condition , because they went through it once before .
now , do you think they can sell that bill of goods ?
this country today has more freedom for all its people than any country in the history of the world .
and all the efforts of all the republican politicians ca n't convince the people that this is socialism .
the next part of this " white is black " campaign is to try to make people believe that the democratic party is in favor of communism .
that is an even tougher job than selling the socialism nonsense , but the republicans are desperate , so they are going to try it .
of course , we have spent billions of dollars to build up our defenses against communism ; we have created an alliance of the free nations against communism ; we are helping them to arm against communism ; we have met and halted communism in greece and turkey , in berlin and austria , in italy and iran , and the most important of all , in korea .
we have fought communism abroad .
we have fought communism at home .
we have an fbi and a central intelligence agency defending us against spies and saboteurs .
the federal loyalty program keeps communists out of government .
that 's the record , and how do the republicans propose to get around it ?
here 's what they will try to do .
they will go to the voters and say , " did you know the government was full of communists ? "
and the voters say , " no .
what makes you say that ? "
and then the republicans explain that somebody named joe doakes works for the government , and he has a cousin who sells shoelaces , or a ribbon clerk in a department store , and this cousin has a wife who wrote an article , before joe married her , that was printed in a magazine that also printed an article in favor of chinese communists -- and they will continue that ad lib .
this may sound very silly , and it is .
but some political fakers spend all their time trying to pull the wool over the people 's eyes with this sort of nonsense .
the real test of anti - communism is whether we are willing to devote our resources and our strength to stopping communist aggression and saving free people from its horrible tyranny .
this kind of anti - communism takes money and courage -- and not just a lot of talk .
the next time you hear some of this loud anti - communist talk from our republican friends , ask them how they voted -- ask them how they voted on aid to greece , ask them how they voted on the marshall plan , ask them how they voted on the mutual security program .
the chances are they voted to cut or cripple these all - important measures against communism .
i say to you in all seriousness , beware of those who pretend to be so violently anti - communist in this country , and at the same time vote to appease communism abroad .
in my book , that is talking out of both sides of the mouth at once ; and i do n't think the american people are going to be taken in by it .
the next part of the republican " white is black " campaign is to try to fool the voters into thinking that the democratic party is dishonest -- that the government is full of grafters and thieves and all kinds of assorted crooks .
to hear them talk you would n't think that there was an honest man in washington .
and that includes some of them , too , maybe .
now , i want to say something very important to you about this issue of morality in government .
i stand for honest government .
i have worked for it .
i have probably done more for it than any other president .
i have done more than any other president to reorganize the government on an efficient basis , and to extend the civil service merit system .
i hate corruption not only because it is bad in itself , but also because it is the deadly enemy of all things the democratic party has been doing all these years .
i hate corruption everywhere , but i hate it most of all in a democratic officeholder , because that is a betrayal of all that the democratic party stands for .
here is the reason .
to me , morality in government means more than a mere absence of wrongdoing .
it means a government that is fair to all .
i think it is just as immoral for the congress to enact special tax favors into law as it is for a tax official to connive in a crooked tax return .
it is just as immoral to use the lawmaking power of : the government to enrich the few at the expense of the many , as it is to steal money from the public treasury .
that is stealing money from the public treasury .
all of us know , of course , about the scandals and corruption of the republican officeholders in the 1920 's .
but to my mind the veterans ' administration scandals , in those days , and the teapot dome steal , were no worse -- no more immoral -- than the tax laws of andrew mellon , or the attempt to sell muscle shoals to private owners .
legislation that favored the greed of monopoly and the trickery of wall street was a form of corruption that did the country four times as much harm as teapot dome ever did .
private selfish interests are always trying to corrupt the government in this way .
powerful financial groups are always trying to get favors for themselves .
now , the democratic administration has been fighting against these efforts to corrupt the powers of government .
we have n't always won , but we have never surrendered , and we never will .
for all these years , we have been fighting to use our natural resources for the benefit of the public , to develop our forests and our public oil reserves and our water power for the benefit of all , to raise the incomes of all our citizens , to protect the farmer and the worker against the power of monopoly .
and where have the republicans been in this fight for morality in government ?
do they come out and vote with us to keep the special interests from robbing the public ?
not at all .
most of them are on the other side .
it 's the same thing when you come to the question of the conduct of government officials .
the republicans make a great whoop and holier about the honesty of federal employees , but they are usually the first to show up in a government office asking for special favors for private interests , and in raising cain if they do n't get them .
these republican gentlemen ca n't have it both ways -- they ca n't be for morality on tuesday and thursday , and then be for special privileges for their clients on monday , wednesday , and friday .
the press recently -- for a wonder -- has been giving some facts on this subject that have been very hard to get at .
i 'm disgusted with these efforts to discredit and blacken the character and reputation of the whole federal service .
we have a higher percentage of federal employees under civil service than ever before , and on the whole they are a finer , better type of men and women than we have ever had in the service before .
it is just as much our duty to protect the innocent as it is to punish the guilty .
if a man is accused , he ought to have his day in court , and i do n't mean a kangaroo court , either .
i hate injustice just as much as i hate corruption .
of course , we must always work to keep our government clean .
our democratic senators and congressmen have been working and i have been working to clean up bad conditions where they exist , and to devise procedures and systems to prevent them in the future .
and i would like to have help in this fight from everybody , democrats and republicans alike .
i have just got one reorganization plan through the congress , and i am going to send up some more plans to the congress soon -- to put more of our federal officials under civil service and out of politics .
i would like to see how many of the republicans vote for them .
i do n't think the " black is white " campaign of the republican party is going to succeed .
i think the voters are going to see through this holier - than - thou disguise that our republican friends are putting on .
all the tricks of republican propaganda can not make the people forget that the democratic party has been working for their welfare .
we are working for the welfare of the farmer .
we hold to the ideal that goes back to jefferson , that a farmer should have the opportunity to own his farm , to share in the benefits of scientific progress , and to secure a fair income for his efforts .
the democratic party is working for the success of our free enterprise system .
we have worked to prevent monopoly , to give the small businessman a fair chance , and to develop our natural resources for all the people , and not just for the favored few .
the democratic party is working for the welfare of labor .
we have worked for good wages and hour legislation , for unemployment compensation , and for fair labor relations laws .
the democratic party is dedicated to the ideal that every family is entitled to fair opportunities for decent living conditions , to a chance to educate their children , to have good medical services , and reasonable provision for retirement .
that is why we have worked for good social security laws , for better education and health services , for good housing , and for equal rights and opportunities for all our people , regardless of color , religion , or national origin .
above all , the democratic party is working for peace on earth and goodwill among men .
we believe that war is not inevitable , that peace can be won , that free men of all lands can find the way to live together in the world as good neighbors .
that is why we have been willing to sacrifice to stop aggression , willing to send our money and our goods to help men in other countries stand up against tyranny , willing to fight in korea to stop world war iii before it begins .
for if the bloody harvest of world war were to begin anew , most of us would never see a peaceful world again .
this is the record of the democratic party .
it is a proud record , and an honorable record .
it is a record of progress , of actions that are right because they are solidly founded on american ideals .
whoever the democrats nominate for president this year , he will have this record to run upon .
i shall not be a candidate for reelection .
i have served my country long , and i think efficiently and honestly .
i shall not accept a renomination .
i do not feel that it is my duty to spend another 4 years in the white house .
we must always remember the things the democratic party has done , and the high ideals that have made it great .
we must be true to its principles and keep it foremost in service of the people .
if we do that , we can be sure that there will be a democratic president in the white house for the next 4 years .

my fellow countrymen : 
 at noon today i sent to congress a message vetoing the taft - hartley labor bill .
i vetoed this bill because i am convinced it is a bad bill .
it is bad for labor , bad for management , and bad for the country .
i had hoped that the congress would send me a labor bill i could sign .
i have said before , and i say it now , that we need legislation to correct abuses in the field of labor relations .
last january i made specific recommendations to the congress as to the kind of labor legislation we should have immediately .
i urged that the congress provide for a commission , to be made up of representatives of the congress , the public , labor and management , to study the entire field of labor management relations and to suggest what additional laws we should have .
i believe that my proposals were accepted by the great majority of our people as fair and just .
if the congress had accepted those recommendations , we would have today the basis for improved labor - management relations .
i would gladly have signed a labor bill if it had taken us in the right direction of stable , peaceful labor relations -- even though it might not have been drawn up exactly as i wished .
i would have signed a bill with some doubtful features if , taken as a whole , it had been a good bill .
but the taft - hartley bill is a shocking piece of legislation .
it is unfair to the working people of this country .
it clearly abuses the right , which millions of our citizens now enjoy , to join together and bargain with their employers for fair wages and fair working conditions .
under no circumstances could i have signed this bill .
the restrictions that this bill places on our workers go far beyond what our people have been led to believe .
this is no innocent bill .
it is interesting to note that on june 4 , congressman hartley on the floor of the house of representatives , made the following statement , and i quote : " you are going to find there is more in this bill than may meet the eye . "
that is a revealing description of this bill by one of its authors .
there is so much more in it than the people have been led to believe , that i am sure that very few understand what the taft - hartley bill would do if it should become law .
that is why i am speaking to you tonight .
i want you to know the real meaning of this bill .
we have all been told , by its proponents , that this is a " moderate " bill .
we have been told that the bill was " harsh " and " drastic " when it was first passed by the house of representatives , but that the senate had persuaded the house to drop out the harsh provisions and that the final bill -- the bill sent to me -- was " mild " and " moderate . "
but i found no truth in the claims that the bill sent to me was mild or moderate .
i found that the basic purpose and much of the language of the original house of representatives bill were still in the final bill .
in fact , the final bill follows the provisions of the original house bill in at least 36 separate places .
we have all been told that the taft - hartley bill is favorable to the wage earners of this country .
it has been claimed that workers need to be saved from their own folly and that this bill would provide the means of salvation .
some people have called this bill the " workers ' bill of rights . "
let us see what this bill really would do to our workingmen .
the bill is deliberately designed to weaken labor unions .
when the sponsors of the bill claim that by weakening unions , they are giving rights back to individual workingmen , they ignore the basic reason why unions are important in our democracy .
unions exist so that laboring men can bargain with their employers on a basis of equality .
because of unions , the living standards of our working people have increased steadily until they are today the highest in the world .
a bill which would weaken unions would undermine our national policy of collective bargaining .
the taft - hartley bill would do just that .
it would take us back in the direction of the old evils of individual bargaining .
it would take the bargaining power away from the workers and give more power to management .
this bill would even take away from our workingmen some bargaining fights which they enjoyed before the wagner act was passed 12 years ago .
if we weaken our system of collective bargaining , we weaken the position of every workingman in the country .
this bill would again expose workers to the abuses of labor injunctions .
it would make unions liable for damage suits for actions which have long been considered lawful .
this bill would treat all unions alike .
unions which have fine records , with long years of peaceful relations with management , would be hurt by this bill just as much as the few troublemakers .
the country needs legislation which will get rid of abuses .
we do not need -- and we do not want -- legislation which will take fundamental rights away from our working people .
we have been told that the taft - hartley bill is a means by which the country can be protected from nationwide strikes in vital industries .
the terms of the bill do not support this claim .
many people are under the impression that this bill would prevent or settle a strike in the coal industry .
i sincerely trust that the coal operators and the miners will soon come to an agreement on the terms of a contract and that there will be no interruption of coal mining .
but if the miners and the operators do not reach agreement , and if this bill should become law , it is likely that the most that could be accomplished under the complicated procedures of the bill would be postponement of a strike from july until october .
under this bill a work stoppage in the coal mines might be prevented for 80 days and then , if agreement had not been reached , the miners would be free to strike , and it would be mandatory for the president to refer the whole matter to congress , even if congress were not in session .
postponing a strike in the coal industry until the approach of winter , when our need for coal is acute , is certainly not the way to protect the nation against the dangers of a shortage of coal .
the bill would not aid fair and early settlements of disputes in vital industries .
we have been told , by the supporters of the taft - hartley bill , that it would reduce industrial strife .
on the contrary , i am convinced that it would increase industrial strife .
the bill would soon upset security clauses in thousands of existing agreements between labor and management .
these agreements were mutually arrived at and furnish a satisfactory basis for relations between worker and employer .
they provide stability in industry .
with their present types of agreements outlawed by this bill , the parties would have to find a new basis for agreement .
the restrictions in this bill would make the process of reaching new agreements a long and bitter one .
the bill would increase industrial strife because a number of its provisions deprive workers of legal protection of fundamental rights .
they would then have no means of protecting these rights except by striking .
the bill would open up opportunities for endless law suits by employers against unions and by unions against employers .
for example , it would make employers vulnerable to an immense number of law suits , since grievances , however minor , could be taken into court by dissatisfied workers .
insofar as employers are concerned , i predict that if this bill should become law they would regret the day that it was conceived .
it is loaded with provisions that would plague and hamper management .
it is filled with hidden legal traps that would take labor relations out of the plant , where they belong , and place them in the courts .
another defect is that in trying to correct labor abuses the taft - hartley bill goes so far that it would threaten fundamental democratic freedoms .
one provision undertakes to prevent political contributions and expenditures by labor organizations and corporations .
this provision would forbid a union newspaper from commenting on candidates in national elections .
it might well prevent an incorporated radio network from spending any money in connection with the national convention of a political party .
it might even prevent the league of women voters -- which is incorporated -- from using its funds to inform its members about the record of a political candidate .
i regard this provision of the taft - hartley bill as a dangerous challenge to free speech and our free press .
one of the basic errors of this bill is that it ignores the fact that over the years we have been making real progress in labor - management relations .
we have been achieving slow but steady improvement in cooperation between employers and workers .
we must always remember that under our free economic system management and labor are associates .
they work together for their own benefit and for the benefit of the public .
the taft - hartley bill fails to recognize these fundamental facts .
many provisions of the bill would have the result of changing employers and workers from members of the same team to opponents on contending teams .
i feel deep concern about what this would do to the steady progress we have made through the years .
i fear that this type of legislation would cause the people of our country to divide into opposing groups .
if conflict is created , as this bill would create it -- if the seeds of discord are sown , as this bill would sow them -- our unity will suffer and our strength will be impaired .
this bill does not resemble the labor legislation which i have recommended to the congress .
the whole purpose of this bill is contrary to the sound growth of our national labor policy .
there is still time to enact progressive , constructive legislation during the present session .
we need such legislation to correct abuses and to further our advance in labor management relations .
we seek in this country today a formula which will treat all men fairly and justly , and which will give our people security in the necessities of life .
as our generous american spirit prompts us to aid the world to rebuild , we must , at the same time , construct a better america in which all can share equitably in the blessings of democracy .
the taft - hartley bill threatens the attainment of this goal .
for the sake of the future of this nation , i hope that this bill will not become law .

mr. vice president , mr. chief justice , fellow citizens : 
 i accept with humility the honor which the american people have conferred upon me .
i accept it with a resolve to do all that i can for the welfare of this nation and for the peace of the world .
in performing the duties of my office , i need the help and the prayers of every one of you .
i ask for your encouragement and for your support .
the tasks we face are difficult .
we can accomplish them only if we work together .
each period of our national history has had its special challenges .
those that confront us now are as momentous as any in the past .
today marks the beginning not only of a new administration , but of a period that will be eventful , perhaps decisive , for us and for the world .
it may be our lot to experience , and in a large measure bring about , a major turning point in the long history of the human race .
the first half of this century has been marked by unprecedented and brutal attacks on the rights of man , and by the two most frightful wars in history .
the supreme need of our time is for men to learn to live together in peace and harmony .
the peoples of the earth face the future with grave uncertainty , composed almost equally of great hopes and great fears .
in this time of doubt , they look to the united states as never before for good will , strength , and wise leadership .
it is fitting , therefore , that we take this occasion to proclaim to the world the essential principles of the faith by which we live , and to declare our aims to all peoples .
the american people stand firm in the faith which has inspired this nation from the beginning .
we believe that all men have a right to equal justice under law and equal opportunity to share in the common good .
we believe that all men have a right to freedom of thought and expression .
we believe that all men are created equal because they are created in the image of god .
from this faith we will not be moved .
the american people desire , and are determined to work for , a world in which all nations and all peoples are free to govern themselves as they see fit , and to achieve a decent and satisfying life .
above all else , our people desire , and are determined to work for , peace on earth -- a just and lasting peace -- based on genuine agreement freely arrived at by equals .
in the pursuit of these aims , the united states and other like - minded nations find themselves directly opposed by a regime with contrary aims and a totally different concept of life .
that regime adheres to a false philosophy which purports to offer freedom , security , and greater opportunity to mankind .
misled by that philosophy , many peoples have sacrificed their liberties only to learn to their sorrow that deceit and mockery , poverty and tyranny , are their reward .
that false philosophy is communism .
communism is based on the belief that man is so weak and inadequate that he is unable to govern himself , and therefore requires the rule of strong masters .
democracy is based on the conviction that man has the moral and intellectual capacity , as well as the inalienable right , to govern himself with reason and justice .
communism subjects the individual to arrest without lawful cause , punishment without trial , and forced labor as the chattel of the state .
it decrees what information he shall receive , what art he shall produce , what leaders he shall follow , and what thoughts he shall think .
democracy maintains that government is established for the benefit of the individual , and is charged with the responsibility of protecting the rights of the individual and his freedom in the exercise of those abilities of his .
communism maintains that social wrongs can be corrected only by violence .
democracy has proved that social justice can be achieved through peaceful change .
communism holds that the world is so widely divided into opposing classes that war is inevitable .
democracy holds that free nations can settle differences justly and maintain a lasting peace .
these differences between communism and democracy do not concern the united states alone .
people everywhere are coming to realize that what is involved is material well - being , human dignity , and the right to believe in and worship god .
i state these differences , not to draw issues of belief as such , but because the actions resulting from the communist philosophy are a threat to the efforts of free nations to bring about world recovery and lasting peace .
since the end of hostilities , the united states has invested its substance and its energy in a great constructive effort to restore peace , stability , and freedom to the world .
we have sought no territory .
we have imposed our will on none .
we have asked for no privileges we would not extend to others .
we have constantly and vigorously supported the united nations and related agencies as a means of applying democratic principles to international relations .
we have consistently advocated and relied upon peaceful settlement of disputes among nations .
we have made every effort to secure agreement on effective international control of our most powerful weapon , and we have worked steadily for the limitation and control of all armaments .
we have encouraged , by precept and example , the expansion of world trade on a sound and fair basis .
almost a year ago , in company with 16 free nations of europe , we launched the greatest cooperative economic program in history .
the purpose of that unprecedented effort is to invigorate and strengthen democracy in europe , so that the free people of that continent can resume their rightful place in the forefront of civilization and can contribute once more to the security and welfare of the world .
our efforts have brought new hope to all mankind .
we have beaten back despair and defeatism .
we have saved a number of countries from losing their liberty .
hundreds of millions of people all over the world now agree with us , that we need not have war -- that we can have peace .
the initiative is ours .
we are moving on with other nations to build an even stronger structure of international order and justice .
we shall have as our partners countries which , no longer solely concerned with the problem of national survival , are now working to improve the standards of living of all their people .
we are ready to undertake new projects to strengthen a free world .
in the coming years , our program for peace and freedom will emphasize four major courses of action .
first , we will continue to give unfaltering support to the united nations and related agencies , and we will continue to search for ways to strengthen their authority and increase their effectiveness .
we believe that the united nations will be strengthened by the new nations which are being formed in lands now advancing toward self - government under democratic principles .
second , we will continue our programs for world economic recovery .
this means , first of all , that we must keep our full weight behind the european recovery program .
we are confident of the success of this major venture in world recovery .
we believe that our partners in this effort will achieve the status of self - supporting nations once again .
in addition , we must carry out our plans for reducing the barriers to world trade and increasing its volume .
economic recovery and peace itself depend on increased world trade .
third , we will strengthen freedom - loving nations against the dangers of aggression .
we are now working out with a number of countries a joint agreement designed to strengthen the security of the north atlantic area .
such an agreement would take the form of a collective defense arrangement within the terms of the united nations charter .
we have already established such a defense pact for the western hemisphere by the treaty of rio de janeiro .
the primary purpose of these agreements is to provide unmistakable proof of the joint determination of the free countries to resist armed attack from any quarter .
every country participating in these arrangements must contribute all it can to the common defense .
if we can make it sufficiently clear , in advance , that any armed attack affecting our national security would be met with overwhelming force , the armed attack might never occur .
i hope soon to send to the senate a treaty respecting the north atlantic security plan .
in addition , we will provide military advice and equipment to free nations which will cooperate with us in the maintenance of peace and security .
fourth , we must embark on a bold new program for making the benefits of our scientific advances and industrial progress available for the improvement and growth of underdeveloped areas .
more than half the people of the world are living in conditions approaching misery .
their food is inadequate .
they are victims of disease .
their economic life is primitive and stagnant .
their poverty is a handicap and a threat both to them and to more prosperous areas .
for the first time in history , humanity posesses the knowledge and skill to relieve suffering of these people .
the united states is pre - eminent among nations in the development of industrial and scientific techniques .
the material resources which we can afford to use for assistance of other peoples are limited .
but our imponderable resources in technical knowledge are constantly growing and are inexhaustible .
i believe that we should make available to peace - loving peoples the benefits of our store of technical knowledge in order to help them realize their aspirations for a better life .
and , in cooperation with other nations , we should foster capital investment in areas needing development .
our aim should be to help the free peoples of the world , through their own efforts , to produce more food , more clothing , more materials for housing , and more mechanical power to lighten their burdens .
we invite other countries to pool their technological resources in this undertaking .
their contributions will be warmly welcomed .
this should be a cooperative enterprise in which all nations work together through the united nations and its specialized agencies whenever practicable .
it must be a worldwide effort for the achievement of peace , plenty , and freedom .
with the cooperation of business , private capital , agriculture , and labor in this country , this program can greatly increase the industrial activity in other nations and can raise substantially their standards of living .
such new economic developments must be devised and controlled to the benefit of the peoples of the areas in which they are established .
guarantees to the investor must be balanced by guarantees in the interest of the people whose resources and whose labor go into these developments .
the old imperialism -- exploitation for foreign profit -- has no place in our plans .
what we envisage is a program of development based on the concepts of democratic fair - dealing .
all countries , including our own , will greatly benefit from a constructive program for the better use of the world 's human and natural resources .
experience shows that our commerce with other countries expands as they progress industrially and economically .
greater production is the key to prosperity and peace .
and the key to greater production is a wider and more vigorous application of modern scientific and technical knowledge .
only by helping the least fortunate of its members to help themselves can the human family achieve the decent , satisfying life that is the right of all people .
democracy alone can supply the vitalizing force to stir the peoples of the world into triumphant action , not only against their human oppressors , but also against their ancient enemies -- hunger , misery , and despair .
on the basis of these four major courses of action we hope to help create the conditions that will lead eventually to personal freedom and happiness for all mankind .
if we are to be successful in carrying out these policies , it is clear that we must have continued prosperity in this country and we must keep ourselves strong .
slowly but surely we are weaving a world fabric of international security and growing prosperity .
we are aided by all who wish to live in freedom from fear -- even by those who live today in fear under their own governments .
we are aided by all who want relief from lies and propaganda -- those who desire truth and sincerity .
we are aided by all who desire self - government and a voice in deciding their own affairs .
we are aided by all who long for economic security -- for the security and abundance that men in free societies can enjoy .
we are aided by all who desire freedom of speech , freedom of religion , and freedom to live their own lives for useful ends .
our allies are the millions who hunger and thirst after righteousness .
in due time , as our stability becomes manifest , as more and more nations come to know the benefits of democracy and to participate in growing abundance , i believe that those countries which now oppose us will abandon their delusions and join with the free nations of the world in a just settlement of international differences .
events have brought our american democracy to new influence and new responsibilities .
they will test our courage , our devotion to duty , and our concept of liberty .
but i say to all men , what we have achieved in liberty , we will surpass in greater liberty .
steadfast in our faith in the almighty , we will advance toward a world where man 's freedom is secure .
to that end we will devote our strength , our resources , and our firmness of resolve .
with god 's help , the future of mankind will be assured in a world of justice , harmony , and peace .

this is a solemn but a glorious hour .
i only wish that franklin d. roosevelt had lived to witness this day .
general eisenhower informs me that the forces of germany have surrendered to the united nations .
the flags of freedom fly over all europe .
for this victory , we join in offering our thanks to the providence which has guided and sustained us through the dark days of adversity .
our rejoicing is sobered and subdued by a supreme consciousness of the terrible price we have paid to rid the world of hitler and his evil band .
let us not forget , my fellow americans , the sorrow and the heartache which today abide in the homes of so many of our neighbors -- neighbors whose most priceless possession has been rendered as a sacrifice to redeem our liberty .
we can repay the debt which we owe to our god , to our dead and to our children only by work -- by ceaseless devotion to the responsibilities which lie ahead of us .
if i could give you a single watchword for the coming months , that word is -- work , work , and more work .
we must work to finish the war .
our victory is but half - won .
the west is free , but the east is still in bondage to the treacherous tyranny of the japanese .
when the last japanese division has surrendered unconditionally , then only will our fighting job be done .
we must work to bind up the wounds of a suffering world -- to build an abiding peace , a peace rooted in justice and in law .
we can build such a peace only by hard , toilsome , painstaking work -- by understanding and working with our allies in peace as we have in war .
the job ahead is no less important , no less urgent , no less difficult than the task which now happily is done .
i call upon every american to stick to his post until the last battle is won .
until that day , let no man abandon his post or slacken his efforts .
and now , i want to read to you my formal proclamation of this occasion : 
 " a proclamation -- the allied armies , through sacrifice and devotion and with god 's help , have wrung from germany a final and unconditional surrender .
the western world has been freed of the evil forces which for five years and longer have imprisoned the bodies and broken the lives of millions upon millions of free - born men .
they have violated their churches , destroyed their homes , corrupted their children , and murdered their loved ones .
our armies of liberation have restored freedom to these suffering peoples , whose spirit and will the oppressors could never enslave .
" much remains to be done .
the victory won in the west must now be won in the east .
the whole world must be cleansed of the evil from which half the world has been freed .
united , the peace - loving nations have demonstrated in the west that their arms are stronger by far than the might of the dictators or the tyranny of military cliques that once called us soft and weak .
the power of our peoples to defend themselves against all enemies will be proved in the pacific war as it has been proved in europe .
" for the triumph of spirit and of arms which we have won , and for its promise to the peoples everywhere who join us in the love of freedom , it is fitting that we , as a nation , give thanks to almighty god , who has strengthened us and given us the victory .
" now , therefore , i , harry s. truman , president of the united states of america , do hereby appoint sunday , may 13 , 1945 , to be a day of prayer .
" i call upon the people of the united states , whatever their faith , to unite in offering joyful thanks to god for the victory we have won , and to pray that he will support us to the end of our present struggle and guide us into the ways of peace .
" i also call upon my countrymen to dedicate this day of prayer to the memory of those who have given their lives to make possible our victory .
" in witness whereof , i have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the united states of america to be affixed . "

it certainly is a pleasure .
this is the first missouri town at which we have stopped since we left washington , and i certainly was highly pleased when the next governor of missouri met me in des moines this morning and spent the day with me .
we went to that great meeting outside of des moines , and he has been with me ever since .
i told him that at the first stop in missouri he was going to have to present the president of the united states , although so far as missouri was concerned , they did n't need such a presentation .
forrest smith and i are going to carry this state , and so is every other democrat on the ticket .
i have got a lot of friends here in trenton .
i have been here many a time .
when i was a kid , i had a job in the national bank of commerce in kansas city , and i was getting $ 35 a month , and i had an old lady who ran a boarding house out on 1314 troost , and she let me live there and have two meals a day for $ 5 a week .
imagine that !
and she was a native of trenton , mo. that has been so long ago , i hate to remember just exactly how long it has been , but because that good old lady was so kind to me , i have always had a warm spot in my heart for this town , even if it does go republican sometimes .
i do n't think you are going to do that next time .
how about it ?
i am not supposed to address or make a political speech in my home state at this time , but i sincerely hope that all of you will study the issues for what they are worth , and i sincerely hope that on election day you wo n't hesitate to go to the polls , because this government of ours is made up of the people .
every one of you has a hand in this government , and when you do n't exercise that great privilege which our forefathers sought to give you , you are shirking your duty , and then if the government goes wrong , there is nobody to blame but you .
you know , in 1946 two - thirds of you stayed at home and you have got the 80th congress -- i say , next to one , the worst congress the country has ever had for the welfare of the public .
if you will study the record , i am sure you will come to the same conclusion that i have , although you are not as close to those things as i am .
but your interests are involved in the results of this -- the action and nonaction of the 80th congress .
all of you in this good town depend either on some job or on the soil , and if you do your interests have been vitally affected by the actions of this " do - nothing " 80th republican congress .
now you are going to have a chance to remedy that on november 2nd .
you are going to have a chance to make forrest smith governor of missouri , and you are going to have a very , very great chance of keeping a missourian in the white house for another 4 years .
there is one thing i want to bring home to you .
i am on a crusade for the welfare of the everyday man in the united states .
i am not working for special privilege .
i am not working for the speculators ' lobby .
i am not working for the real estate lobby .
i am not working for any special interests in the united states but the interests of the everyday man whose interest is my interest -- and that interest is your interest .
you know , lincoln said that the lord certainly loved the common people or he would n't have made so many of them .
i think that is just as true as it can be .
now i want you , as citizens of the great state of mine , of which i am prouder than anything else , because i think it is the greatest state in the union , and i ca n't say that in california or new york or pennsylvania , but i say it here .
it 's the only state in the union around which you can put a fence and it will survive .
it has got everything it needs .
there is no other state in the union that has that .
i want every citizen of this great state to help me in that crusade , to keep the government of the people , by the people , and for the people .
and if you will do that , this country will continue for another thousand years as the greatest country in the world .

sixteen hours ago an american airplane dropped one bomb on hiroshima , an important japanese army base .
that bomb had more power than 20,000 tons of t. n.t. it had more than two thousand times the blast power of the british " grand slam " which is the largest bomb ever yet used in the history of warfare .
the japanese began the war from the air at pearl harbor .
they have been repaid many fold .
and the end is not yet .
with this bomb we have now added a new and revolutionary increase in destruction to supplement the growing power of our armed forces .
in their present form these bombs are now in production and even more powerful forms are in development .
it is an atomic bomb .
it is a harnessing of the basic power of the universe .
the force from which the sun draws its power has been loosed against those who brought war to the far east .
before 1939 , it was the accepted belief of scientists that it was theoretically possible to release atomic energy .
but no one knew any practical method of doing it .
by 1942 , however , we knew that the germans were working feverishly to find a way to add atomic energy to the other engines of war with which they hoped to enslave the world .
but they failed .
we may be grateful to providence that the germans got the v-1 's and v-2 's late and in limited quantities and even more grateful that they did not get the atomic bomb at all .
the battle of the laboratories held fateful risks for us as well as the battles of the air , land and sea , and we have now won the battle of the laboratories as we have won the other battles .
beginning in 1940 , before pearl harbor , scientific knowledge useful in war was pooled between the united states and great britain , and many priceless helps to our victories have come from that arrangement .
under that general policy the research on the atomic bomb was begun .
with american and british scientists working together we entered the race of discovery against the germans .
the united states had available the large number of scientists of distinction in the many needed areas of knowledge .
it had the tremendous industrial and financial resources necessary for the project and they could be devoted to it without undue impairment of other vital war work .
in the united states the laboratory work and the production plants , on which a substantial start had already been made , would be out of reach of enemy bombing , while at that time britain was exposed to constant air attack and was still threatened with the possibility of invasion .
for these reasons prime minister churchill and president roosevelt agreed that it was wise to carry on the project here .
we now have two great plants and many lesser works devoted to the production of atomic power .
employment during peak construction numbered 125,000 and over 65,000 individuals are even now engaged in operating the plants .
many have worked there for two and a half years .
few know what they have been producing .
they see great quantities of material going in and they see nothing coming out of these plants , for the physical size of the explosive charge is exceedingly small .
we have spent two billion dollars on the greatest scientific gamble in history - and won .
but the greatest marvel is not the size of the enterprise , its secrecy , nor its cost , but the achievement of scientific brains in putting together infinitely complex pieces of knowledge held by many men in different fields of science into a workable plan .
and hardly less marvelous has been the capacity of industry to design , and of labor to operate , the machines and methods to do things never done before so that the brain child of many minds came forth in physical shape and performed as it was supposed to do .
both science and industry worked under the direction of the united states army , which achieved a unique success in managing so diverse a problem in the advancement of knowledge in an amazingly short time .
it is doubtful if such another combination could be got together in the world .
what has been done is the greatest achievement of organized science in history .
it was done under high pressure and without failure .
we are now prepared to obliterate more rapidly and completely every productive enterprise the japanese have above ground in any city .
we shall destroy their docks , their factories , and their communications .
let there be no mistake ; we shall completely destroy japan 's power to make war .
it was to spare the japanese people from utter destruction that the ultimatum of july 26 was issued at potsdam .
their leaders promptly rejected that ultimatum .
if they do not now accept our terms they may expect a rain of ruin from the air , the like of which has never been seen on this earth .
behind this air attack will follow sea and land forces in such numbers and power as they have not yet seen and with the fighting skill of which they are already well aware .
the secretary of war , who has kept in personal touch with all phases of the project , will immediately make public a statement giving further details .
his statement will give facts concerning the sites at oak ridge near knoxville , tennessee , and at richland near pasco , washington , and an installation near santa fe , new mexico .
although the workers at the sites have been making materials to be used in producing the greatest destructive force in history they have not themselves been in danger beyond that of many other occupations , for the utmost care has been taken of their safety .
the fact that we can release atomic energy ushers in a new era in man 's understanding of nature 's forces .
atomic energy may in the future supplement the power that now comes from coal , oil , and falling water , but at present it can not be produced on a basis to compete with them commercially .
before that comes there must be a long period of intensive research .
it has never been the habit of the scientists of this country or the policy of this government to withhold from the world scientific knowledge .
normally , therefore , everything about the work with atomic energy would be made public .
but under present circumstances it is not intended to divulge the technical processes of production or all the military applications , pending further examination of possible methods of protecting us and the rest of the world from the danger of sudden destruction .
i shall recommend that the congress of the united states consider promptly the establishment of an appropriate commission to control the production and use of atomic power within the united states .
i shall give further consideration and make further recommendations to the congress as to how atomic power can become a powerful and forceful influence towards the maintenance of world peace .

my fellow americans : 
 i am happy to have this opportunity to talk to you once more before i leave the white house .
next tuesday , general eisenhower will be inaugurated as president of the united states .
a short time after the new president takes his oath of office , i will be on the train going back home to independence , missouri .
i will once again be a plain , private citizen of this great republic .
that is as it should be .
inauguration day will be a great demonstration of our democratic process .
i am glad to be a part of it -- glad to wish general eisenhower all possible success , as he begins his term -- glad the whole world will have a chance to see how simply and how peacefully our american system transfers the vast power of the presidency from my hands to his .
it is a good object lesson in democracy .
i am very proud of it .
and i know you are , too .
during the last 2 months i have done my best to make this transfer an orderly one .
i have talked with my successor on the affairs of the country , both foreign and domestic , and my cabinet officers have talked with their successors .
i want to say that general eisenhower and his associates have cooperated fully in this effort .
such an orderly transfer from one party to another has never taken place before in our history .
i think a real precedent has been set .
in speaking to you tonight , i have no new revelations to make -- no political statements -- no policy announcements .
there are simply a few things in my heart that i want to say to you .
i want to say " goodbye " and " thanks for your help . "
and i want to talk to you a little while about what has happened since i became your president .
i am speaking to you from the room where i have worked since april 12 , 1945 .
this is the president 's office in the west wing of the white house .
this is the desk where i have signed most of the papers that embodied the decisions i have made as president .
it has been the desk of many presidents , and will be the desk of many more .
since i became president , i have been to europe , mexico , canada , brazil , puerto rico , and the virgin islands -- wake island and hawaii .
i have visited almost every state in the union .
i have traveled 135,000 miles by air , 77,000 by rail , and 17,000 by ship .
but the mail always followed me , and wherever i happened to be , that 's where the office of the president was .
the greatest part of the president 's job is to make decisions -- big ones and small ones , dozens of them almost every day .
the papers may circulate around the government for a while but they finally reach this desk .
and then , there 's no place else for them to go .
the president -- whoever he is -- has to decide .
he ca n't pass the buck to anybody .
no one else can do the deciding for him .
that 's his job .
that 's what i 've been doing here in this room , for almost 8 years .
and over in the main part of the white house , there 's a study on the second floor -- a room much like this one -- where i have worked at night and early in the morning on the papers i could n't get to at the office .
of course , for more than 3 years mrs. truman and i were not living in the white house .
we were across the street in the blair house .
that was when the white house almost fell down on us and had to be rebuilt .
i had a study over at the blair house , too , but living in the blair house was not as convenient as living in the white house .
the secret service would n't let me walk across the street , so i had to get in a car every morning to cross the street to the white house office , again at noon to go to the blair house for lunch , again to go back to the office after lunch , and finally take an automobile at night to return to the blair house .
fantastic , is n't it ?
but necessary , so my guards thought -- and they are the bosses on such matters as that .
now , of course , we 're back in the white house .
it is in very good condition , and general eisenhower will be able to take up his residence in the house and work right here .
that will be much more convenient for him , and i 'm very glad the renovation job was all completed before his term began .
your new president is taking office in quite different circumstances than when i became president 8 years ago .
on april 1945 , i had been presiding over the senate in my capacity as vice president .
when the senate recessed about 5 o'clock in the afternoon , i walked over to the office of the speaker of the house , mr. rayburn , to discuss pending legislation .
as soon as i arrived , i was told that mr. early , one of president roosevelt 's secretaries , wanted me to call .
i reached mr. early , and he told me to come to the white house as quickly as possible , to enter by way of the pennsylvania avenue entrance , and to come to mrs. roosevelt 's study .
when i arrived , mrs. roosevelt told me the tragic news , and i felt the shock that all of you felt a little later -- when the word came over the radio and appeared in the newspapers .
president roosevelt had died .
i offered to do anything i could for mrs. roosevelt , and then i asked the secretary of state to call the cabinet together .
at 7:09 p. m. i was sworn in as president by chief justice stone in the cabinet room .
things were happening fast in those days .
the san francisco conference to organize the united nations had been called for april 25th .
i was asked if that meeting would go forward .
i announced that it would .
that was my first decision .
after attending president roosevelt 's funeral , i went to the hall of the house of representatives and told a joint session of the congress that i would carry on president roosevelt 's policies .
on may 7th , germany surrendered .
the announcement was made on may 8th , my 61st birthday .
mr. churchill called me shortly after that and wanted a meeting with me and prime minister stalin of russia .
later on , a meeting was agreed upon , and churchill , stalin , and i met at potsdam in germany .
meanwhile , the first atomic explosion took place out in the new mexico desert .
the war against japan was still going on .
i made the decision that the atomic bomb had to be used to end it .
i made that decision in the conviction it would save hundreds of thousands of lives -- japanese as well as american .
japan surrendered , and we were faced with the huge problems of bringing the troops home and reconverting the economy from war to peace .
all these things happened within just a little over 4 months -- from april to august 1945 .
i tell you this to illustrate the tremendous scope of the work your president has to do .
and all these emergencies and all the developments to meet them have required the president to put in long hours -- usually 17 hours a day , with no payment for overtime .
i sign my name , on the average , 600 times a day , see and talk to hundreds of people every month , shake hands with thousands every year , and still carry on the business of the largest going concern in the whole world .
there is no job like it on the face of the earth -- in the power which is concentrated here at this desk , and in the responsibility and difficulty of the decisions .
i want all of you to realize how big a job , how hard a job , it is -- not for my sake , because i am stepping out of it -- but for the sake of my successor .
he needs the understanding and the help of every citizen .
it is not enough for you to come out once every 4 years and vote for a candidate , and then go back home and say , " well , i 've done my part , now let the new president do the worrying . "
he ca n't do the job alone .
regardless of your politics , whether you are republican or democrat , your fate is tied up with what is done here in this room .
the president is president of the whole country .
we must give him our support as citizens of the united states .
he will have mine , and i want you to give him yours .
i suppose that history will remember my term in office as the years when the " cold war " began to overshadow our lives .
i have had hardly a day in office that has not been dominated by this all -- embracing struggle -- this conflict between those who love freedom and those who would lead the world back into slavery and darkness .
and always in the background there has been the atomic bomb .
but when history says that my term of office saw the beginning of the cold war , it will also say that in those 8 years we have set the course that can win it .
we have succeeded in carving out a new set of policies to attain peace -- positive policies , policies of world leadership , policies that express faith in other free people .
we have averted world war iii up to now , and we may already have succeeded in establishing conditions which can keep that war from happening as far ahead as man can see .
these are great and historic achievements that we can all be proud of .
think of the difference between our course now and our course 30 years ago .
after the first world war we withdrew from world affairs -- we failed to act in concert with other peoples against aggression -- we helped to kill the league of nations -- and we built up tariff barriers that strangled world trade .
this time , we avoided those mistakes .
we helped to found and sustain the united nations .
we have welded alliances that include the greater part of the free world .
and we have gone ahead with other free countries to help build their economies and link us all together in a healthy world trade .
think back for a moment to the 1930 's and you will see the difference .
the japanese moved into manchuria , and free men did not act .
the fascists moved into ethiopia , and we did not act .
the nazis marched into the rhineland , into austria , into czechoslovakia , and free men were paralyzed for lack of strength and unity and will .
think about those years of weakness and indecision , and the world war ii which was their evil result .
then think about the speed and courage and decisiveness with which we have moved against the communist threat since world war ii .
the first crisis came in 1945 and 1946 , when the soviet union refused to honor its agreement to remove its troops from iran .
members of my cabinet came to me and asked if we were ready to take the risk that a firm stand involved .
i replied that we were .
so we took our stand -- we made it clear to the soviet union that we expected them to honor their agreement -- and the soviet troops were withdrawn from iran .
then , in early 1947 , the soviet union threatened greece and turkey .
the british sent me a message saying they could no longer keep their forces in that area .
something had to be done at once , or the eastern mediterranean would be taken over by the communists .
on march 12th , i went before the congress and stated our determination to help the people of greece and turkey maintain their independence .
today , greece is still free and independent ; and turkey is a bulwark of strength at a strategic corner of the world .
then came the marshall plan which saved europe , the heroic berlin airlift , and our military aid programs .
we inaugurated the north atlantic pact , the rio pact binding the western hemisphere together , and the defense pacts with countries of the far pacific .
most important of all , we acted in korea .
i was in independence , missouri , in june 1950 , when secretary acheson telephoned me and gave me the news about the invasion of korea .
i told the secretary to lay the matter at once before the united nations , and i came on back to washington .
flying back over the flatlands of the middle west and over the appalachians that summer afternoon , i had a lot of time to think .
i turned the problem over in my mind in many ways , but my thoughts kept coming back to the 1930 's -- to manchuria , to ethiopia , the rhineland , austria , and finally to 
 munich .
here was history repeating itself .
here was another probing action , another testing action .
if we let the republic of korea go under , some other country would be next , and then another .
and all the time , the courage and confidence of the free world would be ebbing away , just as it did in the 1930 's .
and the united nations would go the way of the league of nations .
when i reached washington , i met immediately with the secretary of state , the secretary of defense , and general bradley , and the other civilian and military officials who had information and advice to help me decide on what to do .
we talked about the problems long and hard .
we considered those problems very carefully .
it was not easy to make the decision to send american boys again into battle .
i was a soldier in the first world war , and i know what a soldier goes through .
i know well the anguish that mothers and fathers and families go through .
so i knew what was ahead if we acted in korea .
but after all this was said , we realized that the issue was whether there would be fighting in a limited area now or on a much larger scale later on -- whether there would be some casualties now or many more casualties 
 later .
so a decision was reached -- the decision i believe was the most important in my time as president of the united states .
in the days that followed , the most heartening fact was that the american people clearly agreed with the decision .
and in korea , our men are fighting as valiantly as americans have ever fought -- because they know they are fighting in the same cause of freedom in which americans have stood ever since the beginning of the republic .
where free men had failed the test before , this time we met the test .
we met it firmly .
we met it successfully .
the aggression has been repelled .
the communists have seen their hopes of easy conquest go down the drain .
the determination of free people to defend themselves has been made clear to the kremlin .
as i have thought about our worldwide struggle with the communists these past 8 years -- day in and day out -- i have never once doubted that you , the people of our country , have the will to do what is necessary to win this terrible fight against communism .
i know the people of this country have that will and determination , and i have always depended on it .
because i have been sure of that , i have been able to make necessary decisions even though they called for sacrifices by all of us .
and i have not been wrong in my judgment of the american people .
that same assurance of our people 's determination will be general eisenhower 's greatest source of strength in carrying on this struggle .
now , once in a while , i get a letter from some impatient person asking , why do n't we get it over with ?
why do n't we issue an ultimatum , make all - out war , drop the atomic bomb ?
for most americans , the answer is quite simple : we are not made that way .
we are a moral people .
peace is our goal , with justice and freedom .
we can not , of our own free will , violate the very principles that we are striving to defend .
the whole purpose of what we are doing is to prevent world war iii .
starting a war is no way to make peace .
but if anyone still thinks that just this once , bad means can bring good ends , then let me remind you of this : we are living in the 8th year of the atomic age .
we are not the only nation that is learning to unleash the power of the atom .
a third world war might dig the grave not only of our communist opponents but also of our own society , our world as well as theirs .
starting an atomic war is totally unthinkable for rational men .
then , some of you may ask , when and how will the cold war end ?
i think i can answer that simply .
the communist world has great resources , and it looks strong .
but there is a fatal flaw in their society .
theirs is a godless system , a system of slavery ; there is no freedom in it , no consent .
the iron curtain , the secret police , the constant purges , all these are symptoms of a great basic weakness -- the rulers ' fear of their own people .
in the long run the strength of our free society , and our ideals , will prevail over a system that has respect for neither god nor man .
last week , in my state of the union message to the congress -- and i hope you will all take the time to read it -- i explained how i think we will 
 finally win through .
as the free world grows stronger , more united , more attractive to men on both sides of the iron curtain -- and as the soviet hopes for easy expansion are blocked -- then there will have to come a time of change in the soviet world .
nobody can say for sure when that is going to be , or exactly how it will come about , whether by revolution , or trouble in the satellite states , or by a change inside the kremlin .
whether the communist rulers shift their policies of their own free will -- or whether the change comes about in some other way -- i have not a doubt in the world that a change will occur .
i have a deep and abiding faith in the destiny of free men .
with patience and courage , we shall some day move on into a new era -- a wonderful golden age -- an age when we can use the peaceful tools that science has forged for us to do away with poverty and human misery everywhere on earth .
think what can be done , once our capital , our skills , our science -- most of all atomic energy -- can be released from the tasks of defense and turned wholly to peaceful purposes all around the world .
there is no end to what can be done .
i ca n't help but dream out loud just a little here .
the tigris and euphrates valley can be made to bloom as it did in the times of babylon and nineveh .
israel can be made the country of milk and honey as it was in the time of joshua .
there is a plateau in ethiopia some 6,000 to 8,000 feet high , that has 65,000 square miles of land just exactly like the corn belt in northern illinois .
enough food can be raised there to feed a hundred million people .
there are places in south america -- places in colombia and venezuela and brazil -- just like that plateau in ethiopia -- places where food 
 could be raised for millions of people .
these things can be done , and they are self - liquidating projects .
if we can get peace and safety in the world under the united nations , the developments will come so fast we will not recognize the world in which we now live .
this is our dream of the future -- our picture of the world we hope to have when the communist threat is overcome .
i 've talked a lot tonight about the menace of communism -- and our fight against it -- because that is the overriding issue of our time .
but there are some other things we 've done that history will record .
one of them is that we in america have learned how to attain real prosperity for our people .
we have 62 1/2 million people at work .
businessmen , farmers , laborers , white - collar people , all have better incomes and more of the good things of life than ever before in the history of the world .
there has n't been a failure of an insured bank in nearly 9 years .
no depositor has lost a cent in that period .
and the income of our people has been fairly distributed , perhaps more so than at any other time in recent history .
we have made progress in spreading the blessings of american life to all of our people .
there has been a tremendous awakening of the american conscience on the great issues of civil rights -- equal economic opportunities , equal rights of citizenship , and equal educational opportunities for all our people , whatever their race or religion or status of birth .
so , as i empty the drawers of this desk , and as mrs. truman and i leave the white house , we have no regret .
we feel we have done our best in the public service .
i hope and believe we have contributed to the welfare of this nation and to the peace of the world .
when franklin roosevelt died , i felt there must be a million men better qualified than i , to take up the presidential task .
but the work was mine to do , and i had to do it .
and i have tried to give it everything that was in me .
through all of it , through all the years that i have worked here in this room , i have been well aware i did not really work alone -- that you were working with me .
no president could ever hope to lead our country , or to sustain the burdens of this office , save as the people helped with their support .
i have had that help -- you have given me that support -- on all our great essential undertakings to build the free world 's strength and keep the peace .
those are the big things .
those are the things we have done together .
for that i shall be grateful , always .
and now , the time has come for me to say good night -- and god bless you all .

mayor la guardia , ladies and gentlemen : 
 i am grateful for the magnificent reception which you have given me today in this great city of new york .
i know that it is given me only as the representative of the gallant men and women of our naval forces , and on their behalf , as well as my own , i thank you .
new york joins the rest of the nation in paying honor and tribute to the four million fighting americans of the navy , marine corps , and coast guard -- and to the ships which carried them to victory .
on opposite sides of the world , across two oceans , our navy opened a highway for the armies and air forces of the united states .
they landed our gallant men , millions of them , on the beachheads of final triumph .
fighting from murmansk , the english channel and the tyrrhenian sea , to midway , guadalcanal , leyte gulf and okinawa -- they won the greatest naval victories in history .
together with their brothers in arms in the army and air force , and with the men of the merchant marine , they have helped to win for mankind all over the world a new opportunity to live in peace and dignity -- and we hope , in security .
in the harbor and rivers of new york city and in other ports along the coasts and rivers of the country , ships of that mighty united states navy are at anchor .
i hope that you and the people everywhere will visit them and their crews , seeing for yourselves what your sons and daughters , your labor and your money , have fashioned into an invincible weapon of liberty .
the fleet , on v - j day , consisted of 1200 warships , more than 50,000 supporting and landing craft , and over 40,000 navy planes .
by that day , ours was a sea power never before equalled in the history of the world .
there were great carrier task forces capable of tracking down and sinking the enemy 's fleets , beating down his air power , and pouring destruction on his war - making industries .
there were submarines which roamed the seas , invading the enemy 's own ports , and destroying his shipping in all the oceans .
there were amphibious forces capable of landing soldiers on beaches from normandy to the philippines .
there were great battleships and cruisers which swept the enemy ships from the seas and bombarded his shore defense almost at will .
and history will never forget that great leader who , from his first day in office , fought to reestablish a strong american navy -- who watched that navy and all the other might of this nation grow into an invincible force for victory -- who sought to make that force an instrument for a just and lasting peace -- and who gave his life in the effort -- franklin d. roosevelt .
the roll call of the battles of this fleet reads like a sign post around the globe -- on the road to final victory : north africa , sicily , italy , normandy , and southern france ; the coral sea , midway , guadalcanal , and the solomons ; tarawa , saipan , guam , the philippine sea , leyte gulf ; iwo jima and okinawa .
nothing which the enemy held on any coast was safe from its attack .
now we are in the process of demobilizing our naval force .
we are laying up ships .
we are breaking up aircraft squadrons .
we are rolling up bases , and releasing officers and men .
but when our demobilization is all finished as planned , the united states will still be the greatest naval power on earth .
in addition to that naval power , we shall still have one of the most powerful air forces in the world .
and just the other day , so that on short notice we could mobilize a powerful and well - equipped land , sea , and air force , i asked the congress to adopt universal training .
why do we seek to preserve this powerful naval and air force , and establish this strong army reserve ?
why do we need to do that ?
we have assured the world time and again -- and i repeat it now -- that we do not seek for ourselves one inch of territory in any place in the world .
outside of the right to establish necessary bases for our own protection , we look for nothing which belongs to any other power .
we do need this kind of armed might , however , for four principal tasks : 
 first , our army , navy , and air force , in collaboration with our allies , must enforce the terms of peace imposed upon our defeated enemies .
second , we must fulfill the military obligations which we are undertaking as a member of the united nations organization -- to support a lasting peace , by force if necessary .
third , we must cooperate with other american nations to preserve the territorial integrity and the political independence of the nations of the western hemisphere .
fourth , in this troubled and uncertain world , our military forces must be adequate to discharge the fundamental mission laid upon them by the constitution of the united states -- to " provide for the common defense " of the united states .
these four military tasks are directed not toward war -- not toward conquest -- but toward peace .
we seek to use our military strength solely to preserve the peace of the world .
for we now know that this is the only sure way to make our own freedom secure .
that is the basis of the foreign policy of the people of the united states .
the foreign policy of the united states is based firmly on fundamental principles of righteousness and justice .
in carrying out those principles we shall firmly adhere to what we believe to be right ; and we shall not give our approval to any compromise with evil .
but we know that we can not attain perfection in this world overnight .
we shall not let our search for perfection obstruct our steady progress toward international cooperation .
we must be prepared to fulfill our responsibilities as best we can , within the framework of our fundamental principles , even though we recognize that we have to operate in an imperfect world .
let me restate the fundamentals of that foreign policy of the united states : 
 1 .
we seek no territorial expansion or selfish advantage .
we have no plans for aggression against any other state , large or small .
we have no objective which need clash with the peaceful aims of any other nation .
2 .
we believe in the eventual return of sovereign rights and self - government to all peoples who have been deprived of them by force .
3 .
we shall approve no territorial changes in any friendly part of the world unless they accord with the freely expressed wishes of the people concerned .
4 .
we believe that all peoples who are prepared for self - government should be permitted to choose their own form of government by their own freely expressed choice , without interference from any foreign source .
that is true in europe , in asia , in africa , as well as in the western hemisphere .
5 .
by the combined and cooperative action of our war allies , we shall help the defeated enemy states establish peaceful democratic governments of their own free choice .
and we shall try to attain a world in which nazism , fascism , and military aggression can not exist .
6 .
we shall refuse to recognize any government imposed upon any nation by the force of any foreign power .
in some cases it may be impossible to prevent forceful imposition of such a government .
but the united states will not recognize any such government .
7 .
we believe that all nations should have the freedom of the seas and equal rights to the navigation of boundary rivers and waterways and of rivers and waterways which pass through more than one country .
8 .
we believe that all states which are accepted in the society of nations should have access on equal terms to the trade and the raw materials of the world .
9 .
we believe that the sovereign states of the western hemisphere , without interference from outside the western hemisphere , must work together as good neighbors in the solution of their common problems .
10 .
we believe that full economic collaboration between all nations , great and small , is essential to the improvement of living conditions all over the world , and to the establishment of freedom from fear and freedom from want .
11 .
we shall continue to strive to promote freedom of expression and freedom of religion throughout the peace - loving areas of the world .
12 .
we are convinced that the preservation of peace between nations requires a united nations organization composed of all the peace - loving nations of the world who are willing jointly to use force if necessary to insure peace .
now , that is the foreign policy which guides the united states .
that is the foreign policy with which it confidently faces the future .
it may not be put into effect tomorrow or the next day .
but nonetheless , it is our policy ; and we shall seek to achieve it .
it may take a long time , but it is worth waiting for , and it is worth striving to attain .
the ten commandments themselves have not yet been universally achieved over these thousands of years .
yet we struggle constantly to achieve them , and in many ways we come closer to them each year .
though we may meet setbacks from time to time , we shall not relent in our efforts to bring the golden rule into the international affairs of the world .
we are now passing through a difficult phase of international relations .
unfortunately it has always been true after past wars , that the unity among allies , forged by their common peril , has tended to wear out as the danger passed .
the world can not afford any letdown in the united determination of the allies in this war to accomplish a lasting peace .
the world can not afford to let the cooperative spirit of the allies in this war disintegrate .
the world simply can not allow this to happen .
the people in the united states , in russia , and britain , in france and china , in collaboration with all the other peace - loving people , must take the course of current history into their own hands and mold it in a new direction - the direction of continued cooperation .
it was a common danger which united us before victory .
let it be a common hope which continues to draw us together in the years to come .
the atomic bombs which fell on hiroshima and nagasaki must be made a signal , not for the old process of falling apart but for a new era -- an era of ever - closer unity and ever - closer friendship among peaceful nations .
building a peace requires as much moral stamina as waging a war .
perhaps it requires even more , because it is so laborious and painstaking and undramatic .
it requires undying patience and continuous application .
but it can give us , if we stay with it , the greatest reward that there is in the whole field of human effort .
differences of the kind that exist today among nations that fought together so long and so valiantly for victory are not hopeless or irreconcilable .
there are no conflicts of interest among the victorious powers so deeply rooted that they can not be resolved .
but their solution will require a combination of forbearance and firmness .
it will require a steadfast adherence to the high principles which we have enunciated .
it will also require a willingness to find a common ground as to the methods of applying those principles .
our american policy is a policy of friendly partnership with all peaceful nations , and of full support for the united nations organization .
it is a policy that has the strong backing of the american people .
it is a policy around which we can rally without fear or misgiving .
the more widely and clearly that policy is understood abroad , the better and surer will be the peace .
for our own part we must seek to understand the special problems of other nations .
we must seek to understand their own legitimate urge toward security as they see it .
the immediate , the greatest threat to us is the threat of disillusionment , the danger of insidious skepticism -- a loss of faith in the effectiveness of international cooperation .
such a loss of faith would be dangerous at any time .
in an atomic age it would be nothing short of disastrous .
there has been talk about the atomic bomb scrapping all navies , armies , and air forces .
for the present , i think that such talk is 100 percent wrong .
today , control of the seas rests in the fleets of the united states and her allies .
there is no substitute for them .
we have learned the bitter lesson that the weakness of this great republic invites men of ill - will to shake the very foundations of civilization all over the world .
and we had two concrete lessons in that .
what the distant future of the atomic research will bring to the fleet which we honor today , no one can foretell .
but the fundamental mission of the navy has not changed .
control of our sea approaches and of the skies above them is still the key to our freedom and to our ability to help enforce the peace of the world .
no enemy will ever strike us directly except across the sea .
we can not reach out to help stop and defeat an aggressor without crossing the sea .
therefore , the navy , armed with whatever weapons science brings forth , is still dedicated to its historic task : control of the ocean approaches to our country and of the skies above them .
the atomic bomb does not alter the basic foreign policy of the united states .
it makes the development and application of our policy more urgent than we could have dreamed 6 months ago .
it means that we must be prepared to approach international problems with greater speed , with greater determination , with greater ingenuity , in order to meet a situation for which there is no precedent .
we must find the answer to the problems created by the release of atomic energy -- we must find the answers to the many other problems of peace -- in partnership with all the peoples of the united nations .
for their stake in world peace is as great as our own .
as i said in my message to the congress , discussion of the atomic bomb with great britain and canada and later with other nations can not wait upon the formal organization of the united nations .
these discussions , looking toward a free exchange of fundamental scientific information , will be begun in the near future .
but i emphasize again , as i have before , that these discussions will not be concerned with the processes of manufacturing the atomic bomb or any other instruments of war .
in our possession of this weapon , as in our possession of other new weapons , there is no threat to any nation .
the world , which has seen the united states in two great recent wars , knows that full well .
the possession in our hands of this new power of destruction we regard as a sacred trust .
because of our love of peace , the thoughtful people of the world know that that trust will not be violated , that it will be faithfully executed .
indeed , the highest hope of the american people is that world cooperation for peace will soon reach such a state of perfection that atomic methods of destruction can be definitely and effectively outlawed forever .
we have sought , and we will continue to seek , the attainment of that objective .
we shall pursue that course with all the wisdom , patience , and determination that the god of peace can bestow upon a people who are trying to follow in his path .

