wow .
in one day , we are going to win the great state of florida and we are going to take back the white house , take it back .
florida 's my second home , a state i love so much .
and by the way , hillary , once this is over , she 'll never come back to florida .
she 's got nothing to do with florida .
i 'm here with the houses and the buildings and thousands and thousands of employees who we love .
she 's got nothing to do with this place .
she does n't know florida , that i can tell you .
but i am really thrilled to be here .
this is the last day of our campaign .
who would have believed this ?
who would have believed it ?
it 's been some campaign , too .
it 's been some campaign .
they say it 's the single greatest movement , politically speaking , in the history of this country .
can you believe that ?
can you believe it ?
that 's quite an honor .
and they say we 'll get a tremendous amount of credit , win or lose .
i said no , no , no , i do n't want any credit if we lose .
i 'm not looking for credit .
i 'm not looking for credit .
i 'm looking to make america great again , not credit .
this election will decide whether we are ruled by a corrupt political class .
you 've been watching what 's going -- folks , the system is rigged .
it 's rigged , ok ?
the system is rigged .
at least we know it and people in this country , i think because of us , have never known it so obviously as they do now .
the system is totally rigged .
hillary clinton should not even be allowed to run for the presidency of the united states .
she should n't be allowed to run .
it 's disgraceful .
what 's happening -- what 's happening is a disgrace and our country is a laughingstock all over the world .
with what 's happening with our justice , our country is a laughingstock .
all over the world , they 're laughing .
if we win -- well , you know what you can do ?
go out and vote tomorrow .
that 's what you can do .
i 'll tell you .
that 's the only way .
that 's where you beat the rigging , folks .
if we win , the corrupt politicians and their donors lose .
if they win , the american people lose big league .
this is it , folks .
we will never have another opportunity .
not in four years , not in eight years .
it 'll be over with supreme court justices , with people pouring into our country .
this is it .
this is it .
good luck .
get out there .
i did my thing .
i mean i worked .
yesterday ...   yesterday they said i set a record .
i had crowds like -- massive crowds .
thank you .
thank you .
but yesterday we set a record .
we went to seven different states .
you ought to see these crowds .
in michigan -- which i think we 're going to win michigan by the way .
we 're gon na win michigan .
you know what we 're gon na win ?
we 're gon na win minnesota .
we 're gon na win minnesota .
we 're leading big in ohio .
we 're leading in iowa .
we 're leading in new hampshire , where i 'm going in a little while .
we 're leading in north carolina .
we 're doing very , very well in pennsylvania .
very well .
you watch what 's gon na happen in pennsylvania .
the miners are gon na come out , the workers are gon na come out , the steel workers who lost their jobs are coming out .
by the way , lots of people surrounding philadelphia are going to come out of there voting , because they want to vote .
and you know who 's gon na come out ?
the women are going to come out .
you watch .
the women -- the women are going to come out big .
it 's all a phony deal .
they 're telling you a lot of phony stuff .
they are so worried .
you had to see them on television this morning .
oh , you know they get a note handed over that we 're leading in , let 's say , new hampshire -- which we are -- they get a note .
very happy and everything , " oh , oh , oh .
mr. trump is leading in new hampshire . "
you can see they 're thrilled .
they 're totally thrilled .
they are thrilled .
by the way i just want to introduce -- i 'm a big fan of billy graham .
we all are .
who is n't right ?
who is n't ?
who is n't ?
i 'm also a big fan -- and he 's been so incredible to me -- of franklin graham .
he 's a great guy .
he 's keeping it going .
and billy graham 's granddaughter was here and spoke incredibly i hear , i hear .
but cissie graham lynch is here someplace .
where 's cissie ?
where is she ?
you were so great .
everybody 's saying , if you can do as well as cissie , you 've done a good job .
so thank you .
that is an amazing -- i will tell you , my father used to take me , they called it the crusades .
and that was the crusades .
it was a beautiful thing .
but billy graham was amazing .
i think -- is he 98 today ?
98 years old , billy graham .
thank you , cissie .
really great .
say hello to your family .
billy graham is 98 years old .
this is an amazing -- truly one of the great , great man .
our failed political establishment has delivered nothing but poverty at home and disaster overseas .
they get rich making america poor .
it 's time to reject a media and political elite that 's bled our country dry .
it 's finally time for us to fight for america .
we 're going to fight for america .
i 'm not a politician .
my only special interest is you .
you know , i built a great company -- one of the great companies -- one of the great real estate companies .
some of the most incredible assets in the world , including doral right down the road and lots of other things .
buildings on the beach with the dezer family and with related .
we 've had a tremendous career .
but -- and i was on the other side .
you know my whole life i was always watching , watching .
i was on the other side .
it 's very nice and very comfortable to be on the other side .
but i love this country .
and this country was going bad .
it was going bad .
so i went , like , from , sort of , an ultimate insider -- i mean , people that absolutely -- senators , they 'd call , " don , how are you ? "
you know , they 'd come over every year , i 'd give them a check for some crazy thing they 're doing .
and they 'd say , " donald , how are you ?
how are you ? "
the day i announced it was like , " donald who ?
we do n't know -- we do n't know donald trump . "
you have to see these guys .
oh , i know i 'm better than anybody .
it was time , it   was time .
i had to join the other side , which is you .
we are going to do things so special .
our country was in trouble , our country was in trouble , $ 20 trillion in debt , making deals like the deal with iran where we give them $ 150 billion .
where we give them $ 1.7 billion in cash .
you know what that is ?
that 'd fill up this side of the arena .
nobody ever even heard of things like this .
when you look at our military is allowed to deplete -- our military 's very depleted .
we ca n't do that , this is among the times where we most need a tremendous and powerful and smart military .
we need smart people .
and obamacare is a disaster , everything 's wrong .
our country does n't win anymore .
we 're going to start winning again , ok ?
real change begins with immediately repealing and replacing obamacare .
its just been announced that the residence of florida -- sorry to tell you this folks , i do n't wanna -- i do n't wanna make you depressed , you know half of you are gon na walk out of the room but do n't do that -- are going to experience massive double digit premium hikes , ok ?
and they 're far greater than what you 've been told .
you 've been told numbers because they did n't wanna do it before the election .
i worked very hard to force those numbers out .
it 's gon na have a great impact on -- you know , my poll numbers are going through the roof .
you know why ?
i really believe a big part of it is obamacare because we 're gon na repeal it and replace it .
in the great state of arizona , premiums are going up more than 116 percent .
over 90 percent of the counties in florida are losing obamacare and they 're losing the insurers that put obamacare there .
but you know what ?
we 're gon na make it 100 percent of the counties because we 're gon na terminate obamacare and it 's not going to make a difference .
we 'll be terminating obamacare and we 'll be replacing it with so many different options , but you 'll have great health care at a fraction -- a fraction of the cost and it 'll be great .
with obamacare , premiums are surging , companies are leaving , insurers are fleeing , doctors are quitting and deductibles are going through the roof .
yet , crooked hillary clinton wants to double down on obamacare , making it even more expensive .
gon na go way up , gon na go way up , obamacare is going much higher .
nobody in this room can believe what 's going on in washington .
nobody in this room can believe what 's going on with the fbi and what 's going on with the department of justice , nobody , nobody can .
nobody can believe it .
i 'm asking for your vote so we can repeal and replace obamacare and save health care for every family in florida and in our great country .
real change also means restoring honesty to our government .
hillary clinton is the most corrupt person ever to seek the office of the presidency of the united states .
she threatened national security , she sold her office to the highest bidder and then to cover her tracks , she deleted at least 33,000 e - mails after receiving a congressional subpoena .
hillary clinton is being protected by a totally rigged system .
and now , it 's up to the american people to deliver justice at the ballot box tomorrow , that 's what 's gon na happen .
that 's what 's gon na happen .
my contract with the american voter begins with a plan to end government corruption and take back our country and to take it back swiftly from the special interests who i know so well .
i want the entire corrupt washington establishment to hear the words we are all about to say .
when we win tomorrow , we are going to drain the swamp .
you know , the other day , you read where hillary clinton called entertainers because she ca n't get anybody -- nobody wants to go .
i mean , look , i do n't know .
i see she 's doing fine , i 'm doing fine in the polls and all that stuff .
i do n't know how .
nobody goes to her rallies .
so she got jay - z and beyonce and the language they used was so bad .
the language .
the language was so bad .
and as they were singing , singing right ?
talking ?
was it talking or singing ?
i do n't know .
but the language   the language was so bad that many of the people left .
by the time hillary got up , there was nobody there .
but the crooked media , those people back there , the most dishonest people .
the crooked media does nothing , they do n't explain it .
they do n't explain it .
and is n't it amazing that when jay - z and beyonce use the filthy language that they use in the songs , using words that if i ever said those words , it would be the reinstitution of the electric chair , right ?
it 's true .
it 's true .
they use these words and then she comes on and hugs them like everything 's right .
and yet with me , " he 's very lewd . "
that 's a new word , you know , lewd .
i mean , i 've never seen anything like it in my life .
she is such a phony .
she is such a phony .
i will say this , i do n't think that billy graham ever spoke like this .
do we agree ?
this is different than a billy graham crusade .
but you know what , we 're all looking for the same thing .
we 're looking for greatness for our country , we 're looking for religious liberty -- looking for religious liberty .
but we are somewhat different personalities .
look at this mask .
look at this mask .
wow .
that 's beautiful .
look at that .
looks just like me .
nice head of hair , i 'll say that .
thank you .
thank you .
is there any place more fun to be than a trump rally ?
at the core of my contract is my plan to bring back our jobs .
florida has lost one in four of its manufacturing jobs since nafta , a deal signed by bill clinton and supported by his lovely wife , hillary .
america has lost , hard to believe this , 70,000 factories since china entered the world trade organization , another bill and hillary - backed disaster .
we are living through the greatest jobs theft in the history of our world .
look , no country has ever lost jobs like us .
they 're sucked out of our country , the companies leave , they fire everybody , they go to mexico and many other countries .
it never happened before like this .
and we 're going to stop it day one .
it 's so easy to stop .
it 's so easy .
so easy to stop .
a trump administration will stop the jobs from leaving america and we will stop the jobs from leaving florida .
promise .
if a company wants to fire their workers , leave florida and move to another country like mexico as an example , and then ship their products back into the united states through what will become an unbelievably strong border , i will tell you ...   ... we will make them pay a 35 percent tax on those products .
and i 'll tell you what 's gon na happen .
i 'll tell you what 's gon na happen .
nobody 's gon na leave because the model no longer works .
you know , ford is leaving .
i was in michigan last night .
ford is leaving .
they 're all leaving .
that 's why i 'm going to win michigan .
i believe we 're gon na win michigan .
michigan they 've ripped -- they have ripped cars out of there , factories out of there , plants out of there .
same thing ohio , so many companies have gone to mexico and other countries .
and we 're going to win these states by tremendous amounts because people are tired of being ripped off .
that 's what 's happening .
they 're being ripped off .
they 're being led by politicians who frankly -- you know , i went to an ivy league school , i was a good student , all that stuff .
but some words are just like , you ca n't duplicate them , right ?
we 're tired of being led by stupid people .
they 're stupid .
they 're stupid people .
we will renegotiate nafta , stand up to china and stop the job- killing trans - pacific partnership , which will be a disaster .
hillary clinton said it 's the gold standard , and she 's right .
remember she lied in the debate ?
she said she never said it .
i said you did say it .
she said -- well , it turned out she lied , she did say it .
it was the gold standard .
i say she was right though .
it 's the gold standard for the other countries , not for us .
so she was actually right .
she should have said that , she would have stopped a lie .
she does n't know what she 's doing .
as part of our plan to bring back jobs , we are going to lower taxes on american business from 35 percent to 15 percent .
and we are going to massively cut taxes for the middle class who i call -- who i call the forgotten people .
these are the forgotten men and women .
they built our country .
they built our country .
hillary clinton wants to raise taxes .
wants to raise taxes .
oh , i love those signs .
blacks for trump .
hold that sign up .
i 'm telling you , blacks for trump .
you know , one of the things they 're seeing in a couple of these states like florida , african- americans are n't turning out and when they do there are a lot of them voting for trump .
this is very disturbing to the other side .
they 're not turning out because they do n't care about her .
she 's got not a lot of inspiration .
she used a term called super - predator to define black youth , right ?
super - predator .
and they 're not turning out .
they 're not turning out .
and then they 're worried because when they do turn out , i 'm getting so many more than was anticipated .
i think the same is going to be true with hispanics .
you know , the cubans gave me the award , the bay of pigs association ...   the bay of pigs association last week gave me the award , man of the year .
the bay of pigs association and it was a great honor .
no , we 're gon na do great with the african - americans , we 're gon na do great with the hispanics .
and the other side is starting to see it and they are not happy .
they are not happy .
we 're gon na be one country , we 're not gon na be a divided nation anymore , we 're a divided nation .
we are a divided nation .
thank you , proud of our country .
we will also cancel billions and billions of dollars in global warming payments to the united nations where those payments disappear .
and we 're gon na use all of that money to invest in the infrastructure and we could even say the environmental infrastructure of our country .
and remember this , remember this .
when it comes to environment because i receive many environmental awards , you know , people do n't wanna talk about that , that 's ok .
but we need absolutely crystal clear and clean water .
we need beautiful , immaculate air .
and we need safety and we need safety .
we give billions and billions of dollars away , you can imagine who 's taking that money , you can imagine .
we do n't even know what happens to it .
and we -- he goes , hillary is taking it .
probably , hey , you 're pretty smart , probably .
probably she gets her piece .
and we will create jobs and opportunities for african - americans and hispanic americans that have been failed so badly .
they 've been lied to , they 've been cheated to by the democratic party .
they want their vote , give us your vote , thanks a lot , see you in four years .
that 's what happens .
we 're gon na do our job .
for instance , i met recently with the leaders in the puerto rican community , a community that 's -- it 's a great community , i know it well .
and they 're being crushed by high taxes , regulations and failed education policies of hillary clinton and obama .
you know where obama is now ?
not working on jobs , not working on mosul , where they gave him four months advanced notice , our military .
we are going into mosul , four months , right ?
in four months , we are expecting to enter mosul .
i 'm turning -- i said please , turn off the television , i ca n't hear .
the element of surprise , folks .
so then , i hear three months , yes , in three months we 'll be attacking mosul .
now , it 's two months .
then it 's a month .
then it 's two weeks .
we 're preparing now , to go into mosul , we wanna get their leaders because you know isis , supposedly the leaders are -- do n't they realize that the first time before they finished the first sentence four months ago , those leaders have already found new places .
do n't they understand that ?
oh , general douglas macarthur , where are you , sir ?
where is our general george patton ?
where are they , where is general patton ?
where is general george patton ?
you know where they are ?
they 're watching and they 're spinning in their grave , they do n't believe it .
would n't it be nice if we just shut up , did the job , had a news conference a week later and said we had great success , would n't that be nice , now ?
that 's obama , that 's obama .
and you know what ?
hillary , that would be four more years of obama and we do n't want it .
and tell ...   and tell this president to stop campaigning and go back to work .
i 'm going to deliver jobs , safety , great education , help small businesses to thrive and grow and create amazing opportunities for the children of this country .
here in florida , we have such an amazing , incredible hispanic- american community from cuba , from puerto rico , from venezuela , from haiti .
i was in little haiti the other day , great people .
they are such warm , great people .
by the way , warm , great people , i spent a lot of time with them .
they hate the clintons , they hate what the clintons did to them in haiti , they hate them .
the dominican republic and from many other places to all of our wonderful hispanic communities in this state , i want you to know that you will have a true friend and champion in donald trump .
that i can tell you .
whether you vote for me or not , i 'm with you .
i will never ever let you down .
we will become a rich nation once again , but to be a rich nation , we must also a safe nation .
hillary clinton wants a 550 percent increase in the inflow of syrian refugees into our country , 550 percent .
her plan will import generations of terrorism , extremism and radicalism into your schools and through out your communities .
when i 'm elected president , we will suspend the syrian refugee program .
and we will keep radical islamic terrorists the hell out of our country .
and you know what folks , all of us i am speaking for all of us , we all have heart and i have to say this in front of sissy   anyway .
we all have heart and we 're gon na build safe zones in syria .
we 're gon na get the gulf states -- they have tremendous amounts of money , i know them well and they 're gon na help .
they 're gon na put up all the money .
we 're not gon na put up money .
we 're gon na lead it and we 'll do a great a job .
but we 're gon na get the gulf states to put up the money .
we owe $ 20 trillion and we have to rebuild our own country , it 's time , it 's time .
but we 're gon na build safe zones in syria and we have to do that because what 's happening is just a horrible thing , what 's happening .
but we have enough problems in our country .
a trump administration will also secure and defend the boarders of the united states .
and yes , we will build a great wall , and yes , mexico will pay for the wall .
they 're gon na pay for the wall .
we have to keep the massive amounts of drugs that are pouring into our country and poising our youth -- we have to keep it out .
never before has there been a drug epidemic like we have in our country , and much of it is coming through the southern border .
and it 's pouring in , it 's pouring in and it truly is poisoning our youth and plenty of other people .
we are going to keep it out and we are going to work very hard with medical professionals to take care of those people that are so badly addicted .
right ?
hillary supports totally open boarders .
there goes you country .
there goes your country , folks .
and strongly supports sanctuary cities like san francisco where kate steinle was murdered by an illegal immigrant who was deported probably more than five times .
we will cancel all federal funding to sanctuary cities .
we will stop illegal immigration , deport all criminal aliens and dismantle every last criminal gang and cartel threatening our cities .
they 're threatening our cities , they are threatening our citizens , they are not going to be here very long , folks .
they 're gon na be out of here .
we will also repeal the obama - clinton defense sequester and rebuild our badly depleted military .
we have no choice .
this defense build - up will be supported by brand - new ships in mayport and by engineers and new advanced manufacturing of the space coast .
ok ?
you know the space coast has been like lost .
new aircraft will fly from macdill air force base and naval air station pensacola .
we 're also going to support our friends in cuba in their fight against oppression , the oppression of the castro regime .
tremendous repression .
we will demand political and religious freedom for the people of cuba and stand with our friends in venezuela in their struggle likewise for freedom we will stand .
and we 're always going to help the people of haiti who have such a tremendous difficult path .
but we will help them and help them rebuild .
the people of haiti , incredible people .
i really enjoyed that time with them .
very importantly we 'll also stand strong -- we have to stand strong with the state of israel in their fight against islamic terrorism .
barack obama was the worst thing that ever happened to israel .
the worst thing .
the worst thing that ever happened to israel .
barack obama was a disaster for israel .
and believe me , the iran deal where we made them rich , we also gave them a direct path right to nuclear weapons .
but we 'll be working with israel very closely , very , very closely .
i 'm honored to have the endorsement of more than 200 top admirals and generals and 22 -- and that number is raising -- rising very quickly .
and 22 medal of honor recipients .
incredible people .
we were with them the other night right next to fort bragg .
and i 'll tell you we had 22,000 maybe 25,000 people in a field .
it was the most incredible thing you 've ever seen .
incredible .
these are incredible people .
these are truly great patriots and they are truly brave .
hillary unleashed destruction in iraq , syria , libya , she empowered iran and she unleashed isis onto the world .
there was no isis when she was secretary of state .
then they allowed the way they -- look , we should have never been in iraq , but we were .
we should have never gotten out of iraq the way obama and clinton got us out .
never . .
a vacuum was formed and -- thank you very much .
we now have isis in 32 countries all over the world unleashed by obama and hillary clinton .
but we 're gon na knock them out .
we have no choice .
we 're gon na knock them out , folks .
we 're gon na knock them out .
that 's one we have chopping off heads , drowning people in steel cages .
not since medieval times have we seen anything like this .
not since medieval times have we seen anything like this .
and then i 'm in one of the debates -- did i win the debates by the way ?
did i win ?
they did nine online polls after the debates and all nine said i won .
and she was in debate prep all the time .
i was guilty , i was saying like -- they kept saying are you in debate prep ?
i said , yeah , i 've been doing this stuff all my life .
i 'm supposed to be studying like -- she was in debate prep but it was n't really .
look , for a week and a half before each debate she would close the door , go to sleep and say it was debate prep right ? ?
and then when she left those debates , she was exhausted .
i 'll tell you , when she left the second and third debate she was exhausted .
not what we need in our country , folks .
we need a lot of energy in our country and a lot of bum - bum .
we need a lot of things .
we do n't need hillary .
get out and vote .
get out and -- who 's already voted ?
that 's pretty good .
wow .
you 've almost all voted .
all right .
goodbye , everybody .
well , that 's what the democrats do to the inner cities you know .
they say oh they voted , let 's get out of here .
i 'll see you in four years .
wow , that 's pretty good .
all right .
for the few people that have n't , that 's a very impressive -- i love you too .
thank you .
i love you too .
get out and vote for the few that have n't .
hillary and our failed washington establishment have dragged us into foreign wars that have made us less safe and that we never win , we never win .
shipped our -- i do n't think you like hillary very much .
oh boy , what a -- what a disaster this is -- she gets in , it 's a disaster .
she 's not gon na get in folks , i do n't see it .
i 'll tell you , i do n't see it .
not getting ...   they 've shipped our jobs and our -- hillary -- all over the world and left our borders wide open at home .
that will all change starting actually tomorrow , actually tomorrow .
because while we do n't take office until mid - january , the whole psyche will change as of tomorrow , right , this guy knows .
firemen , firemen , right , great firemen , great people , great , great people .
not easy being a fireman today , right ?
oh , thank you .
i see a great fireman over here .
i was with the fire groups the other day , they have a new problem , nobody ever heard of this problem .
you know about it , oh can i -- oh , wow , get that for me , wow .
thank you .
great , that 's great , thank you .
tell you what , i was all set to put it on then i see it 's about 20 years old and this sucker has been used .
no way i 'm putting that on .
no , but the firemen have a big -- they have a big problem , they have a shooting problem where they 're being shot at as they go into fires .
this is a new phenomenon , people do n't even know about it .
they 're being shot at as they go to fires , they 're being shot at as they put out fires .
so we got ta change , folks , we have to -- we have to bring people together .
we have such a divided country , thank you .
thank you .
from now on , it 's going to be america first .
to all americans , i say it is time for change , it is time for new , strong and smart leadership .
just in summing up ... 

  thank you .
think i 'm gon na be doing six of these today , can you believe that ?
six , going to north carolina , we 're going to all over , we 're going to new hampshire right after .
its gon na be great .
i love doing it because there 's such spirit , the people -- the people of this country are so incredible .
oh , look at that , look at that , beautiful , beautiful baby , beautiful baby , good job .
good job , daddy .
wow .
oh , that 's an elephant costume , that 's so cute .
thank you , that 's very nice , thank you .
just think about what we can accomplish in the first 100 days of a trump administration .
we are going to have the biggest tax cuts since ronald reagan .
hillary clinton is raising your taxes .
we will save and protect social security and medicare .
hillary is going to cut your social security and cut your medicare benefits .
we will eliminate every unnecessary , job - killing regulation , they 're killing our businesses , cancel every illegal obama executive order of which there are many .
in honor of the great billy graham , we will protect religious liberty .
rebuild our military and take great care finally of our veterans .
our veterans are not being treated properly .
provide school choice and put an end to common core .
bring our education local .
support the great men and women of law enforcement .
save our second amendment , which is under siege .
and appoint justices to the united states supreme court who will uphold and defend the constitution of the united states .
this is so hard to believe .
you have one day until the election .
you know what that means ?
that means tomorrow .
you have one day to make every dream you ever dreamed for your country come true .
you have one magnificent chance to beat the corrupt system and deliver justice .
you will deliver justice for every forgotten man , forgotten woman and forgotten child in this nation .
do not let this opportunity slip away .
we are fighting for every citizen who believes that government should serve the people , not the donors and not the special interests .
and we are fighting to bring us all together as americans .
just imagine what our country could accomplish if we started working together as one people under one god saluting one american flag .
thank you .
i 'm asking you to dream big .
because with your vote we are just one day away from the change you 've been waiting for your entire life .
i think and hope it will be the most important vote you will ever cast , because we do n't win anymore as a country .
we do n't win on the borders , we do n't win with trade .
what china is doing to us is beyond belief .
we do n't win anymore .
we do n't win with our military .
we have the greatest people in the world .
but we do n't beat isis .
we do n't win anymore .
we will start winning again and winning like you 've never seen before , tell you .
we 're going to win again .
in fact , the people of florida may get tired of it .
you 're going to say , " oh this guy , he wins too much !
we ca n't take it .
he wins too much ! "
you 'll send your emissary , " please , mr. president , the people of florida just do n't want to win this much .
you 're winning on trade .
you 're bringing back jobs .
you 're winning at the border .
the military is unbelievable , it 's too much . "
and i 'll say , " sorry , folks .
we 're going to keep on winning , " right ?
together we will make american wealthy and prosperous again .
we will make america strong again .
we will make america safe again .
and we will make america great again .
thank you , everybody .
god bless you .
god bless you .
go out and vote !
thank you .
thank you very much .
thank you .
i would like to thank my incredible running mate , governor mike pence .
thank you .
and i love you , too .
we have a lot of very enthused and excited people in this campaign .
so i really do thank all of you .
i would like to thank my incredible running mate , mike pence , on the tremendous job he 's done .
and he 's a fantastic leader and a leader on health care issues , and to have him involved is just my very great honor , believe me .
i 'd also like to thank dr. ben carson .
not only a great man , and i do n't say that about a lot of people , but one of the toughest competitors i 've ever faced .
people do n't know how well he did during those primaries .
and i just kept looking back .
and i just kept seeing him .
and boy , i 'll tell you .
but even more importantly , he 's a brilliant physician and i hope he will be very much involved with my administration in the coming years .
thank you .
i 'd also like to recognize the distinguished members of congress in attendance who have all been at the forefront of health care , and have been so helpful to me : congresswoman ellmers , lummis ; congressmen price , harris , burgess and desjarlais .
and let me give a special thanks to senator barrasso , a terrific doctor , a senate leader , who did incredible work chairing our platform committee , just unbelievable work .
so i want to thank you very much , senator .
fantastic job .
and been very , very loyal to what we 're doing and what we represent .
so thank you , senator .
when we win on november 8th ...   ... and elect a republican congress , we will be able to immediately repeal and replace obamacare .
have to do it .
i will ask congress to convene a special session so we can repeal and replace and it will be such an honor for me , for you and for everybody in this country because obamacare has to be replaced .
and we will do it and we will do it very , very quickly .
it is a catastrophe .
the president said if you like your plan , you can keep your plan .
if you like your doctor , you can keep your doctor .
which may go down as one of the great political lies of the century .
even the skeptical democrats believed him and approved the legislation .
there were democrats that were very much against it , but they believed him and they approved it .
no one ever read , or certainly very few people , the 2,700 page bill .
to this day , nobody understands it .
the obama administration has just announced massive double digit and triple digit obamacare premium hikes everywhere , all throughout the country .
here in pennsylvania , premiums are going to increase more than 60 percent and that 's nothing compared to what will happen in the future .
of course , in the future , i 'm president , there wo n't be obamacare , so you wo n't have to worry about it .
that means parents wo n't have enough money to pay their bills or get medicine for their kids .
in the great state of arizona , a wonderful place i just left , premiums will go up even higher than 116 percent .
other states are going up more than 60 , 70 , 80 , 90 percent .
deductibles can go to $ 12,000 , $ 13,000 , $ 14,000 , even $ 15,000 .
in other words , your health care wo n't even be usable .
you 're paying all this money , you wo n't even get to use it .
people all across the country are devastated .
in many instances , their health care costs are more than their mortgage costs or their rent which , by the way , is a first in american history .
this is particularly unfair to millennials and younger americans generally who will be totally crushed by these massive health care costs before they even get started on their journey through life .
one - third of the counties -- think of this , one - third of the counties in pennsylvania will have only a single insurance company left if you have that .
that includes philadelphia , where i went to school .
the associated press found that some of the 440,000 pennsylvania consumers who buy insurance through healthcare.gov will face some of the highest premium increases in the nation .
the people of philadelphia .
insurers are leaving , premiums are soaring , doctors are quitting , companies are fleeing and deductibles go through the roof .
workers ' hours are being cut , hiring is frozen -- totally frozen -- and wages are being slashed .
obamacare means higher prices , fewer choices and lower quality .
yet hillary clinton wants to expand obamacare and make it even more expensive .
she wants to put the government totally in charge of health care in america .
if we do n't repeal and replace obamacare , we will destroy american health care forever .
it 's one of the single most important reasons why we must win on november 8th , we must win .
thank you .
thank you .
thank you very much , everybody .
thank you .
our replacement plan includes health savings accounts , a nationwide insurance market where you can purchase across state lines and letting states manage medicaid dollars so much better .
we will create quality , reliable , affordable health care in a free market where parents can make the health care decisions that they really wanna make for their families .
it will be a much better health care at a much less expensive cost .
we 've also outlined detailed solutions on so many other issues to make life better for every american family .
and while this is really -- thank you .
while this is really a meeting and that 's what it is , it 's a meeting of very , very special people and i appreciate you all being here .
but it 's a meeting talking about health care and obamacare .
our plan for other things also include the bringing back of manufacturing jobs .
we have to do it .
we 're gon na bring back your manufacturing , we 're gon na bring back our jobs that formed the backbone of the american middle class and our country as a whole .
our jobs are being stolen .
pennsylvania has lost almost 40 percent of its manufacturing jobs since nafta , a deal signed by bill clinton and supported by hillary clinton .
the city of philadelphia has lost more than one - third of its manufacturing jobs since china joined the word trade organization , another bill and hillary - backed disaster .
a trump administration will renegotiate nafta , believe me .
and we have the greatest negotiators in the world .
we will use our great negotiators .
we 'll   have a fair deal , but we 'll have a deal that goes in two directions , not one direction , right into mexico and these other places .
and stand up to foreign product dumping , currency manipulation and unfair subsidy behavior .
we are going to bring manufacturing jobs , lots of jobs , back to pennsylvania .
we 're gon na do it .
and it wo n't even be difficult .
we 're going to open modern mines and take care of our great miners .
our miners have been mistreated horribly .
we will be producing clean coal , oil , natural gas and shale energy .
we 're also bringing back our steel workers who have been so badly hurt , so badly hurt .
whose jobs have been stolen by the dumping of steel all over the state , and frankly , all over this country , by china and other countries .
nobody has been treated worse than these workers , but that will change on january 20th of next year , believe me .
it will change .
we 're also going to provide the children of the state with school choice .
so important .
that means parents can spend and take care of their children , but they can send their kids to public school , to private , to chartered , to magnet , to religious or to home school .
it 's going to be their right and it 's going to be something that 's so , so good for your children and for the education of your children .
we will also totally eliminate common core and bring education local .
we 're gon na bring it local .
people do not like common core in this country , that i can tell you .
and our system is failing , so it 's obviously not working .
we 're gon na eliminate common core , we 're gon na bring it local .
our tax plan will provide a 35 percent tax cut to middle class families with two kids .
as an example , you have two kids , a 35 percent cut so desperately needed .
our middle class has not been properly respected , that i can tell you .
we will let parents deduct childcare expenses from their taxes and create tax - free childcare and elder care savings accounts with matching contributions for low income families .
we will eliminate the obama - clinton defense sequester and rebuild our badly depleted military .
when did we ever need it more ?
greatest people on earth in our military , but it 's badly depleted .
thank you .
people love this country , do n't they ?
is n't it beautiful , right ?
beautiful .
it 's a beautiful thing to watch and see .
and i see it all over the country , no matter where we go .
and every time i say we are going to rebuild our depleted military , it 's always the same response .
it 's an incredible response .
our navy is the smallest it 's been since world war i , think of that .
smallest since world war i. and rebuilding it will require a national effort .
that 's why i will ask my secretary of the navy to review facilities like the philadelphia navy yard , i know it well .
with a long history of service to our navy , proximity to vibrant private industry and room for expansion to enlist them in the rebuilding of what will be a great fleet again .
to recruit master craftsman   this buildup requires and we will establish centers of excellence at locations like the philadelphia navy yard .
vocational training is a great thing .
we do n't do it anymore .
we do n't do it anymore .
and i must tell you , so often in going to college right down the road and going to college , we have people that were brilliant and we had other people that were n't as brilliant in that way but were brilliant , incredible when it came to fixing a motor , when it came to fixing something that i had no idea what was happening and other great geniuses had no idea what was happening and they could take it apart blindfolded .
and we do n't do that anymore .
vocational training for our country is so , so , so important .
and just in closing -- and they loved it .
they loved it .
they did n't want to be doing what i was doing .
they loved it .
they were so good at it and they loved it .
so vocational training , we 're going to start it up big league .
we will rebuild our military and we will rebuild our country .
i 'm not a politician .
my only special interest is you , the american people .
that 's why i 've done this .
thank you very much .
the guiding rule of the political class in washington , d.c. is that they are looking out only for themselves , only for themselves with the exception of these few people .
i feel guilty as i 'm looking , they 're staring me in the eyes .
so i have to say with these exceptions .
they will say anything and do anything and cling to their power and prestige at your expense .
i 'm running to change and reverse decades of failure and to work with the american people to create generations of success .
i 'm running ...   i 'm running to restore honesty to our government and safety to our communities .
we need safety .
and by the way , our law enforcement officials , these are great , great people .
thank you .
and we are going to give great prosperity to our economy .
i want to go into our poorest communities and work on a national plan of revitalization , the inner cities .
and i 've been working with so many african - american groups .
these are such incredible people .
we 've been talking about it , working on it .
we 're going to bring jobs into the inner cities .
we 're going to bring safety .
we 're going to bring education , good , good schools into the inner cities .
the spirit of the people in the inner cities is beyond the spirit of anybody .
and it 's gon na work .
it 's gon na work .
you watch .
americans are tired of being told to defer their dreams to another day .
but politicians for the most part really mean another decade , because that 's what they 're talking about .
enough waiting .
time is now .
but to accomplish our goals , we must cut our ties with the small   bitter , petty politics of the past .
we must declare our independence from a failed establishment that has squandered $ 6 trillion on foreign wars in the middle east that never end , that we never win and that have made us far less safe .
think of it .
think of all the money that 's spent , all the lives that have been lost .
and we 're far less safe today than we were before we started .
they 've left our borders wide open at home and shipped our jobs and wealth to other countries .
it 's time for new leadership .
i 've led a great life and i truly love our country .
so now i want to give back to the country that 's been so good to me , that 's why i 'm doing this .
all i see everywhere i travel in this nation , and i 've been everywhere , is untapped potential waiting to be realized .
the people are amazing , the people are amazing .
if we unlock the potential of this country and its incredible people , no dream is outside of our reach .
if we stopped believing in our failed politicians and start believing in ourselves , then anything , anything is possible .
i 'm asking you to dream big , to push for bold change and to believe in a movement powered by our love for each other and our love for our country .
that is how we will truly make america great again .
thank you very much , thank you everybody .
god bless you , thank you .
i 'm very good , thank you , sean .
well , we 're going to be doing a lot of things .
we 're going to be lowering taxes .
we 're going to be strengthening our borders .
we 're going to be getting rid of regulations .
the regulations are going to be gone because , i mean , you look at this country , what 's happening with regulations .
and we need them for security and we need them for certain things like the environment , but our regulations are just taking over our companies .
we ca n't compete anymore .
we 're going to be terminating , repealing and replacing " obama care . "
we 're going to be saving our 2nd amendment .
there are a lot of things , sean .
it 's going to be -- i think it 's going to be very special .
well , i think they do , and i think if they watched the debates , they would really understand a lot .
i mean , right now , i think you have two very clear -- you have a really clear choice between hillary clinton and myself .
and if you just look at the stances on everything -- she 's going to raise taxes , i 'm going to lower taxes .
she 's going to increase regulations , i 'm going to cut regulations down to a minimum , a good number , but down to a minimum .
and there 's so many different things .
we 're going to rebuild the military . ,
we 're going to take care of our vets .
we 're going to save the 2nd amendment .
we 're going to repeal and replace " obama care , " which is a total disaster .
she wants to make it even a bigger mess and going to spend trillions and trillions of dollars on it .
and it 's crazy what 's going on .
and so you have really clear choice .
you have a very , very distinct choice .
well , it 's totally brutal .
i mean , you can do something that 's , you know , just fabulous , it 's perfect , everything 's great , and then they end up giving you bad news and bad stories , bad coverage .
it 's the single greatest pile - on .
they say -- this is n't me saying it , this is other people , and even news organizations -- the single greatest pile - on .
despite that , you just saw the crowd we had outside .
we 're in pennsylvania now .
we just left north carolina .
i 'm going back to pennsylvania .
i 'm going to a different section in pennsylvania in a little while .
we have a massive crowd there .
it 's been unbelievable what 's going on .
and i think that it 's not pollable , although , as you know , three polls came out today saying i 'm leading nationwide .
and look , it 's a question of taxes .
it 's a question of borders .
do we want to have a country or not ?
we 're going to have strong borders .
and we 're going to have people come into our country , but sean , they 're going to come in legally , through a process .
they 're going to come in legally .
so you know , i think a lot was learned in the debates .
i think you understand how we did and how well we did in the debates , and i think we really showed a big difference .
sean , i 've been saying for a long time it 's a rigged system .
it 's totally -- it 's just terrible , what 's going on .
and then the politicians play right along with it .
i mean , you have 1.8 million people who are dead who are registered to vote , and some of them absolutely vote .
now , you know , tell me how they do that .
there 's only one way .
but you have 2.5 million people or so that are registered in two states .
that means they 're voting twice .
look , we have a system .
i 'm a big believer in the system .
i love our country .
but i think i 've done a great service by pointing this out , and a lot of people agree with what i 'm saying .
that i can tell you .
but when you look at those tapes , it 's disgusting .
our rally in chicago -- that 's where they were .
they were there .
and nobody could figure out what was going on .
where did these -- they 're real thugs , by the way , real thugs .
and injured policemen .
they injured people .
and they should be put in jail .
i mean , these are bad people .
and again , it 's a rigged system .
and who got blamed for it ?
our rally people , us , me , everybody .
it had nothing to do with us .
well , i think it 's a disgrace , and i guess he saw the president 44 times , they say .
who knows ?
but i think it 's disgraceful .
can you imagine , the one who was overseeing violence -- and this is a criminal act .
you know , you -- i do n't know if you saw the picture .
cops were leaving -- these policemen , these great people were leaving with massive gashes in their head from these people .
these are professional thugs .
they were being paid $ 1,500 a day , and they got cell phones out of it .
no , this is a very serious problem .
and i think come november 8th , i think we 're going to win , and maybe we 're going to win bigger than people ever even dreamed .
when you look at pennsylvania , you look at what 's happening here , when you look at north carolina where i just left , you look at ohio , and you see what 's happening -- you see what 's happening with some of the jobs , the companies that are leaving our country and going to mexico and other places .
you see what 's happening with " obama care , " which is such a disaster ! "
obama care " is a catastrophe !
the premiums are going up 60 , 70 , 80 percent .
the care is no good .
you ca n't even get it .
the deductible -- i mean , say what you want .
bill clinton said this is the craziest thing i 've ever seen .
he said that .
and he probably suffered ... 
  but he said obama care is a disaster .
it is a total disaster .
well , take a look at what 's going on .
i mean , look at -- as an example -- this was n't wikileaks , but look at what you just said about the voter fraud that was uncovered with the tapes .
look at what you said about the thugs going into arenas and starting problems .
look at what came out today about the new york times , where they have reporters that are soft or safe or something .
and i have those same reporters , and they are brutal .
they 're not brutal , they 're dishonest .
they 're totally dishonest .
it 's , you know , totally dishonest group of people .
and you just take a look at what 's happened .
look at how you get set up .
i mean , they say you saw somebody in 1902 and you touched the person .
i mean , give me a break !
this is stuff that all does n't exist , sean .
this is dirty , disgusting stuff .
and they 'll find out .
i 'll be revealed at some point .
this is dirty , disgusting stuff .
and you know what ?
it 's no way -- it 's no way that it should be .
we 're supposed to be a great democracy .
it 's no way that it should be .
i mean , a certain magazine wrote some horrible things .
i guess it came out today .
nobody reports .
i 'm not going to get involved in it , but nobody reports it .
but if somebody calls up the newspaper and says just one thing , they make a big deal out of it .
by the way , it never happened .
never happened .
just so you understand , all that stuff , it was fabricated , made up , never happened .
when you see -- they come , like , every two days .
never happened !
never , ever happened !
i think it 's a disgrace .
it 's the most rigged system i 've ever seen .
and i 've been talking about it for a long time .
and it was rigged against bernie sanders and it 's rigged even more against me .
it 's a disgrace .
they poison -- they poison the voters with this kind of stuff and this kind of junk that never happened !
it 's not like a question , like , it may have .
it never -- none of it ever happened !
she should give it back .
no , absolutely not .
you 're not surprised .
but she should give that money back .
i brought it up during the debate .
give the money back .
it 's $ 25 million at a minimum .
give the money back .
she did n't want to answer that question , if you noticed .
sean , you have seen things and i 've had -- i 've seen things , and i 've been going through this .
i 've never -- nobody could imagine that this could happen in the united states .
nobody can even imagine it .
but i 'll tell you what .
we 're going to win the election , and we 're going to clean out the swamp .
you know i 'm using the expression , we 're going to drain ... 

  ... the swamp of washington , d.c. it is a swamp of absolute corruption !
it 's absolutely corrupt !
and we 're going to drain the swamp .
we 'll see what happens .
we 're going to drain it .
but we 're going to win .
we have such enthusiasm .
and you saw what -- i just left this rally two minutes ago .
in fact , i 'm sitting in a room that 's about 200 degrees .
i 've never seen it ... 
  it 's like a steam room .
and no , it 's just wonderful .
but i 'll tell you what .
at least you 're on the side of , you know , exposing some of this stuff .
the press does n't want to do it .
it 's incredible what 's going on in our country .
but come november , if you watch -- you saw this arena .
it was packed with thousands of people outside .
something is going on that 's very , very special .
plus , three polls came out today , including rasmussen , and including another poll that called it the most accurately four years ago .
and they say i 'm ... 

  right .
right .
sean , i want to do it tomorrow .
i do n't want to do it right now .
i really want to do it tomorrow .
i can only say we 're going to make america great again .
we have so many problems .
our taxes are too high .
we 're going to reduce them .
our borders are weak .
our regulations are crazy .
drugs are pouring into our country .
people are coming into the country that we really should n't have come into the country .
we have drug lords and criminals and murderers .
and i mean , what 's going on in this country is incredible .
hillary wants open borders where people can just flow through .
we 're not going to have a country anymore .
we are going to do something very special , and tomorrow i think is going to be ... 

  ... a special day at a special place .
i did .
no , i -- look , we -- we say what 's true , and some people do n't like hearing it , but we say what 's true .
... people in there .
no , that 's ok .
it was a great dinner .
it was a great dinner .
no , i enjoyed it .
i thought it was great .
no , i did n't .
she was great .
she understood .
it was -- that was probably the moment of the evening .
people loved it .
thank you .
thank you very much , sean .
if hillary clinton gets elected , we 've got four more years of obama , we have a disaster !
we have isis all over !
we have a bunch of babies running our country , folks .
we have bunch of losers !
they 're losers !
they 're babies !
we have a president , all he wants to do is campaign !
his wife , all she wants to do is campaign !
if hillary clinton gets elected , we 've got four more years of obama , we have a disaster .
we have isis all over !
we wo n't win anymore .
and your taxes are going up , and she wants to double up and triple up on " obama care , " which has to be repealed and replaced .
it 's a disaster .
we are going to start making things in america again !
we are going to start making things in north carolina again !
we are bringing back our jobs !
america first .
remember that .
wow .
thank you very much , everybody .
i do n't know how old this building is , but i know one thing , we broke the building 's record for attendance , ok ?
and it 's pretty good   thousands of people outside and they are pulling in right now , so should we wait about an hour or not ?
no way , right ?
let 's start .
they 'll fill in as we -- as we speak .
so i want to thank you -- i want to thank all of the great people of pennsylvania .
i went to school in pennsylvania .
they 've taken our jobs out of pennsylvania .
we 're going to be bringing them back , folks , believe me .
we 're bringing them back .
oh , what these politicians have done to us , not going to happen much longer , i assume you saw the debate last night , everybody was good .
better believe me .
so a special group , i do n't know if you know who i am talking about , but they have been -- i do n't know what it is .
bikers love trump -- bikers , right ?
bikers .
i do n't know what it is .
i 'm riding in these cars and they 're passing me , going about 150 miles an hour say , man , those guys have guts , but they are crazy , right ?
but , you know , they had bikes for trump , and it said , " the deplorable run for trump . "
who 's in here from the deplorable run ?
yes , there are a lot of them , over 1,000 -- so there are over 1,000 and the bikers is special , and i 'll tell you it 's great to have them on my side .
you know , a lot of times i 'll go to an event .
i did in hilton head and i did in a few places -- actually many places -- and i 'll see hundreds of bikers on these beautiful bikes , oftentimes harleys , i have to say oftentimes , but not always , not always .
but i 'll see these bikers , and they 'll be there , and i always feel so safe with the bikers .
they are there , and a lot of times , they do n't even want to come inside , they just want to make sure i 'm safe .
can you believe that ?
they are great people .
they are great people .
so , to the bikers , i -- i love you guys .
you 're great guys , right ?
great guys .
also , i want to introduce , if i could , two people that have been unbelievable .
they 're congressmen -- hard to believe , i mean , congressmen .
who likes congressmen ?
but i like these two congressmen .
and we have congressman barletta .
where is he ?
where is he ?
where is he ?
come here .
congressman marino , where is he ?
come here , and get up here .
senator sessions and rudy , get up here please .
we 're going to make pennsylvania so rich again , your jobs are coming back .
we 're going to be ending illegal immigration .
we 're going to stop the jobs from pouring out of our country .
we 're going to renegotiate our disastrous trade deals .
these are deals made by people that do n't have a clue .
we 're going to lower your taxes , big league .
hillary wants to increase your taxes by a lot .
we 're going to reduce regulations , which are killing your companies and they 're leaving and they 're going to mexico and lots of other places for lots of reasons , but one of the reasons is a bad reason .
it 's called " regulations . "
they are regulating these companies out of existence , and jobs out of existence .
we are going to unleash american energy , including oil ...   ... shale , clean coal and natural gas .
now , this just came out , this just came out .
wikileaks , i love wikileaks .
and i said , write a couple of them down .
let 's see .
during a speech , look at hillary clinton , oh , she 's crooked , folks .
she 's crooked as a three - dollar bill .
ok .
here 's one .
it just came out , " lock her up is right . "
no .
so everybody saw the debate last night , so let me tell you .
when i said we are going to get a special prosecutor to figure this deal out ...   i have never been so ashamed of this country as what 's gone on with hillary clinton .
i have never seen anything like it .
i have never ever seen anything like it .
you have never seen anything like it .
thirty - three thousand e - mails -- thirty - three thousand , she deletes them , she bleaches them -- that nobody does because it 's such an expensive process .
she gets a subpoena from the united states congress , and after she gets the subpoena , she does that , but we 'll talk about that in a minute .
we have to go back to wikileaks , so wikileaks .
so , a speech made behind closed doors , crooked hillary clinton said that terrorism was not a threat , quote , " not a threat to the nation . "
no .
let me tell you .
well , big , big , big threat .
terrorism was not a threat .
let me tell you , terrorism is a big threat .
we 're riding into something that 's very dangerous and she 's allowing thousands and thousands of people to come into this country , and i will tell you something , it 's the great trojan horse , and we do n't want to be part of the era -- well , we have the great -- well , they 're talking about us in 200 years from now , ok , as the stupid people that got taken .
then over here , let 's see , and bragged about her great relationship with the financial industry .
that 's where she gets all the money .
in florida , they say she 's going to put ads on 50 to one , and i think we 're going to win .
i think we 're going to win .
hillary admitted -- oh , this is a beauty -- during one of the secret speeches , amazing how nothing is secret today when you talk about the internet , no .
hillary admitted that isis could infiltrate with the refugees , great .
then why is she letting so many people into our country .
she said wall street can police itself .
all right , that 's -- who cares .
big bank , clinton said , needed wall street money in order to successfully -- she needs -- says here , quote , " needs wall street money in order to successfully run a campaign , " ok .
so what else is new ?
you know , i said to her yesterday , i said , listen , i 'm going to have over $ 100 million in my campaign , right ?
so meaning , i do n't have to take money from all these characters that want everything because that 's what 's happening .
so , she 's out there and she got a lot of money .
she made $ 200 million -- $ 250 million while she 's in office , ok ?
figure that one out , figure that one out .
so i said , so look , i 'm putting up $ 100 million -- it 's going to end up being more than that -- but i 'm putting up all this money and i 'm also getting tremendous amounts of money from people like $ 61 a piece , a record set .
no republican has ever done that , no republican .
which tells me that we have a great movement going on , right ?
that 's what a great movement is .
but i said to hillary clinton , why did you put up $ 10 million or $ 20 million , $ 25 million , put up some of the money that you ripped off when you 're a secretary of state , when you 're in the senate .
figure it .
from the time they left the white house until now , $ 250 million .
i said , put some of the money into your campaign .
do n't get it from these companies that all want favors .
so let 's see what happens with that , so let 's see .
speech behind closed doors , hillary said , " in order to be successful politically , " this is a bad one , " you need to have both a public and private position on public policy .
in other words , we have to tell you one thing and we have to tell the bankers is another thing , that 's good .
another closed door speech , she 's got a lot of money , she wanted to have open borders .
and open trade -- trade with anybody .
there go the rest of your jobs .
your jobs are 40 percent gone now anyway , there go the rest of your jobs .
she wants -- in one of the other speeches , universal health care coverage , single parent system .
she wanted to be like canada , but the people in canada with money , when they have an operation , they come down to this country because they have got a lot of problems up in canada , so she wants to go .
forget it .
here 's an interesting one .
sidney blumenthal ...   do you remember what ambassador stevens in benghazi was calling , and writing , and even -- they were desperate for help .
they say like 600 times , right ?
the only one she was speaking to is sidney blumenthal who 's a sleaze -- he 's a sleaze .
in fact , obama wanted her restricted that she could n't speak .
that 's probably one of the reasons she wanted to have her private server , you know , she wanted to go -- because she promised obama that she would n't be talking to sleazy sidney .
so , blumenthal writes a quote -- this just came out a little while ago , i have to tell you this .
one important point has been universally acknowledged by the nine previous reports about benghazi .
this is sidney blumenthal , the only one she was talking to .
she was n't talking to ambassador stevens , even the 600 calls , probably desperation .
the attack was almost certainly preventable , benghazi .
clinton was in - charge of the state department and it failed to protect the united states personnel and an american consulate in libya , he meant benghazi .
if the gop wants to raise that as a talking point against her , it is legitimate .
in other words , she is now admitting that they could have done something about benghazi .
this just came out a little while ago .
what a group we have , what a group .
what a group we have .
so , we 're going to do a lot .
we 're working very hard , we have 28 days , november 8th is the big day .
we 're going to get out , we 're going to win .
i 'm going to make three , four , five stops a day .
i may be limping across that finish line , but we 're going to get across that finish line .
and i figure -- i figure that that final week maybe we do six stops a day and we 'll call them " get out the vote stops . "
if you do n't mind , we 'll make them a lot shorter than what we 're doing .
just get out , because we got to get you out to vote .
and honestly , folks , you know , i went to school in philadelphia , and i love philadelphia .
i love philadelphia , and i hope we 're going to do great in philadelphia .
i went to school there , i love the school , i loved everything .
but , i just hear such reports about philadelphia , and we have to make sure we 're protected , we have to make sure the people of philadelphia protected , that the vote counts are 100 percent , everybody wants that .
but , i hear these horror shows -- i hear these horror shows , and we have to make sure that this election is not stolen from us and is not taken away from us .
and everybody knows what i 'm talking about , and this crooked media --you can talk about crooked hillary -- they 're worse than she is .
i 'm telling you , they are so dishonest .
without the media -- without the media , hillary clinton could n't be elected dog catcher , i mean that , it 's true , true .
rudy knows i only tell the truth , i only tell the truth .
you know , they do focus groups after the debate .
we won every poll .
we won .
did you see those polls ?
every poll , 80 - 20 , 90 - 10 -- i get a list , but we do n't want to put -- but every poll .
but cnn did a focus group .
and by the way , frank luntz did a focus group , and the focus group -- that one we liked -- frank luntz , good guy , 18 to four in favor of trump , right ?
cnn did a focus group .
unfortunately -- it 's so sad .
they got caught trying to convince people and find the right people so they could give a phony vote .
cnn is a disgrace -- disgrace .
they just turned off their camera .
so funny , they just turned off their camera .
i love it .
i love it now these dishonest people .
they 're dishonest .
but , you know , when you look at them and , in fact , if somebody get me -- get me -- get me a list .
where is the great dan scavino ?
get me a list .
i 'll tell you about the list .
bring it up here right away , bring it up here , i 'll tell you .
but we had a good time last night , and they just sent out -- they had 69 million people watching , which is just about , they say , the most ever to watch the second debate , which is fantastic .
which is fantastic .
and even the bad media admitted , you know , when i say , the line in the sand , and she said , i was n't secretary of state .
unfortunately , she was , she lied , again she lied .
hillary lied , but it was n't as big a lie as the e - mails , do n't you agree ?
no , no , no , she lied , she 's a liar .
and she lied -- and she lied when she said that she did n't say that tpp -- trans - pacific partnership -- was the gold standard , right ?
she lied because she endorsed it , she wanted it 100 percent , then she heard me speaking about it and say they do n't control monetary manipulation in all the ways that this country has taken advantage of , and she went against it temporarily .
but , if she ever won , she 'll approve that so fast , and nothing is as bad as nafta , but you know what , that 's going to be close , it 's going to be a disaster -- it 's going to be a disaster , and so , she lied .
she said , i never said it was the gold standard , unfortunately , it was the gold standard , so one of those things , one of those things .
so , folks , it 's so important that we get out in november , that we vote , so we get rid of these liars , we get rid of these incompetent people , we get rid of the hillary clintons of the world .
and you know , i 'm with the congressman and we 're backstage , and a poll came out like we 're down three points in the states of pennsylvania , and they 're going -- and these guys are pros .
you may not like them because they are politicians , but i like them anyway despite they 're being a politician .
but , you know , they said , we ca n't believe it because everybody in pennsylvania wants trump , you know , and ...   ... and we get crowds like this everywhere , but we get them in ohio , we get them in florida , we 're doing -- we have one in florida coming up 25,000 minimum -- minimum , two days , but we 're getting them .
but , they just said -- they said , there 's no way we 're three down .
even the polls are crooked , i 'm telling you .
look , we 're in a rig system , folks , we 're in a rig system .
the only way we can unrig them is get to the polls , but we got to make sure they 're honest polls , we got to make sure .
but , i think november 8th is going to be brexit , but i ...   ... you know , when i -- when i have a lot of property over there , so they ask me about brexit , and i said , well , i think it 's going to pass , meaning they wanted independence .
the u.k. wanted to get out , they did n't want people pouring in to their country who nobody knew where they came from , right ?
so i said , no , i think it 's going to pass .
huge headlines " trump says it 's going to pass . "
remember obama went over there , he said he 's going to put them on the back of the line and it 's never going to pass , and if it does , they 're going to put them in the back of the line .
i think he helped it pass , you want to know the truth ?
so , they said it 's going to pass , and i said it 's going to pass , but it was given very , very little chance of passage , very , very little chance .
and then what happened is it passed easily , right ?
so the polls were all really wrong , but big league wrong .
we 're just a little tiny bit behind here , and the polls were just like unbelievable .
so , it passed and nobody said , trump said it was going to happen .
i hate that , you know , i hate that .
but what is going to happen , i think the state of pennsylvania , we 're going to win so big .
i 'm just thinking -- i think we 're going to win in pennsylvania .
and we 're going to spend a lot of time in the suburbs over the next couple of weeks , the suburbs of philadelphia because we got to get that vote , we want to get that vote .
i know you 're gon na vote , right ?
right ?
so we 're going to get that vote and we 'll get it fast .
where are those polls ?
bring them up here .
dan scavino , everybody , the famous dan scavino .
let me see .
did anybody ever hear of dan ?
he 's become quite famous in social media .
all right , you ready ?
so it says here , in -- ah , drudge is a great guy , right ?
right .
what a great man .
trump 70 , clinton 30 , this is the list .
variety , you know , that 's the show business people , but they 're not going to like this .
these people do n't like trump , you know , the showbiz .
trump 64 .
see , this guy does n't stop , look at this guy .
trump 64 , clinton 36 .
listen to this .
time magazine -- now do you think time magazine likes me even though i 've been on their cover like seven or eight times ?
they 're liking us .
time magazine , no fan of trump , 89 to 11 .
fox -- fox , 85 to 13 , where are the other couple of points ?
here 's a good one -- well .
they 're are the slightly conservative -- breitbart , 93 to seven , would you say that ?
fox seattle , 79 to 16 .
detroit , 84 to 16 .
get the hell out of here , dan .
so , we 're going to have -- is there any more fun to be than a trump rally in all fairness , right ?
so here 's what i 'm going to tell you .
you know , i spend a lot of time with senator sessions who 's the king of the borders .
he is the king , one of the great men , one of the most highly respected men in the united states senate , and they go to him -- and i remember ted cruz , who endorsed me recently , which was very nice -- but , i remember ted cruz has such respect for senator sessions .
and one of the reasons is nobody knows more about the border than senator sessions , and we were talking a little while ago and we have people coming in and we just got ice two days ago -- ice .
these are great people , by the way , they 're not allowed to do their job , but they 're great people .
they just endorsed me because they want to do their job .
the border patrol , the border patrol just endorsed me -- the border patrol just endorsed me .
and i will tell you such an honor , 16,500 border patrol agents , they endorsed trump , first time they 've ever done it .
and then very importantly , sheriff joe from arizona , we love joe .
and i told new hampshire , which has a tremendous problem with heroin and other places , but , new hampshire was the first state i went and then we went in to run like people have n't seen very easily .
but i told new hampshire very , very strongly , i told new hampshire , if i win , we 're going to solve the problem of this poison flowing into pennsylvania ...   ... to new york , to new england , to all of these different places , to ohio -- where they have a big problem -- to florida , we 're going to stop the poison -- and to do that , we 're going to build a wall .
who is going to pay for the wall ?
who ?
they do n't know it yet , but they 're paying for the wall , right ?
they do n't know .
no , they 're great .
i was with a few of our friends , we went to mexico two months ago , we had a great meeting with the president and he 's a good guy , and we 're working that everybody is going to be happy .
but , right now , it 's a very unfair highway going in .
it 's a highway going in and there 's no highway going out , our jobs , our money , our wealth is going there .
a friend of mine who builds plants , he 's the biggest .
he builds plants , that 's what he does .
if you said build an apartment , maybe he would n't do so well , but he builds the best plants in the world -- biggest and the best .
and i said , how are you doing ?
and you might have heard me say this , i think it 's incredible and , frankly , it 's terrible in a certain way .
he said , donald , i 'm doing great , the business is great .
i said , good .
how is it in the united states ?
not very good .
where is it good ?
he said , mexico .
he said it 's the seventh wonder of the world .
he said , it 's the most incredible thing you 've ever seen .
we are building some of the biggest , most sophisticated plants in the world .
now , the people are coming out of michigan , ford announced -- as you know -- ford just announced that they 're moving their entire building of small cars to mexico .
out of mexico .
that 's on top of a $ 2.5 billion plant that they built three years ago , that i 've been complaining about for three years , and that 's why i think we 're going to win in the state of michigan , because i 've been complaining about this for years , and these other guys like hillary , she started complaining in about two -- two days ago .
she 's not going to do anything .
so , we 're going to create strong borders , and we 're not going to let our businesses go .
and when ford says , we 're leaving , or when carrier air - conditioning says they 're leaving the great state of indiana where we have a wonderful , wonderful vice presidential nominee .
mike pence , great friend .
a great guy and , by the way , a totally loyal person .
this guy , he called me up , do you mind if i put out a statement ?
no , what -- what would you like to put out -- just , absolutely put it out mike .
this guy is so loyal , so good and such a terrific person , and his family , karen , his wife , and family is amazing .
he was one of our really good choices .
do you agree with that ?
one of our really good choices .
and he 's done a great job in indiana , aaa rating , lower the taxes , done really a good job unlike this guy , tim kaine .
you know , in his first week as governor of virginia , he signed a $ 4 billion tax increase , this is what you have , and hillary clinton wants to raise your taxes -- but he signed a $ 4 billion tax increase -- so here 's what 's going to happen , folks .
when these companies like carrier air - conditioning think they 're going to leave indiana or leave pennsylvania , or leave ohio or leave any of your states , they can go between states , i ca n't get involved , ok , if you do n't mind .
you got ta -- that 's up to you and your governor and all of the people .
but , if they think they 're going to go out and they 're going to make air - conditioners , move to mexico , build their new plant and sell those air - conditioners , now through a very strong powerful border and they 're going to sell those air - conditioners and they 've let 1,400 people go in indianapolis , not going to happen that way -- not going to happen .
there will be consequences , they will pay a 35 percent tax on every air - conditioner that comes across the border .
and when they know that , they wo n't leave indiana and these companies wo n't leave pennsylvania , and they 're not there because their numbers do n't work anymore , ok ?
we 're going to stop them so easily .
and i 've been watching these politicians go through this for years .
i 've been watching them give low interest loans , i 've been watching them give zero interest loans -- these companies do n't even need the money , most of them , they take the money .
there were a couple of instances where geniuses with great lawyers gave them money and then they moved anyway because they did n't have any restrictive confidence in the -- i mean , the whole thing is crazy .
but , what 's going to happen is once they find out , they 're not going to leave .
ok ?
they 're not going to leave so , we 're going to have strong borders .
we 're going to have a wall , the wall is going to stop people from coming into our country illegally ...   ... along with border patrol and ice .
the wall is going to stop poison drugs , poison from ruining our youth and poisoning our youth and other people .
and , you know , i have something i always like doing , i read this when i 'm in a good mood -- i 'm in such a great mood .
you know , i wish those cameras would show this crowd because if they would , people would be amazed , they never show the crowd .
they never show the crowd , show the crowd , see they do n't want to turn around .
look at the cameras they face straight .
they face -- my wife is always going , how was the crowd ?
she said , it sounded big , but i never see it .
they never show the crowd because you know what , they do n't want us to win and they do n't show these crowds , but you look at these crowds , bernie sanders never even came close , and he was second , by the way .
hey fellas , turn the cameras around , seriously way up there in the upper decks , show the crowds .
but they just do n't want to do it .
they keep that camera pinned to my face , they do n't even want to show what 's behind me , they keep that camera pinned to my face .
they are so dishonest .
you know , if crooked hillary clinton were up here and they had this kind of a crowd , the cameras would be showing the crowd all day long .
that 's why we have to win this election , we have to take it away from these dishonest characters .
so here 's the story , folks , it 's true , every night i go home , my wife said , how big was the crowd ?
she said , it sounded huge .
i said , yes , they have like what , 16,000 people .
so she said , yes , it sounded that .
i said , did n't you see it ?
no , they never showed the crowd .
it 's always my face -- my face , i do n't want to -- i do n't want to show my face , i want the crowd , but they never moved the camera .
you know , i used to think they could n't .
i figured their brand new equipment they could n't because mechanically they did n't moved .
and then when they 're -- but unfortunately , when we had a protester the first time , right , you know what i 'm going to say , those cameras they turned like a pretzel , the steel wow , wow .
so , they look like pretzels .
i never -- i never knew that steel could be bent in that kind of a configure .
they 're dishonest .
but because of the fact that we have lots of problems , but one of the problems we have a tremendous illegal immigration problem .
and now hillary clinton wants people to come in from syria at a rate -- think of this ...   they 're coming to your community , folks , at a rate of 550 percent more than obama and he 's letting them in by the thousands , and we have no idea who the hell they are .
so , i have this -- has anyone heard " the snake " because people love it , but ...   ok .
who has -- who has not heard it ?
who has heard it ?
shall we do it or not ?
it 's so good .
so , you think of this in terms of illegal immigration , in terms of people coming into our country that we have no idea who they are , and in terms of the fact that lots of bad things will happen .
and again , before i start , i have a big heart , you have a big heart , we all have big hearts .
we want to see good things happen , right ?
so we 're going to build safe zones in syria , we 're going to have the gulf states pay for it because we owe right now $ 20 trillion , it 's double during obama 's term .
and the bad part , it doubled though we did n't do anything , we did n't fix our roads , our bridges , our tunnels , our hospitals , our airports are a mess , they 're like third world .
so , we have totally too much debt and we did n't fix anything .
we got problems , folks , but we 'll get it fixed if we get elected , otherwise , we 're going down .
so , this is a case for illegal immigration and it was written by al wilson , anybody ever heard of al wilson ?
and it was n't meant for this , it was a song , but , i saw it once and i thought it was very apropos .
so , this is thinking about illegal immigration , and what 's going to happen as sure as you are -- sorry , we have no seats -- standing there . "
on a way to work one morning , down the path along the lake , a tender - hearted woman saw a poor half - frozen snake .
his pretty colored skin had been all frosted with the dew .
poor thing , she said , i 'll take you in and i 'll take care of you .
take me in , oh , tender woman , take me in for heaven 's sake .
take me in , oh , tender woman , sighed the broken snake .
she wrapped them up all cozy in the comfort of silk , and laid him by the fireside with some honey and some milk .
she hurried home from work that night .
and as soon as she arrived , she found that pretty snake she taken in , had been revived .
take me in , oh , tender woman , take me in for heaven 's sake .
take me in , oh , tender woman , sighed the broken snake .
she clutched him to her bosom .
you 're so beautiful , she cried , but if i had n't brought you in by now , you surely might have died .
she stroked his pretty skin again and kissed and held him tight .
but instead of saying , thank you , the snake gave her a vicious bite .
take me in , oh , tender woman , take me in for heaven 's sake .
take me in , oh , tender woman , sighed the vicious snake -- vicious , vicious , vicious .
i saved you , cried the woman , and you 've bit me heaven 's why ?
you know your bite is poisonous and now i 'm going to die .
oh , shut up , silly woman , said the reptile with a grin , you knew damn well i was a snake before you took me in . "
and then we have very incompetent politicians in washington taking everybody in , that honestly it 's a very sad thing to behold and to watch , very , very , very sad .
is there a doctor in the house ?
are you ok ?
thank you very much .
thank you .
are you ok ?
you know , we have people waiting here for seven , eight hours .
i love you , darling .
i love you .
look at her .
she 's tougher than all of us .
thank you .
thank you .
thank you .
thank you .
thank you .
look at that guy over there .
wow .
wow .
bring him up .
what 's your -- what 's your name ?
now he 's supposed to look like donald trump , but he 's actually much too good - looking , you are really handsome .
are you having a good time tonight ?
where is your daddy and your mommy , right ?
do you want to go back -- do you want to go back to them or do you want to stay with donald trump ?
beautiful , what a beautiful boy , what a beautiful boy .
thank you .
i 'll tell you what folks , we better win on november 8th .
you know , one of these -- one of these pundits said to me -- because this is a movement , there 's never been anything like this -- they say -- many of them said -- bill o'reilly said -- a lot of respect for bill o'reilly , tough guy , smart guy .
he said , it 's the single greatest political phenomena he 's seen in his lifetime , that covers a lot of territory .
and others have said the same thing , and they said , really it does n't matter if you win or if you lose , it does n't matter because what -- i said , let me tell you a little secret .
if we do n't win , this is the greatest waste of time , energy and money that i will ever do in my life , believe me -- believe me .
we 're not doing this to come in second , folks .
and if we come in second , your second amendment is in trouble because she wants to decimate it .
and we 're going to fix -- by the way , you know , we 're going to do something that people have n't done .
we 're going to fix our inner cities , we 're going to help our latino - americans and our african - americans , we 're going to help them .
forty - five percent of african - american youth lives in poverty , fifty - eight percent of african - american youth do n't have jobs .
more than 3,000 people have been shot in the city of chicago since the beginning of the year -- think of that -- since january 1st , 3,000 , that means it 's like a war zone .
the democrats , like crooked hillary clinton ...   ... have run the inner cities for 50 , 60 , 70 , even 100 years uninterrupted .
they produce only more joblessness , failing schools and rising crime .
those african - americans suffering in our country -- and i have to tell you this -- they 're suffering -- they 're suffering .
you got no jobs -- inner cities , you got no jobs , you have no safety , you have no education .
the schools are horrible .
i say to them , what the hell do you have to lose ?
i 'm going to fix the inner cities , i 'm going to fix them .
i 'm going to fix them .
vote for trump .
we 've spent $ 6 billion -- think of this , think of this -- we spent billions and billions of dollars on different things .
we do n't get our monies worth , but we 've spent in the middle east $ 5 to $ 6 trillion , what do we have ?
it 's worse now , had we done nothing in the middle east it 's much better than it is now .
you would n't have the migration .
look at the mistakes that hillary clinton made .
libya , iraq , they created isis because the way they got out of iraq , whether you like going into the war or not , and despite what you read from these dishonest people , i was against going into iraq , by the way .
but whether you were in or not , it was somewhat with the surge stabilized and they announced to the world that they 're going to take everybody out real fast , get them out , get them out , get them out , and the vacuum was created .
and guess who came out of the vacuum , who came out of the vacuum ?
isis .
that was hillary clinton and our great genius president barack obama .
and now what he does -- all he wants to do is campaign .
remember he said , donald trump will never win the republican primary .
all right , so we 've won that one , right ?
is n't it too bad -- is n't it too bad that we do n't have stronger leadership on both sides -- on both sides .
i mean , you know , you have people that ca n't fix a budget , but then they start talking about their nominee , but they ca n't fix the budget .
is n't it really sad that we do n't have stronger leadership on both sides ?
but that 'll change if we win on november 8th , believe me it 's going to change fast -- going to change fast .
but why is it that the president of the united states , we 've got no growth .
you saw gnp , you saw that gdp , you saw that , right ?
it 's so bad like one percent .
that means we 're not growing .
do you know if china goes down to seven or eight percent , it 's like considered a national tragedy ?
here we are hovering at nothing , our jobs are gone , we have bad jobs .
they have a phony employment rate .
bad jobs numbers last week , did you see those bad jobs numbers ?
and that 's the last jobs report before the election , i was shocked .
i was so surprised that they let that happen because it 's all rigged -- it 's all rigged .
but , let me just tell you , we 're going to do something that 's going to be so amazing .
i 'm going to fight harder than anybody has ever fought for the american people -- harder .
we 're going to help the latinos trapped in poverty .
we 're going to fight for school choice .
we 're going to fight to end common core , which we 'll do very quickly and bring education locally .
and hillary clinton ca n't do those things because she 's totally run by the teachers union , which are wonderful people , by the way , but they have total control so you ca n't choice and you ca n't end common core .
if you 're hillary clinton , you ca n't do it because you 're controlled by the teachers just like she 's controlled by wall street .
so what we 're going to do are things that have n't been done , and these things are going to be wonderful .
we have a military that 's depleted , we have to build up our military , we have to -- we have no choice .
we have to take care of our great veterans , we 're not taking care of our veterans , not taking care of .
we 're going to save your second amendment , we 're going to terminate obamacare and replace it .
we 're going to have the largest tax cut since ronald reagan , remember this , hers are going up .
we are going to do things that are going to make you so proud of this country again , you 're going to be so proud .
you 're going to go to the polls and you 're going to even home tonight and you 're going to say to your husband , to your wife , to your children , to whoever listens , i had a great time , but you 're going to look back in 10 years , in 15 and 20 years , and 25 years , and you 're going to say , this was one of the most important nights -- more importantly , you 're going to say , on november 8th , the single - most important vote you 've ever cast , is going to be cast on november 8th .
she wants to put our miners out of business .
not going to happen , going to be just the -- we 're going to have clean coal .
we 're going to have all forms of energy , we 're going to have all forms of energy .
we 're going to have everything , but we 're going to take care of our minors , we 're going to take care of our steelworkers .
we 're going to not let the epa destroy our companies for natural gas , and shale and all other things , not going to let it happen .
we 're not going to let it happen .
so , you 're going to go home and you 're going to say , great evening , great evening , but you 're going to look back at that vote and you 're going to say , that was a very , very important day , that that was the greatest vote i 've ever cast , because that 's when our country started turning around -- that 's when our country started turning around .
and you 're going to be proud of your country again and , hopefully , you 're going to be very proud of your president and you 're going to see things happen that have never happened before .
we 're going to make great trade deals .
we 're going to have a strong military and , hopefully , we 're not going to have to use it but it 's called " peace through strength . "
and we 're going to have our borders back again , and people are going to come into our country , but they 're going to come in legally .
they are n't going to come in -- we 're going to have a big beautiful door .
but , they 're going to come in legally through a process , and it 's not going to be a process now , where people are waiting in line for 10 years and they do n't move and you had people come right across the border , so unfair .
we 're going to have a fair process and we want people to come in .
is that correct ?
we want people , but they have to come in legally .
and we 're going to see immediate change , and that 's what you need .
hillary clinton is not about change , hillary clinton has been doing this stuff for 30 years .
and i said to her last night -- i said to her last night , i said , you know , hillary , you talk about this thing and that thing , and donald 's got some great tax deal , but all her friends have the same thing .
all her friends , they said , hillary , you are united states senator , why did n't you something about it ?
she 's not going to do anything about anything , it 's just talk .
and you saw it and i said , when she was a senator , she said she was going to do things .
she never did a thing , it only got worse .
that 's what 's going to happen with our country , folks .
so here 's the story , you go out , early vote , do whatever you have to do , but you go out on november 8th and you vote , because so many things we are going to put -- remember this , people do n't talk about it .
justice scalia passed away .
great man , great justice .
we are going to appoint great people who believe in our constitution to the united states supreme court ...   ... people that believes in our second amendment to the united states supreme court .
this election day , you have one magnificent chance to deliver justice for every forgotten man , woman and child in this country .
you have 29 days -- can you believe it ?
this started on june 16th of last year , coming down the escalator , to make every dream you ever dreamed for your country to come true .
on november 8th , the arrogance of washington , d.c. , will come face - to - face with the righteous verdict of the american voter , it 's about time .
we are going to smash the washington establishment and open it up to each and every american the way it 's supposed to be .
would n't it be nice if some of our politicians fought the special interest instead of fighting me and you ?
the sad truth is a lot of establishment politicians simply do n't believe in protecting our borders , or fixing our trade deals , or putting america first , and we are going to put america first .
i am going to fight for every citizen , of every background from every stretch of this nation , and i 'm going to fight to bring us all together as americans .
we are a divided country now .
imagine what our country could accomplish if we started working together as one people under one god , saluting one american flag .
you 're going to look back at this rally for the rest of your life , you 're going to remember this day .
this is a movement like you 've never seen before and you will never see it again , if it does n't happen on november 8th , it 's never going to happen for our country .
believe me , it will never happen again .
we are going to make history together .
you 're going to look back at this election and say , this is by far , and i say it again and again , the most important vote -- by far -- that you 've ever cast .
we 're going to vote to make our country safe again .
we 're going to vote to make our country wealthy again .
we are going to vote on november 8th to make our country great again .
thank you very much .
god bless you .
i love you .
thank you , thank you .
thank you very much .
great people , great state .
thank you everybody .
so we have thousands of people outside , but rather than wait , let 's get started , right ?
we have almost 4,000 people .
they 're going to be coming in as we speak , but i think we get going right now .
is that correct ?
they are being checked out .
i want to begin by thanking the great wisconsin leaders who are here with us today .
chairman reince priebus who gave a very inspirational speech .
senator ron johnson , i hope you all going to get out and vote for ron .
we 're going to ...   we 're going to repeal and replace obamacare .
a great athlete , people do n't know that , great athlete and a wonderful guy .
he 's been with me right from the beginning , congressman sean duffy ...   ... and your party chairman who 's done an incredible job , we all know brad courtney .
thank you , brad .
thank you .
thank you , everybody .
a special thank you to governor scott walker ...   ... who has done a fantastic job in wisconsin .
i want to tell you i ran against him .
he is tough , he is brutal .
i want to be very respectful , he is one tough cookie .
so , to governor walker , i want to thank you .
tremendous , tremendous competitor ...   ... and we 're with him forever .
thank you , scott .
thank you .
most importantly , i want to thank all of you here in attendance today and everyone who is part of this magnificent movement to make america great again .
that is what we 're going to do .
in just one week , we are going to win the great state of wisconsin .
and we are going to win back the white house .
it 's going to happen folks .
a lot of good polls out there today .
we just got one ; we 're seven up in north carolina .
seven up , north carolina .
we 're way ahead in florida , way ahead in ohio , wow .
we 're doing great , ohio and florida , we 're doing great .
iowa , way up in iowa .
we 're getting tremendous help from governor branstad .
we 're sort of way up everywhere .
you know , they were saying texas is going to be close .
it looks like texas is in play .
guess what ?
total blowout .
we love texas .
we love texas .
we 're way up in georgia , that was another one that said it looks like georgia might be in play .
guess what ?
we 're way up .
so , that 's the way it is .
i also want to thank some of our great people that were here tonight , mayor giuliani who is incredible and he 's been so loyal .
and how about coach bobby knight ?
he did pretty well against you , folks , but we still respect .
we want winners , right ?
we 're on the cusp of something incredible -- historic change that transfers power from a failed political establishment and returns that power to our families , communities , and citizens .
it 's going to happen .
real change that begins with immediately , repealing and replacing obamacare , a total disaster , total disaster .
it 's just been announced that the residents of wisconsin -- congratulations -- are going to experience a massive double - digit premium hike .
you know that , right ?
i 'm not going to tell you what it is because i want you to leave here happy .
i do n't want you to be depressed , but do n't worry about it .
we 're going to get rid of it so you 're not going to have to worry about it .
in the great state of arizona , premiums are going up more than 116 percent .
they 're not too happy .
more than three - quarters of the counties in wisconsin are losing obamacare insurers next year , lots of luck in your negotiation with whoever is left .
in minnesota where premiums are going to be increased -- who 's from minnesota ?
wow .
wow .
great , great .
that 's so nice .
look at that man , and you look fantastic .
he says , " minnesota cancer patient for trump . "
you 're going to get better , ok ?
you 're going to get better .
you 're going to get better fast .
you look beautiful .
that 's cool .
and you know , we just had news that in minnesota we are doing fantastically well .
i did n't know we 'll have so many people .
that 's great .
we 're going to do our job for it .
the premium increase will be close to 60 percent -- you know that -- 60 percent in minnesota and a lot higher following , so that 's pretty bad .
the democratic governor has just said the affordable care act in minnesota is no longer affordable .
premiums are surging , companies are leaving , insurers are fleeing , doctors are leaving , and deductibles are through the roof .
other than that it 's a wonderful thing .
many americans are now paying more for health care than for their mortgages or their rent -- a first in the history of america , first time that 's ever happened .
obamacare is a disaster .
it 's a -- it 's a total catastrophe , yet hillary clinton wants to double down on obamacare , making it even more expensive and it 's still wo n't work .
i 'm asking for your vote so we can replace obamacare and save health care for every family in wisconsin and for every family in our country .
real change ... 

  thank you , everybody .
that 's so nice .
you know , this is a movement like has never been seen in this country before .
and if i said that and if it were n't so , those extremely dishonest people , the media , the world 's most ...   ... dishonest people , horrible people , untruthful people .
they would be saying , he said this , he said that , he said this .
let me tell you they are extremely dishonest , and yet we are leading with all of the dishonesty .
we 're leading and i think we 're leading big .
and i think on november 8th it will even be bigger .
real change also means restoring honesty to our government .
as you know , the fbi has reopened its investigation into hillary clinton .
this is the biggest scandal since watergate .
and now it 's been reported that there are fbi inquiries probing virtually all of hillary clinton 's inner circle .
she wants to blame everyone else ... 

  you know , somehow i think that obamacare is not going to be her biggest problem .
does that make sense ?
she wants to blame everyone else for her mounting legal troubles , but she has really no one else to blame but herself .
hillary is the one who set - up an illegal , private e - mail server to shield her criminal activity .
you know that , she knows it .
hillary is the one who engaged in a corrupt pay - to - play scheme at the state department .
hillary is the one endangered national security by sending classified information on an insecure server .
hillary is the one who lied so many times to congress and to the fbi -- 39 times to the fbi , and each lie -- i mean , each time she said -- remember she does -- right , she said , sorry , i do n't recall .
i do n't recall , 39 times .
well , each time she said that , that was also a lie , and i 'm not even including that .
hillary is the one who made 13 phones disappear , some with a hammer .
it was hillary who destroyed 33,000 e - mails after receiving a subpoena from the united states congress ...   ... after .
and she is also the one -- this just came up recently .
by the way , if that were reince or me or somebody , it would have been the biggest story in the world .
she also accepted debate questions given to her in advance and then used them to cheat against bernie sanders ...   ... instead of reporting this terrible -- say terrible breach , right ?
instead of reporting this terrible breach of ethics to the public or to somebody .
she used it .
you notice they keep talking about donna brazile , donna brazile .
well , donna brazile cheated .
and frankly , she should resign from the dnc .
she was just fired from the networks .
she should now resign from dnc .
think of that .
can you imagine if reince got the questions for a debate , gave them to me and they found out , you know what it would be , a double electric chair , right ?
it would be on the front page in the " new york times , " the " washington post . "
it 's hardly covered , can you believe it ?
she got -- i mean , to me , it 's such a breach , you know , being a student , being a believer in so many different things -- to me , it 's such a breach .
she got the questions and did n't report .
nobody even talks about that .
they talk about donna brazile , but they do n't talk about hillary .
hillary got the questions in a debate against bernie sanders and she did n't report it .
surreal cheating , and it was hardly covered .
but we know the answer , so get out and vote on november 8th .
remember ?
hillary is not the victim .
the american people are the victims of this rigged and corrupt system in every way .
and this is your one chance to change it -- it 's your one chance .
i do n't think you 're going to have another chance , folks .
we have an election coming up .
you 're not going to have another chance .
in four years , you can forget it .
if she were to be elected , it would create an unprecedented constitutional crisis , and the work of government would grind to an unbelievably unglorious halt .
she is likely to be under investigation for many years , probably concluding in a very large - scale criminal trial .
in a newly released e - mail , john podesta has been caught saying , " we have to dump all of those e - mails . "
can you believe this ?
that 's wikileaks .
and he also said , to me it has made a big -- a big statement , john podesta -- i 'll tell you what , if he worked for me , i would fire him so fast .
he is such a nasty guy .
he would -- i would fire him like the apprentice , " john , you 're fired . "
amazing .
nasty guy , he 's a nasty guy .
he 's a nasty guy .
but he said , you know , you do n't like to say bad things , you work for people .
he said , hillary has bad instincts .
bernie sanders said , she has bad judgment .
she 's got both .
they 're pretty similar when you think about it .
as it also turns out , one of the top department of justice officials , the assistant attorney general is a close associate of podesta .
the two met for dinner after clinton testified about benghazi , and podesta described him as the man who kept him out of jail , works for the justice department .
has our country ever had a situation like it is going on right now ?
have we ever had anything like it ?
this is a good time to make an important public service announcement because a lot of things have happened over the last few days .
this is a message for any democratic voter who have already cast their ballots for hillary clinton and who are having a bad case of buyers ' remorse ?
in other words , you want to change your vote .
wisconsin is one of several states where you can change your early ballot if you think you 've made a mistake .
a lot of stuff has come out since you voted .
so if you live here or in michigan or pennsylvania or minnesota , those four places ...   ... you can change your vote to donald trump .
we 'll make america great again .
ok ?
she is not going to make america great .
she will never make america great .
the clintons are the sordid past .
we are the bright future .
i say we -- we , it 's we .
i am a messenger -- i am only a messenger , remember , i 'm only a messenger , but you have to say i 'm doing a pretty good job as a messenger .
but i 'm the messenger .
my contract with the american voter begins with a plan to restore honesty and accountability to our government finally .
i want the entire corrupt washington establishment to hear and heed the words we are all here to say when we win on november 8th , we are going to washington , d.c. , and we are going to drain the swamp .
you 're not told -- i 've said this before , but it was very interesting because when i first heard the statement , i said , give me a break .
i hate it .
i said .
i said it , the people went crazy .
then i went to a rally with 18,000 people , i said it , they went totally crazy .
and then i said it again and again , this has only been going on for about a week and a half .
and now i love it , i love the statement and it is very active .
it is very active .
at the core of my contract is my plan to bring back our jobs .
right now 70 million american women and children live in poverty or near the brink of poverty .
forty -- that 's so true .
can you believe in this country ?
forty - three percent of african - american school - aged children live in poverty .
thirty - two percent of hispanic school - aged children live in poverty .
this is our country .
this is unacceptable in america .
i will fix it -- i will fix it -- i will fix it .
i 've been saying a lot and i 've been saying and speaking very openly about the inner cities and saying to the african - american community , the hispanic community , i 've been saying , what do you have to lose ?
it 's such a disaster .
what do you have to lose -- thank you .
we 're going to fix it .
we 're going to bring back great schools .
we 're going to stop the crime .
the crime is unbelievable .
we are going to bring back your jobs .
what do you have to lose ?
we are going to fix it .
as your president , i will go into the poorest communities and work on a national plan for revitalization .
we will replace decades of failure with generations of success .
we 're going to have generations of success .
america has lost one- third of its manufacturing jobs since bill and hillary 's nafta .
you know about that .
one - third of your jobs -- you know , we have a highway , one - way highway right into mexico in these other countries .
they get the jobs , they get the plants , they get the money , we get the unemployment and the drugs , not a good deal .
that 's going to be changed around , folks .
it 's going to be changed here .
i mean , you listen to this where america has lost -- we 're going to build a wall , do n't worry about it .
we 're going to build a wall .
that 's not even close .
and mexico is going to pay for the wall , and they understand that .
they understand that .
america has lost -- listen to this because it 's impossible .
i have been saying for two weeks -- i just got this stat -- for two weeks i 've been saying , that 's a typo .
that 's some kind of an error .
it ca n't be possible .
america has lost 70,000 factories -- 70,000 .
i thought they meant 700 , i said , you have a mistake here , maybe 7,000 .
america has lost 70,000 factories because of politicians that do n't know what they are doing or they are controlled by their special interests .
since china entered the world trade organization -- another bill and hillary - backed disaster -- we are living through the greatest jobs theft in the history of the world .
that 's what 's happening to our country .
we 're being treated like we 're stupid people .
we have leaders who do not know what they are doing .
we have leaders that do n't have a clue .
it 's the single greatest jobs theft in the history of the world .
that 's what 's happened to us .
hutchison technology laid off 400 workers right here and moved their jobs to thailand .
honeywell laid off 974 workers making printed circuit boards in chippewa falls .
their jobs ...   you wo n't be clapping for this -- their jobs went to china .
this is a federal problem because scott and these people have kept so many places , but they 're -- it 's very hard .
it 's very hard because we do n't fight with real tools , meaning you make your product , you want to come back , not going to be so easy , you 're going to pay a nice big fat tax on that product coming in .
ttm technology laid off 166 workers , and most of them went into mexico and other places .
lots of jobs going to china , lots of jobs going to japan , lots of jobs going to south korea , and unbelievable numbers of jobs , and plants , and factories and everything else going into mexico .
a trump administration will stop the jobs from leaving america , and we will stop the jobs from leaving wisconsin .
we 'll work with your governor who is a great , great governor and we 're going to stop it .
we are going to stop it .
the theft -- and that 's what it is -- of american prosperity will come to a very rapid end .
from now on it 's going to be america first .
a donald trump administration will renegotiate nafta , and we will stand up to foreign product dumping all over , currency manipulation , and all of the unfair subsidy behavior that 's going all over our country , makes it impossible -- impossible for our businesses to compete .
they 'll be competing very soon .
we will also immediately stop the job killing trans - pacific partnership .
that will be a disaster .
as part of our plan to bring back jobs , we are going to lower taxes on american businesses from 35 percent down to 15 percent .
we 're the highest taxed nation in the world .
we will become a rich nation again , but to be a reach nation , we must also be a safe nation .
in chicago , 3,664 people have been shot since january 1st of this year .
can you believe that ?
that 's worse than the places you read about and see in the middle east , these are war zones .
we have places that are more dangerous .
in milwaukee , homicides have risen to the highest level in more than 20 years .
nationwide , murders have experienced their largest single year increase in 45 years .
you do n't hear that from the dishonest media .
they do n't tell you that -- they do n't tell you that .
they do n't tell you that .
they 're there for one reason .
they want to protect certain people like hillary .
it 's getting hard to protect her , fellows .
it 's getting very -- getting very , very hard to protect her -- getting very hard to protect her .
she 's out of control .
a trump administration will work with local and federal law enforcements to end this growing crime wave , we have a crime wave .
every child in america has the right to grow up in safety and in peace .
and we will also keep you safe from terrorism .
hillary clinton wants a 550 percent increase in syrian refugees flowing into our country .
who ca n't even believe it ?
her plan would mean generations of terrorism and extremism spreading into your schools and throughout your communities .
when i am elected president , we will suspend the syrian refugee program .
we have no choice .
and we will keep radical islamic terrorists the hell out of our country .
a trump administration will also secure and defend the borders of the united states .
and as i said , and as you know , we 're not playing games , yes , we will build the wall .
and the fact that it 's 110 degrees in this room , i do n't care .
think of it as a sauna .
this room was not designed for this many people .
think of it as a sauna and to use a sauna , you have to pay money .
we get this for nothing .
we have received the first ever endorsement from our ice and border patrol officers .
first time they have ever done it .
16,500 great , amazing people .
they tell us the border crisis is the worst it 's ever been .
it 's a national emergency .
it 's the worst it 's ever been right now .
you know , you try and get some stats .
they do n't want to give you the stats -- the worst it 's ever been right now just about as bad as it gets .
hillary has pledged totally open borders .
there goes your country ...   ... which truly would mean the destruction of the united states in a true sense .
the immigrant officers warned in a letter when they endorsed me that hillary 's plan is , quote , " the most radical immigration proposal in united states history , " and that it would , quote , " lead to the loss of thousands and thousands of lives . "
as secretary of state , hillary clinton allowed thousands of the most dangerous and violent criminal aliens to go free because their home countries very intelligently would not take them back .
they do n't want to take back murderers , drug lords , gang members , they say no .
and let me just tell you something , they would bring them to their country , their country would say no .
get them out , bring them back to the united states where your leaders are stupid people .
bring them back to the united states .
let me tell you , that wo n't happen whether it 's four years or eight years , that wo n't happen once if i am president , not once .
one such criminal was set free on hillary 's watch , went on to kill a young american girl , a fantastic young woman named casey chadwick .
you probably read about her .
the killer who had already been convicted for shooting a girl in the head previously , and who people were begging to incarcerate or send out of our country should have been sent home , instead he was set free and stabbed casey in the face and neck 15 different times and stuffed her body in a closet .
people were begging that he be sent out -- we 're going to make america safe again , believe me .
that 's one of many .
that 's one of many , so many different stories .
hillary also strongly supports sanctuary cities ...   ... like in san francisco where the incredible kate steinle , incredible young woman was killed in her father 's arms by a five - time deported illegal immigrant .
a trump administration will cancel all federal funding to sanctuary cities .
we will deport all criminal aliens , stop the drugs from pouring into our communities and we will end this long nightmare of violence like we 've never seen before .
we will also appeal the obama - clinton defense sequester and re- build our badly depleted military , we have no choice -- we have no choice .
that includes great support for nearby fort mccoy .
i am honored to have the endorsement of more than 200 top admirals and generals , and 22 medal of honor recipients -- it 's a great group .
nobody has like we have whether it 's law enforcement , the military , the veterans , and we are going to take care of our veterans , folks .
our new foreign policy will put america first .
hillary brought disaster to iraq -- just total disaster to iraq , syria , libya .
she empowered iran , and she unleashed isis with the great void that was created , by the way , her and president obama -- the campaigner -- i call him the " campaigning " -- he ought to focus -- instead on campaigning for hillary clinton , where he 's probably now got a conflict in campaigning for her -- he ought to focus on bringing jobs back to our country , focus on getting rid of isis , focus on lots of other things .
now , hillary wants to start a shooting war in syria , a conflict with a nuclear armed russia that could , frankly , for all we know to trigger world war iii .
for what ?
hillary and her failed washington establishment have spent six trillion dollars on wars in the middle east that never end and that we never win .
remember that , they never end and we never win .
and now , the middle east is in worse shape than ever before .
we could have built our country twice .
we could have rebuilt the united states with six trillion dollars , we could have rebuilt it twice .
they dragged us into foreign wars that have made us less safe .
they have left our borders wide open at home and they have shipped our jobs and wealth to other countries .
to all americans i say , it is now time finally for new leadership for change .
thank you .
in closing , just think about what we can accomplish in the first 100 days .
we are going to have the biggest tax cut since ronald reagan .
and she is going to raise your taxes substantially , remember .
we are going to eliminate every unnecessary job killing regulation .
we will cancel every illegal obama executive order .
there are plenty of them -- there are plenty of them .
there are plenty of them .
we will rebuild our military and we will take care of our great , great veterans .
we 're going to take care of them .
they have been treated terribly -- terribly .
our veterans have been treated terribly .
thank you .
we are going to provide school choice and put an end to common core .
we 're bringing our education local .
we will support the great men and women of law enforcement .
that will take place quickly .
the national rifle -- you know this , right ?
the national rifle association , nra , endorsed me -- the earliest endorsement they 've ever given to anybody running for president .
we are going to save our second amendment , which is totally under siege .
we 're going to save our second amendment .
and appoint justices to the united states supreme court who will uphold and defend the constitution of the united states .
hillary wants us to think small , wants us to believe things ca n't change , and wants our lives to revolve around washington , d.c.   i am asking you to dream big , to push for bold change and to believe in a movement powered by the people and by their love of this great country .
i am tired of politicians telling americans to defer their dreams to another day , when they really mean another decade .
america is tired of waiting .
the moment is now .
there has never been a movement like this in our country 's history .
there never will be again perhaps , but we have to take advantage of it on november 8th .
we 're going to turn things around and rapidly and rapidly .
all we have to do is stop believing in our failed politicians and start believing in each other and in our country .
there is no challenge too great and no dream outside of our reach , there is not .
there is no dream outside of our reach .
do n't let anyone tell you it ca n't be done .
the future lies with the dreamers , not the cynics and not the critics .
hillary clinton has been there for 30 years and she has accomplished nothing .
she 's just made things worse .
she is the candidate of yesterday .
we are the movement of the future .
we are , we are .
our movement represents all americans from all backgrounds , and all walks of life .
we are asking for the votes of republicans , democrats , independents and first - time voters of which there are many , there are many .
we are asking for the vote of every american who believes truth and justice , not money and power should rule the day for our country .
and i have been on the other side and i understand the other side , perhaps i understand it better than anybody else , but i love our country and i saw what was happening to our country , and i made the right decision because , boy , did i become an outsider quickly .
that i can tell you .
we are fighting for every citizen who believes that government should serve the people , not the donors and not the special interest .
we are fighting to unlock the tremendous potential of every american community and every american family who hope and pray and yearn for a much better future , and it will happen .
with your vote , we are just -- listen to this , after all of this time , one week -- one week , do you believe it ?
this started on june 16th ... 

  june 16th .
thank you .
thank you .
thank you , everybody .
i will not disappoint you , that i promise , that i promise .
you wo n't be disappointed .
this great movement started on june 16th of last year , and now we 're one week away -- think of it , one week , from the change you 've been waiting your entire life , one week away .
so on november 8th , go out .
do n't disappoint yourselves , your families .
do n't worry about me .
we have to do it .
we really have to do it because together we will make america wealthy again .
we will make america strong again .
we will make america safe again .
and we will make america great again .
god bless you , everybody .
thank you .
thank you .
to all of you deplorables .
thank you , man .
boy oh boy .
we 're going to have a good time tonight .
we 're going to have a good time .
wow .
i love that .
i love that .
look at this .
look what that says .
hold up that sign for the cameras .
wow .
that 's so beautiful .
thank you .
great .
thank you .
that is so nice .
and we are doing well in every way .
the polls have been incredible .
but we 're doing great .
it 's great to be in my second home , florida .
and in the city of miami where i have so many wonderful friends and projects and employees .
we have an amazing group .
and all of you know trump national doral and we 'll go there .
let 's go and have some fun .
we have tremendous developments in miami on the water and doral in particular has been a tremendous , tremendous thing .
so i really appreciate it .
i love this city .
i love the whole state .
so , and i have a lot of employees .
and i 'm paying them a lot of money .
and by the way , a lot of african - american employees , a lot of hispanic employees .
a lot .
and they 're very happy .
they like donald trump .
so new polls have just come in .
and we 're leading in many of the battleground states all over the country .
including being four points up in a certain state known as florida .
and the los angeles times has us six points up nationwide .
good poll .
if it were n't , i would n't be telling you about it , i promise .
but come november 8 , we 're going to win florida .
and we 're going to win the white house .
and we 're going to make america great again .
it 's going to be a victory for the people .
it 's going to be a victory for the workers , the families , the veterans .
the veterans .
we love our veterans .
and every citizen of this country .
it 's going to be a victory for those who have n't had reason to hope for a very long time .
i 'm campaigning in every community and every part of this country for every last vote .
i 'm running to be a president for all americans .
i just had the most amazing afternoon in little haiti .
good place .
unbelievable people .
and i 'm going to be campaigning hard for their votes .
and they are incredible people .
our support comes from all regions , all backgrounds and all walks of life , all .
all of them .
and by the way , at little haiti they presented me with something that i figured i 'd put on .
is that ok to put it on ?
they gave me that and i love it .
i think it 's great .
your cops and soldiers -- thank you .
i love you too .
carpenters and welders , accountants and lawyers , young and old , rich and poor , black , white and hispanic .
but above all , we are together and we are americans .
we got to pull our country together .
just today i was honored to get the endorsement of recipients of the medal of honor , brave people .
and many , many of our most amazing military leaders , generals , admirals , amazing people , real fighters .
they really know what they 're doing .
we now have the endorsements of more than 160 top generals and admirals .
i did n't know we had that many .
well , we love them .
we also have the support of 16,500 border patrol officers .
the first time in the history of the border patrol that they 've endorsed any presidential candidate .
as well as law enforcement officers , police , all across the country .
in fact , i 'm very excited to announce tonight that we just received a few minutes ago an endorsement of the largest police union in the country , the fraternal order of police .
number one by far .
pretty good .
pretty good .
and we have the support of millions of patriotic moms and dads who go to work every day and make our country run .
while my opponent slanders you as deplorable and irredeemable ...   boy that second word is tough .
you do n't hear that as much .
but that means you 're never going to come back , folks .
and i know you 're going to come back .
we 're going to come back so strong .
we 're going to be so strong .
stronger than ever before .
irredeemable .
they do n't talk about that one .
but that was , to me , pretty bad .
i call you hardworking american patriots who love your family and really , really , really love your country .
love your country .
clinton 's entire campaign rests on using a single tactic , and it 's not working very well .
she spent hundreds of millions of dollars on phony campaign ads .
and we 're actually i think probably leading , based on everything we 're seeing .
and we 've spent practically nothing .
i 'm proud of that .
and you know what ?
we 're doing very well .
you know in the old days if you spent less and you had far fewer people and you were leading you got credit .
today they say well , she 's spending much more money .
yes , but she 's doing poorly , very poorly .
but what they do is they smear opponents .
and you look at her history .
and they question policies .
and they talk all the time about racist , racist .
it 's the only word they know .
they used it on romney .
they used it on everybody .
they use it .
when they 're in trouble , they always pull out the racist word .
and they are in very big trouble , i have to tell you .
and for the most part we have n't even started spending our money yet .
and we have raised a lot of money .
and i 'm putting in my money .
and i put in a hell of a lot of money .
in fact ...   ... if things do n't work out , even though a lot of people are saying this was one of the great political phenomenas they 've ever seen .
they 've never seen -- they call it a phenomena .
i will tell you .
if it does n't work out , it will be a tremendous waste of time , energy and money .
and she 's angry for even suggesting it .
but we 're going to -- hey look , november 8 you go and vote .
we 're winning .
i 'll tell you what .
if you vote , we 're winning .
there 's no way they can beat us .
there 's no way she can beat us because her people have no enthusiasm whatsoever .
they 're not going to turn out .
they do n't have the enthusiasm .
who could possibly have enthusiasm ?
what are you getting ?
you turn out winning big league .
and i think -- and they 're all saying the trump people are going to turn out .
we have a movement like they have never , ever seen in this country .
and they say in terms of enthusiasm they have never had polling higher .
so i think , i have very little doubt , turnout we 're going to have a tremendous november 8 .
probably we 'll say november 8 plus the next four years and then four years after that , ok ?
but the racist word , it 's the oldest play in the democratic playbook , and americans have had enough of it , ok .
we get it .
we get it .
i 'll tell you what , i just -- i told you i just left little haiti .
the love is unbelievable .
it 's unbelievable .
there 's no racist .
there 's no nothing .
it 's love .
they want solutions .
they want better lives , not more petty attacks from failed and totally discredited politicians like crooked hillary clinton .
they want their immigration laws enforced and their border secured .
let 's win on november 8 , ok ?
that 'll be ...   they 're patriotic americans of all background who want their jobs and their families protected .
they want protection .
people who warn about radical islamic terrorism are not islamophobes .
everyone 's an islamophobe .
you mention something you 're an islamophobe .
you know they come up with words .
hey , i went to ivy league school .
i did very well .
they have so many new words .
islamophobe .
we have a president , and frankly hillary , who do n't use the words radical islamic terrorism .
and if you do n't know what you 're fighting , you 're not going to fight it very well .
and we 've proven that .
we have decent american citizens who want to uphold our tolerant values and keep our country safe .
we want to keep our country safe .
people who support the police , who want crime reduced and ended , and who are not prejudiced .
they 're concerned and loving citizens whose hearts break every time an innocent child is killed violently on the streets , which is happening all over our country .
yet while hillary clinton lives behind gates and walls and guards , and raises millions from -- you know look what she 's doing with these hedge funds .
raising millions and millions .
i know so many of these people .
give me a break .
the hedge fund and the wall street donors she slanders and smears with her statements last week .
working people who just want a fraction of the security enjoyed by our politicians and certainly enjoyed by her .
now you know she 's very much against the second amendment .
she wants to destroy your second amendment .
guns , guns , guns , right .
i think what we should do is she goes around with armed bodyguards like you have never seen before .
i think that her bodyguards should drop all weapons .
they should disarm right ?
right ?
i think they should disarm immediately .
what do you think ?
yes ?
yes .
take their guns away .
she does n't want guns .
take their -- let 's see what happens to her .
take their guns away .
ok ?
it 'll be very dangerous .
her comments displayed the same sense of arrogance and entitlement that led her to violate federal law as secretary of state , hide and delete her e - mails , destroy her iphones with a hammer .
with a hammer .
thirteen of them .
put classified information in the reach of our enemies .
lie to congress .
and sell government favors and access through her foundation .
it 's the same attitude of arrogance and entitlement that explains why she has never taken accountability for the disaster she created in libya , syria , iraq , iran and all over the world .
everything she touched , it just did n't work out .
certainly it did n't work out for our country .
it 's the same reason why she wo n't take responsibility for her central role in unleashing isis all over the world .
her policies have created disaster overseas and poverty at home .
we see it .
look , we see it .
i drove here .
we see it .
we see it .
i 'm running to reverse these failures .
and they are incredible failures .
and create a new american future .
and that future begins with prosperity at home .
my economic agenda can be summed up in three words .
and you 're going to like these three words .
jobs , jobs , jobs .
one of my highest priorities is to bring jobs into our inner cities .
african - american communities have suffered horribly as a result of failed democratic leadership .
democrats have run these inner cities for a half a century , for 60 years , 75 years , even in some cases 100 years straight .
unabated .
unbroken .
over 100 years .
they control the mayor 's offices , the school boards , the city councils and the seats in congress .
and all they have delivered is more poverty , more crime and more failing schools .
sixty - five percent of african - american children under the age of six now live in poverty .
more than 3,000 people have been shot in the city of chicago this year .
this year .
think of it , since jan. 1 .
fifty - eight percent of african - american youth are not working .
ca n't get a job .
these are the results of the policies embraced by hillary clinton .
and everyone knows that if she 's elected the inner cities will get nothing but more pain and suffering and crime and heartache .
amazing people .
amazing country .
we have an amazing country .
and honestly you see the crime statistics .
your african- american .
you have the inner city problems that have been going on forever .
forever .
you have problems like nobody has .
and you look at crime .
you look at schools .
you look at no jobs .
look at the worse education .
look how dangerous .
you ca n't walk down the street .
you get shot or your child gets shot .
and i 've been saying it .
and i 'll say it openly and some people like it and some people do n't like it .
and i do n't really care .
what do you have to lose ?
i will fix it .
i 'm going to fix it .
we 're going to fix our inner cities .
we 're going to make them safe .
we 're going to bring jobs back .
so to the african - american people within the community , what do you have to lose ?
it ca n't get -- honestly , it ca n't get -- that 's so nice .
thank you .
it ca n't get any worse .
it ca n't get any worse .
it ca n't get any worse .
thank you .
so nice .
thank you .
thank you very much .
it ca n't get any worse , the crime , the jobs .
no jobs .
no education .
worse education .
more unsafe -- you go to afghanistan , right .
we hear afghanistan .
i mean we have cities that are far more dangerous than afghanistan .
inner cities .
african - american people within that community and outside of that community are going to be voting for donald trump in record numbers .
you watch .
we 're going to fix it .
hillary clinton has been in washington for 30 years .
her disastrous record speaks for itself .
and i have to tell you .
when she ran for the united states senate in new york , we have upstate new york which is a total disaster , economic disaster .
she said she 's going to bring back jobs , jobs , jobs .
she -- anyway , she gets elected .
we lost our jobs .
it got worse .
she did n't do anything .
she did n't do anything .
she went home .
she went to sleep , ok .
she did n't do anything .
she did n't do anything .
it got worse .
far worse .
now it 's a total catastrophe .
just remember that .
when she tells you about jobs , when she tells you she 's going to fix trade deals , she would n't know where to begin .
she would n't know where to begin .
and besides that , to do that kind of thing , to negotiate great trade deals , to re - enhance our -- i mean look .
our military is so depleted .
we have the greatest people on earth .
they 're using equipment that 's old .
they 're flying planes that are old .
you see what 's happening .
it 's a depleted military .
we have to have a strong military .
we have to take care of our vets .
we have to take care of our vets .
but to do these things you need a lot of energy .
and she does not have the energy .
and in my opinion she is totally unfit to be the president of the united states .
the only people that she will deliver for , frankly , are her donors and her special interests .
i 'm going to deliver for you .
believe me .
the american people .
we 're going to deliver .
you 're going to be happy .
and those inner cities are going to see progress like they have probably , not probably .
like they have never seen .
you watch .
like they have never seen .
thank you .
if we lower our taxes and we 're getting a massive tax reduction -- and by the way , hillary clinton is raising your taxes substantially .
if we remove destructive regulations , unleash the vast treasure of american energy .
we have so much energy .
it 's being destroyed , our economic worth .
and negotiate trade deals that put america first .
then there is no limit to the number of jobs we can create and the amount of prosperity we can unleash .
there is no limit .
pay off our debt .
pay down our debt .
reduce taxes .
get rid of regulations .
my first day in office i 'm going to order a review of every single regulation issued over the last 10 years .
all needless , job - killing regulations will be immediately canceled .
millions of new jobs will come pouring in .
and we 're going to lift the restrictions on american energy which means at least another half a million jobs each year .
they are being destroyed .
and we 're unable to compete with other nations .
very simple .
and that 's just the beginning .
also on my first day i 'm going to ask congress to send me a bill to immediately repeal and replace disastrous obamacare ...   it has turned out to be a disaster .
this alone will instantly save another two million jobs .
and if you look at your premiums , it 's through the roof .
and by the way , on november 1 , just before the election on november 8 , new numbers are coming out which will show 40 , 50 , 60 percent increases .
they want to delay it until after the election because it 's election -- it 's a disaster .
it 's a disaster .
and your deductibles are so high that unless you lead a really long , slow , vicious death , you 're never going to be able to use , ok .
do you see the deductibles ?
you 're never going to be able to use it .
i 'm also going to completely reform our trade deals .
we 're going to renegotiate nafta .
probably the worst trade deal ever agreed to , signed in the history of the world , not in the united states .
it 's destroyed our manufacturing in our country .
it 's destroyed .
and by the way , guess who signed it ?
bill clinton .
you look at all of the places , florida included .
but you look at upstate new york , you look at ohio , you look at pennsylvania .
you look at all of these different places have been destroyed .
absolutely destroyed .
you look at new england .
look what happened to new england .
they 've been destroyed by companies moving out , going into mexico , firing everybody .
unemployment through the roof .
we 're going to stand up to china , and keep america out of the trans - pacific partnership , another catastrophe .
tpp will be almost as bad as nafta .
nothing can be as bad as nafta .
trans - pacific partnership will be almost as bad as nafta .
it 'll take your jobs , ohio .
remember , it 's going to take your jobs , ohio .
i tell you that .
michigan .
so many places .
tpp is a disaster .
we do n't need another massive multinational deal , by the way , that nobody on our side even reads , that ties us up and binds us down and does n't even discuss monetary manipulation and devaluation , which is how china and all these countries are beating us so badly .
not even discussed .
and they had provisions in the agreement , and they would take it out because certain politicians did n't want to have them in there .
i wonder why .
another major reform is going to be school choice .
and we 're going to terminate common core .
and we 're bringing our education local .
i 've outlined a plan to provide every disadvantaged child in america the freedom to choose the private , public , magnet or religious school of his or her choice .
this will help lift millions of poor african - american and hispanic children out of poverty , something we are going to do .
since president obama came into office another two million hispanic - americans have fallen into poverty .
it 's catastrophic .
and it 's totally unacceptable .
to the hispanic community i say we are going to protect your jobs .
we 're going to build up your schools .
and we 're going to deliver safety and opportunity for your children .
you have no safety .
you have little opportunity .
this week i also rolled out a plan to help our mothers and our families get affordable quality child care for their children .
ivanka trump , very much for child care .
she 's been talking about that to me for two years , long before i even decided to go through this journey .
and it 's not easy , i want to tell you .
we speak in rooms like this .
this is about 100 degrees right now .
that 's considered a cool auditorium .
and the reason is we have such big crowds like this one .
look at that .
every single corner .
unbelievable .
these rooms were n't designed for this many people .
and it is hot in these rooms .
and we stand up here and we talk .
and we do two or three and sometimes we 'll be hitting four a day .
do you think hillary clinton can get through one ?
you ever see her 18-minute speech ?
bomb .
bomb .
bomb .
see ya .
see ya .
i 'm going home .
no .
we 're doing it the right way .
and frankly , when they spend hundreds of millions of dollars on advertising i do n't have to because i do it the old fashioned way .
i come into your neighborhood , right .
it 's a lot cheaper .
it 's a lot harder work , but it 's a lot cheaper .
very true .
very , very true .
on policy after policy we 're going to provide opportunity , prosperity and security for all americans .
we 're also going to stand with the cuban people in their fight against communist oppression .
no , we 're on the right side .
great people .
they 're great people .
the president 's one - sided deal for cuba and with cuba benefits only the castro regime .
people are very unhappy about it .
you know what 's interesting ?
when he landed the plane recently in china , right , they refused to give him a stairway out of air force one .
now that is a first in the history of air force one .
so he used basically the mechanics ' stairs .
that 's the stairs they drop down to get the mechanics up to fix the light bulb , right .
when he landed the plane in saudi arabia , which we protect .
without us they would n't be there for two months .
he landed in saudi arabia .
he was n't greeted by the top officials .
now what would i have done in those two cases ?
bomb .
take me back to washington , jim .
let 's go .
right .
let 's go .
let 's go , jim .
get going .
close those doors .
we 're going home .
now with cuba , with cuba we land in cuba and there 's no castro to greet him .
the big leaders were n't there to greet him .
and i have a lot of cuban friends .
but you would have all done the same thing again .
jim , let 's close those doors .
we 're going home .
right ?
right ?
let 's go , captain .
we 're going home .
we 're going into washington .
maybe we 'll head into miami actually .
that 's not a bad idea .
terrible .
that 's three .
three .
saudi arabia , cuba , china .
air force one has never been treated so badly in its long and incredible history .
air force one used to land and people would respect the people inside .
and they 'd come out and there 'd be all sorts of hoopla .
not anymore .
it 's unbelievable .
and these are countries that are benefited by us greatly .
so we have to make great deals before we do anything with cuba or anybody else , right .
we 're going to make great deals .
you 'll be happy .
you 're going to be happy , i tell you .
how many people are from cuba here ?
come here .
tell me .
cuban .
cuban .
good .
do you agree with me ?
do you agree ?
we 'll do it .
but we 'll do it with great deals .
and we 'll do it with democracy .
and we 'll do it the way we have to do it .
ok ?
we 'll do it the right way .
where is ms. delgado ?
does everybody know ?
what a great -- where is she ?
she is so amazing .
a.j. where is a.j. wow , she 's so -- she 's become a tremendous star .
tell you one thing , when she 's representing me i would n't do it anyway , but i can .
turn off the television .
i 'm well protected .
thank you .
great job .
thank you very much .
thank you , a.j.   but all of the concessions that barack obama has granted the castro regime were done through executive order , which means the next president can reverse them .
and that i will do unless the castro regime meets our demands .
not my demands , our demands .
you know what the demands are .
those demands will include religious and political freedom for the cuban people .
and the freeing of political prisoners .
the freeing of political prisoners .
right ?
am i -- is that right ?
oh boy .
oh boy .
what energy in this room .
what energy .
a lot of energy .
you 'll be very happy , my cuban friends .
i have so many friends from cuba .
incredible people .
so let 's also talk about a place called venezuela .
they -- now who 's here from venezuela ?
or related in some -- not too many .
whoa .
whoa .
what 's going on ?
not too many ?
friend or foe ?
i think he 's friend .
i think he 's friend .
no , he 's ok .
he 's ok .
by the way , is there any place more fun to be than a trump rally ?
you tell me .
right ?
tell you .
we have a lot of venezuelans around doral , the doral section , right .
and it 's a beautiful , vibrant -- this is an amazing place .
but they are really having trouble over in venezuela .
but miami is filled with hardworking , incredible venezuelan people .
but it 's been hurt very badly by socialist venezuela .
and the next president of the united states must stand in solidarity with all people oppressed in our atmosphere .
and we will stand with oppressed people .
and there are many .
the oppressed people of venezuela , they are yearning to be free .
they are yearning for help .
the system is bad .
but the people are great .
great .
they are great people .
here in america i 'll push to expand freedom for all of our citizens .
i 'm going to lower your taxes so substantially .
we 're getting rid of all of those regulations on business .
so many small business owners here , i know five of them .
one of them was small business now he 's big business .
i 'm proud of him .
he 's right here .
but we 're going to get rid of those terrible , terrible regulations .
he just said to me , and the thing that surprised me most , we 're bringing business tax rates down from 35 percent to 15 percent .
and yet ...   ... it 'll be the greatest cut , i believe , in the history of our country .
but i will tell you what surprises me tremendously is that the people that have these cuts , they 're more concerned with regulation than even a big tax decrease because regulations are choking and killing our businesses and stopping our businesses from hiring people , jobs .
so i 'm going to appoint justices of the supreme court who will follow the constitution .
i 'm going to rebuild our depleted .
we 're going to take care of our -- the vets .
who 's a vet ?
who 's a vet ?
where are my vets ?
where are they ?
there they -- ok .
now they 're standing up .
now they -- i know we had a lot of vets here .
thank you , fellas .
thank you very much .
we 're going to take care of our vets .
we 're going to save your second amendment .
do you know if you look at some of the things , the catastrophes -- you look at orlando .
you look at san bernardino .
you look at so many different -- you look at paris .
the toughest gun laws in the world , they have it in paris .
these thugs , these animals walked in and they just go bomb , bomb , bomb .
nobody had guns on the other side .
if there were guns on the other side , just a few of them , number one , probably if they knew , they would n't have attacked .
and number two , even if they did attack , it would 've been a whole different story .
one hundred thirty people killed .
people massively injured , still in the hospital .
their lives are just destroyed .
and if they had protection , if they had guns on the other side , with the bullets flying the other direction , it would 've been a whole different story .
so we 're going to protect your second amendment .
and i 'm going to stop illegal immigration and drugs from coming into our country .
and yes , we will build a wall .
we 'll build a wall .
we will build a wall .
who 's going to pay for the wall ?
one hundred percent .
one hundred percent .
and we 're going to be renegotiating nafta and our terrible trade deals .
we 're going to make great deals out of horrible deals .
and if we ca n't renegotiate the deal because the other side is so , so happy with it , we 're going to terminate the deal and we 'll start all over again , folks .
we 'll have new deals .
and they 'll be much better deals .
and they 'll be two - way streets .
the traffic , it 'll be coming our way .
it 's a one - way street out of the united states for our jobs and our money .
you know i always say we get the drugs they get the cash .
that 's the deal , folks .
no good .
they 're building in mexico right now , and mexico 's just one example , some of the greatest plants .
a friend of mine builds plants .
and he tells me all the time .
i called him up the other day .
i called him up six months ago , told me the same thing .
nothing changes .
ford .
they just announced yesterday they 're moving their small car division , the whole thing , into mexico .
that 's on top of spending billions and billions of dollars ...   and then you wonder why i 'm winning in michigan .
because i 've been telling the people in michigan .
i 've been telling the people in ohio for five years that this is happening .
and our politicians do n't do anything about it .
and hillary clinton will never do anything about it .
she does n't have the capability to do it .
we will rebuild our roads and bridges , tunnels , highways , airports , schools and hospitals .
american cars will travel the roads .
american planes will soar in the sky .
they 'll soar .
and american ships will patrol the seas .
american steel will send new skyscrapers right here in miami into the clouds .
but it 'll be american steel .
american hands will rebuild this nation .
and american energy mined from american sources will power our energy .
and we 'll take care of our steel workers .
and we 'll take care of our miners who have been destroyed by this administration , destroyed .
and hillary clinton has already said she 's going to put the miners out of business .
we 're going to take care of our miners .
they 're amazing people .
american workers will be hired to do the job .
we will put new american steel into the spine of our country .
i will fight for every neglected part of this nation .
and i will fight to bring us all together as one people .
imagine what our country could accomplish if we started working together as one people under one god , saluting one flag .
it 's time to break with the bitter failures of the past and to embrace a new , inclusive and prosperous american future .
we 're not prosperous anymore .
we owe $ 20 trillion .
we have a president who in seven - and - a - half years has doubled the debt .
our country 's in trouble .
a lot of people do n't know it , but our country 's in trouble .
and we 're going to make sure that trouble never comes .
let me tell you .
jobs will return .
incomes will rise .
and new factories will come rushing back to our shores .
once more we will have a government of , by and for the people .
we will make america wealthy again .
we will make america safe again .
we will make america strong again .
and we will make america great again .
thank you , everybody .
thank you .
thank you , miami .
wow , tremendous .
wow .
thank you very much .
thank you .
unbelievable .
people do n't know , i worked in ohio , did you know that ?
and i had a great experience .
and if i did n't have a great experience starting out when i was very young , maybe i would n't be here right now , who knows ?
you need that , it was great for confidence also .
in 12 days , we 're going to win ohio ...   and we are going to win back the white house .
a brand new poll from remington research -- highly respected -- has just a few minutes ago come out , and in ohio we are right now , four points up .
early voting is underway , so make sure , get out and vote , we do n't wanna -- we do n't wanna give this away .
you know , we have a movement going on like they 've never seen before in this country .
drain the swamps , you 've got ta a " drain the swamp " sign back there , we 're going to drain the swamp , believe me .
but this is a movement like they 've never seen in this country before , and every place is packed , and the greatest people on earth , and we 're going to turn our country around , we 're going to turn it around fast .
seventy - five percent of the people think our country is headed in the wrong direction .
we know it 's headed in the wrong direction .
we 're going to fix it , we 're going to take our country back , and it 's going to be put very quickly on the right track .
real change begins with immediately repealing and replacing obamacare .
it 's just been announced that americans are going to experience another massive double - digit hike in obamacare , you see that .
including premiums like in the great state of arizona , where they 're going to go up at 116 percent .
do n't worry , you 'll be there very soon , unless i win in which case you 're not going to have to worry about it .
even bill clinton admitted that obamacare is quote , " the craziest thing in the world , where people wind up paying their premiums which double , and their coverage is cut in half . "
job killing ...   job killing obamacare is just one more way the system is rigged .
remember the name jonathan gruber , the architect of obamacare ?
he said they could pass obamacare --- when he did n't know he was being recorded -- he said they could pass obamacare , because the stupidity of the american voter will allow it to take place .
the only stupidity was that incredible stupidity shown by our politicians when they forced this bill through over the furious objection to many politicians , in all fairness , many , many politicians , but really the american people .
and it was very , very sad .
and in all fairness to the democrats , had our president not lied 28 times -- remember , you can keep your plan , you can keep your doctor , it passed by this much -- they would not have gone for it .
but they believed him too , like everybody else believed him .
they 've caught them in a lot of lies lately , folks .
hillary clinton , talking about liars , wants to double down ...   hillary clinton wants to double down on obamacare and make it even worse .
so , here , i 'm going to repeal it , replace it .
we 're going to have a replacement that is so much less expensive and so much better .
you do n't even get to use obamacare   the deductible is so high and , you know , it 's just ... look , it is so -- it is so out of control , you 'll never get to use it .
four or five thousand dollars before you can start taking ... just this and just happened , hillary clinton declared that obamacare -- do you remember this -- not so long ago as one of the greatest accomplishments of president obama , of the democratic party , and of our county .
it 's a total disaster .
here in ohio , another five insurance companies are dropping out of obamacare .
good luck , good luck in negotiations , folks .
that means that all the residents covered by plans from these companies will be getting cancellation notices very soon .
obamacare is really -- and you know this -- a catastrophe -- it 's a catastrophic event for ohio workers and is making it impossible for many parents to pay their bills , support their families , or get quality medical care to their children .
repealing obamacare is one of the single most important reasons we must win on november eighth .
have to win .
real change also means getting rid of the corruption in washington , d.c.   hillary clinton bleached and deleted 33,000 e - mails , lied to congress under oath , made 13 phone calls , i mean 13 , 13 phones , made them disappear , sometimes with a hammer .
right ?
wrong , wrong .
let 's get rid of these ... and then told the fbi she could remember 39 different times .
the clinton crew gave more than $ 675,000 to the wife of the deputy director of the fbi , and the man who was overseeing the investigation into hillary 's illegal server , a server we now know obama knew about .
just found that out yesterday .
wikileaks .
the more e - mails wikileaks releases , the more lies between the clinton foundation , the secretary of state 's office , and the clintons ' personal finances , they all get blurred .
just today we read about clinton confidante doug brand , bragging that he had funneled tens of millions of dollars to bill clinton , inc. , through the foundation donations , paid speeches , and consulting contracts .
mr. band called the arrangement unorthodox .
the rest of us call it outright corrupt .
in fact , the clinton foundation even hired a law firm to find out if their pay to play scheme would jeopardize their charitable status with the irs .
if the clintons were willing to play this fast and loose with their enterprise when they were n't in the white house , just imagine what they 'll do given the change to once again control the oval office .
and we 've had enough .
honestly , i think we 've had enough of the clintons , in all fairness .
right ?
do n't you agree ?
had enough .
i mean at what point , at what point do we say it ?
hillary clinton is the most corrupt person ever to seek the office of the presidency .
i propose a contract with the american voter that will end the corruption and give the government back to the people .
i want the entire corrupt washington establishment to hear and to heed the words i 'm about to say .
if we win on november eighth , when ...   ok , ok .
when we win on november eighth .
we do n't want to take it for granted , but we are winning in a lot of states , i have to say .
the media now , they 're going wild .
the media 's going wild .
because they 're saying , you know , this guy 's winning in florida , he 's winning in north carolina , he 's winning in iowa , he 's winning in ohio .
all right .
when we win , right , we are going to washington , d.c. , and we are going to drain the swamp .
a lot of spirit in this room -- it 's a good one .
that includes a constitutional amendment to impose term limits on all members of congress .
at the core of my contract is my economic plan .
that plan can be summarized in three very beautiful words , especially for the people in this area and this room -- jobs , jobs , jobs .
no , it 's terrible what 's happened , what 's happened in this area , what 's happened in this country with jobs is terrible .
hillary clinton promised to bring upstate new york 200,000 jobs when she ran for senate .
instead the jobs left .
they did n't come in , they left .
she been there for 30 years and has n't fixed anything .
she 's just made things worse , except for herself and her husband .
forty - seven million americans are on food stamps , and 45 million americans live in poverty .
nearly one in four americans , in their prime earning years , are not working or able to work .
seventy million american women and children are in poverty or on the brink of poverty , and nearly half of african - american children under the age of six are living in abject poverty .
our national debt has doubled in eight years , and our infrastructure throughout our country is crumbling , bad shape .
our airports , our roads , our bridges , our tunnels , our schools , our hospitals .
our trade deficit with the world is now nearly $ 800 billion a year .
we are living through the greatest jobs theft in the history of the world .
think of it .
and that 's so true .
the single greatest jobs theft in the history of the world .
what our politicians have allowed to happen to this area , but to all areas of our country .
nafta , tpp they want to approve .
a disaster .
ohio has lost one in four manufacturing jobs since nafta , a deal signed by bill clinton and supported strongly by hillary clinton .
remember , every time you see a closed factory , a wiped out community in ohio , it was essentially caused by the clintons .
it was nafta .
it was caused by the clintons .
why a deal like that was allowed .
we 've lost 70,000 factories .
think of that one , 70 .
i tell everybody , it 's a typo .
ca n't be 70,000 .
it is .
we 've lost 70,000 factories since china entered the world trade organization , another bill and hillary - backed disaster .
just this year , eaton corporation in ohio closed its plant , laid off 152 workers , and moved their jobs to mexico .
and you 've had many .
i could -- i could name them all day long .
under my contract , if a company wants to fire their workers , move to mexico or other countries , and ship their products back into the united states , we will put a 35 percent tariff on those products .
and folks , just in case you have any questions , when that happens you 're not losing your companies anymore .
and if you do , at least the country 's gon na make a lot of money .
ok ?
we will immediately begin renegotiating nafta , and if we do n't get the deal we want - right now it 's a one - way highway .
we lose our jobs , we lose our companies , we lose everything .
we lose our cash .
they get the cash , they get the jobs , they get the companies .
we get the drugs , we get the unemployment .
that 's what we get .
we get nothing .
we get less than nothing .
we will terminate nafta and get a much better deal for our workers if we ca n't renegotiate it properly .
we 're gon na get a better deal for our workers and for our companies .
because we can not continue to be the people led by stupid people .
we ca n't .
we ca n't .
as part of our plan to bring back american jobs we will lower taxes on our businesses from 35 percent down to 15 percent .
we will also cut taxes for middle class families by 35 percent and massively simplify taxes for all americans .
we will be a rich nation once again .
but to be a rich country , we must also be a safe country .
hillary clinton unleashed isis onto the world , you know that story .
and spreading violently , it 's spreading now into the united states .
there are now 1,000 open isis investigations in the united states .
isis is on a campaign of genocide against christians in the middle east , or what they call the nation of the cross .
ok .
the nation of the cross .
they are crucifying , drowning and beheading their victims .
this is something that we would read about in history books .
and not since medieval times , right ?
have you heard the beheadings and all the things that are happening .
so we have no choice .
we will stop isis and we still stop them fast .
and unlike what they 've done in mosul , which is turning out to be very difficult , we 're not giving three and four months notice .
we 're coming in .
we 're coming in .
you think general george patton would say , " we 're coming in in three or four months , get ready " ?
what a bunch .
they 're throwing people off buildings , hanging their victims from meat hooks .
they 're hanging their victims from meat hooks .
the new york post just published reports about isis crushing children to death and burning adults alive .
now hillary wants massive immigration from the most dangerous regions of the world , where isis operates , including a 550 percent increase in syrian refugees over and above the thousands and thousands that president obama is taking .
we do n't want isis in our country .
the hillary refugee plan would leave us with generations of terrorism , radicalism and extremism inside of our shores .
i only want to admit people who will support this country and love its people .
so important .
keeping our families safe is the highest obligation of the president of the united states .
a trump administration is going to suspend immigration from terror - prone regions .
and we will suspend the syrian refugee program .
that was easy .
we 're not going to take the risk when it comes to the safety of the american people .
no longer .
so let me state this as clearly as i can .
if i 'm elected president , i am going to keep radical islamic terrorists the hell out of our country .
hillary also said she wants totally open borders .
no one who supports open borders can ever serve as president of the united states .
totally open borders .
a trump administration will also secure and defend the borders of the united states .
and yes , we will build a wall .
have to .
we have to .
and who is going to pay for the wall ?
one hundred percent .
mexico , in terms of our trade deficits , is making a fortune off the united states .
their leaders are doing a much smarter job .
but you know what ?
we 'll be happy with mexico .
mexico 's gon na be wonderful , we 're going to have a great relationship with mexico , with china and with other - we do n't even have good relationships now .
they rip us off and we still do n't get along .
at least they should be nice to us .
they 're not even nice .
they 'll be nice .
thousands of americans have been killed by illegal immigrants .
right here in ohio .
sixty - year old margaret costleman was murdered in cold blood by an illegal immigrant .
earlier that day her killer shot another woman in the arm while she was with her children in a nearby park .
police encountered the man more than three weeks before the crime scene , but federal authorities refused to take him into custody , even though people were saying , " please , please do n't let him out .
please take him in . "
then there is the case of 90-year old earl olander , a minnesota farmer who was brutally beaten by illegal immigrants and left to bleed to death in his home .
earl 's body was found with his hands bound behind his back with duct tape .
a blunt force injury to his head .
his killers had criminal records but they did not meet the obama administration 's priorities for removal .
but others that knew him and others that knew them were pleading , were pleading , " do n't let them out .
do n't let them into our society . "
i have a message for the cartels , the drug dealers and the gang members .
when i win , your long reign of crime and terror and horror will come to a very beautiful crashing end .
we will also repeal obama - clinton defense cuts and rebuild our badly depleted military .
our air force is the smallest and oldest it 's ever been .
did you know that ?
because i know what you have here .
you guys are good with wright patterson .
right ?
what a great place .
but we 're very depleted , we have old equipment .
we will build brand new , modern , state of the art planes to fly right at 'em , right at wright patterson air force base .
we have a lot of veterans here today .
i want to thank them for their service and let them know as president i have your back .
believe me .
i have your back .
we will .
she just said , " make america great again , mr. trump . "
we will make america great again .
do n't worry about it .
we will .
and it wo n't take too long .
we will change our foreign policy .
hillary clinton 's policies in iraq , syria , libya threw the middle east into total turmoil .
we 're spending $ 6 trillion on wars in the middle east while our own country falls into total disrepair .
now hillary wants to start a shooting war in syria , conflict with a nuclear power - russia - which could very well lead to world war iii .
and the way she talks about putin .
she 's always said she has no idea , but she 's always saying -- wikileak , it 's russia , and donald trump -- i have nothing to do with russia .
she said maybe donald trump is involved in projects with the russians .
the answer 's no , no .
but what she does , she says donald trump and russia .
look , look , she speaks so badly of putin , nuclear country , she speaks so badly , i say -- and she uses it to keep trying to get votes .
i said to myself you know , how do you speak so badly of somebody , i mean how are they going to ever get along ?
would n't it be great if we actually got along with russia and other countries ?
and we together went after isis and knocked the hell out of them ?
would n't that be a good thing ?
because they want to get them out also .
but she speaks very badly of putin , and i do n't think that 's smart , you know .
you can be very tough , but you should n't be doing what she 's doing .
as her own team has said in wikileaks , she has terrible instincts .
to all americans i say it 's time for new leadership , it really is time .
it really is .
can you imagine four more years of obama ?
that 's what you got to --   it 's high taxes , it 's high regulations , all these companies they ca n't even breathe with the regulations , unnecessary .
it 's isis all over the place .
you know , she says she 'll stop isis .
let me tell you , there was no isis .
there was no isis .
during her term , she created with obama a vacuum in iraq , isis formed , and then obama called them the jv , junior varsity , right ?
well they 're not the jv anymore , folks .
they 're going to be no trouble , we are going to knock them so hard .
but look , look , they 're not the jv , and they were n't them .
and now they 're in 32 different countries .
so she 's saying we will get rid of isis .
she wants to go back home and go to sleep , that 's what she wants to do .
did you see where she got upset yesterday because i took a little while , just a few hours , to cut a ribbon to make sure my kids did a good job ?
we built the building by the way , under budget , and ahead of schedule .
and she said donald trump got off the campaign trail .
i mean i 've been doing six , seven , eight things a day every single day .
she 's home sleeping half the time .
i say she 's definitely a low energy person .
i said where is hillary ?
i watched after the last debate , and after the second debate .
she was tired , wow .
she walked off that stage , she had a lot of people around , they had a lot of people around her , which was smart .
everything will change in november .
just think about what we can accomplish in the first 100 days .
we 're going to have the biggest tax cut since ronald reagan .
we 're going to eliminate every unnecessary job - killing regulation .
we 're going to provide school choice and put an end to common core .
we 're going to rebuild our military , and take care of our vets .
we will support the truly great men and women of law enforcement .
we are going to save our second amendment which is under siege .
and we 'll appoint justices to the united states supreme court , so important , who will uphold and defend the constitution of the united states .
americans are tired of being told by politicians they have to defer their dreams to another day , but they really mean another decade .
it 's like our politics are caught in time loop .
we keep electing the same people over and over again , clinton , clinton , oh , clinton , the impeachment , the lying , the whole thing .
we 're going to keep make the same mistakes if you keep doing that , and we are going to continue to hear the same old excuses .
these career politicians keep telling us that things ca n't change , that we ca n't find new solutions .
that 's basically what they tell us .
well i have a message for them .
the future belongs to the dreamers , not the cynics , and not the critics .
the future belongs to the dreamers .
i 'm asking all americans to join me in dreaming big and bold things for our future .
i 'm going to fight for every american , of every background , in every stretch of this nation .
i 'm going to fight to liberate our citizens from violence and poverty , and crime and fear .
and i 'm going to fight for the inner cities , and for the african- american community , and the way they 're forced to live in the inner cities with no jobs , no education , and no safety .
i 'm going to fight for every person in this country who believes government should serve the people , not the donors , and not the special in .
i 'm going to fight to bring us all together as americans .
just imagine what our country could accomplish if we started working together again as one people under one god , saluting one american flag .
that 's right , once again we will have a government of , by , and for the people .
you got ta get out and vote .
it 's going to be something special .
and i tell you this , and i tell others this sometimes , this is amazing group of people , the spirit , the energy , the genius , the genius .
but you will say that this will be one of the great and most important meetings of your life , but most importantly , you will say that this vote will be the most important vote you 've ever cast .
because our country does n't win anymore .
we do n't win with trade , we do n't win with our great military , we do n't allow them to win , we do n't win with isis -- 

  the world is laughing at us .
we do n't win at the borders .
we do n't win with taking care of our vets .
we do n't win with anything .
we do n't win anymore .
we will start winning again like you 've never seen before .
and i kiddingly say that one of our great two congressman that are here someplace -- where are those great guys ?
they 're here .
they 're going to be coming to see me at the white house , and they 're going to say mr. president , mr. president sir , mr. president --   the people of ohio , they ca n't take it anymore , sir .
you 're winning too much .
you knocked out isis , there are too many jobs in ohio , too many companies are pouring in .
we have a little traffic .
traffic would n't be a bad thing , right ?
every time you see traffic remember , it 's not such a bad thing .
mr. president , you 're winning too much , please , please stop winning so much , we 're not used to it .
i 'll say listen , congressmen , we are going to continue to win .
we are going to win like never before .
we are going to make our country wealthy again .
we are going to make america strong again .
we will make america safe again .
and we will make america great again .
thank you very much .
thank you , everybody .
make sure you go out and vote .
god bless you .
god bless you .
so , it 's been 235 days since crooked hillary clinton has had a press conference .
and you , as reporters who give her all of these glowing reports , should ask yourselves why .
and i 'll tell you why .
because despite the nice platitudes , she 's been a mess .
you look at what 's happened with isis , which is n't even mentioned .
you look at what 's happening with law and order , they do n't even mention our police .
they mention everybody but our police .
they do n't have an american flag on the dais until we started complaining and then they ran up with two very small little flags , one that we saw .
so you know , i put myself through your news conferences often , not that its fun .
235 days , no news conference for hillary clinton .
you oughta check it out because there 's a lot going on .
her great disloyalty to the person that rigged the system for her , debbie wasserman schultz , she totally rigged it .
bernie sanders never had a chance .
and total disloyalty , it 's like you 're fired , get out , fast .
the e - mail situation i call it the double e - mail situation , both very serious .
what was said in the last ones to the dnc was horrible , absolutely horrible .
if i would 've used language like they used about religion , about race , about everything else that they discuss in those e - mails i would 've had to run and hide and probably drop out of the race .
with her , everything 's just fine .
so just ask yourself why she does n't have news conferences .
and honestly , the reason is because there 's no way she can answer questions because the job she has done is so bad .
when they talk about change , i noticed they have change .
she 's been there for 30 years .
thirty years .
there 's no change .
it 's going to be the same , it 's going to be an extension of obama .
in my opinion , worse .
she lied about tpp .
she was for tpp , she saw me on television knocking the hell out of it because it 's a horror show , it 's going to kill all our jobs , it 's going to be almost as bad as nafta , maybe worse which her husband signed , by the way , which destroyed this country , destroyed manufacturing in the united states .
and i 'll do something about it , that 'll be so renegotiated .
and by the way , yesterday for the first time she said she wants to renegotiate trade agreements .
first time , yesterday .
well , because of me .
she also saw me talking about tpp and currency manipulation and currency devaluation .
and she heard it and she said wow , she ca n't win that subject in a debate .
so all of a sudden she goes and she goes against tpp , her vice president is one of the biggest proponents of tpp and now he 's going against it .
and bernie sanders was right , he was against it .
they will go for tpp and vote it in very shortly after the election if she wins , which for the sake of our country we all hope and i hope that she does n't .
they will vote it in -- just mark my words , hopefully we do n't have to worry about it -- but she will vote .
she 'll change a comma , she 'll change a paragraph of the 6,000 page document that nobody 's even read on our side .
just so you understand , the other countries know every word , every paragraph , every sentence , every single comma and period .
we do n't even read it , our country .
because we 're led by stupid people .
so she saw me talking about tpp , she realized that she could n't defend it , her special interests are pushing her hard because she 's bought and sold by the special interests .
they 're pushing her very hard and so she said she 's against it .
the day she gets in -- which hopefully will never happen -- she will approve or shortly thereafter tpp .
and that will be another disaster for job in our country , ok ?
so why do n't we start off any questions ?
yes , sir ?
it 's just a total deflection , this whole thing with russia .
in fact , i saw her campaign manager i do n't know his title , mook .
i saw him on television and they asked him about russia and the hacking .
by the way , they hacked -- they probably have her 33,000 e - mails .
i hope they do .
they probably have her 33,000 e - mails that she lost and deleted because you 'd see some beauties there .
so let 's see .
but i watched this guy mook and he talked about we think it was russia that hacked .
now , first of all was what was said on those that 's so bad but he said i watched it .
i think he was live .
but he said we think it was russia that hacked .
and then he said -- and this is in person sitting and watching television as i 've been doing -- and then he said could be trump , yeah , yeah .
trump , trump , oh yeah , trump .
he reminded me of john lovitz for " saturday night live " in the liar   where he 'd go yes , yes , i went to harvard , harvard , yes , yes .
this is the guy , you have to see it .
yes , it could be trump , yes , yes .
so it is so farfetched .
it 's so ridiculous .
honestly i wish i had that power .
i 'd love to have that power but russia has no respect for our country .
and that 's why -- if it is russia , nobody even knows this , it 's probably china , or it could be somebody sitting in his bed .
but it shows how weak we are , it shows how disrespected we are .
total -- assuming it 's russia or china or one of the major countries and competitors , it 's a total sign of disrespect for our country .
putin and the leaders throughout the world have no respect for our country anymore and they certainly have no respect for our leader .
so i know nothing about it .
it 's one of the most farfetched i 've ever heard .
yes , jon ?
i never met putin , i do n't know who putin is .
he said one nice thing about me .
he said i 'm a genius .
i said thank you very much to the newspaper and that was the end of it .
i never met putin .
i would treat vladimir putin firmly but there 's nothing that i can think of that i 'd rather do than have russia friendly as opposed to the way they are right now so that we can go and knock out isis together with other people and with other countries .
would n't it be nice if we actually got along with people , would n't it be nice if we actually got along , as an example , with russia ?
i 'm all for it and let 's go get isis because we have to get isis and we have to get them fast .
you saw what happened with the priest , it 's only going to get worse .
and hillary clinton wants to allow 550 percent more people from that region into our country and we have no idea who they are , where they come from , where their documentation is , it 's only going to get worse and it 's going to start getting bad in our country .
we 're letting people come in by the tens of thousands .
you see what happened to the french priest .
a friend of mine , he said he was going to france , like three , four months ago .
i saw him yesterday .
i said how 'd you like france .
he said i would n't go to france .
i would n't go to france .
because france is no longer france .
france is no longer france .
they wo n't like me for saying that but you see what happened in nice , you see what happened yesterday with the priest who was supposed to be a spectacular man .
france is no longer france and this world better be very careful and they better get very tough and very smart and they 'll never do it with hillary clinton .
and by the way , in terms of change , she 's been there for 30 years .
she 's been doing this for 30 years .
what she 's going to go all of sudden things are going to change ?
she 's bought and sold 100 percent by special interests and lobbyists .
yes , tom ?
none , none .
because it 's under order .
and i 'll release them when the audits completed .
nobody would release when it 's under -- i 've had audits for 15 or 16 years .
every year i have a routine audit .
i 'm under audit , when the audits complete i 'll release them .
but zero , i mean i will tell you right now , zero , i have nothing to do with russia , yes ?
i do n't know , i do n't know .
it depends on the audit .
it depends on the audit , not a big deal .
by the way , just so you understand , i 've released my papers , 104 pages of documents .
i built an unbelievable company , tremendous cash , tremendous company with some of the great assets of the world .
you 've seen it .
you were all very disappointed when you saw it actually but that 's ok .
far , far great than anybody ever thought .
i have a great company .
i built an unbelievable company but if you look there you 'll see there 's nothing in russia .
and as far as the tax returns , as soon as the audits complete , like any lawyer would tell you , greta van susteren she was going over it a while ago , she 's a lawyer .
she said well no lawyer would let somebody release a tax return when they 're under audit .
it 's a routine audit .
i 've gone through audits , which i think is very unfair , for 15 years .
i have friends that are very rich and never get audited .
i 'm audited every year .
maybe that 's because of politics , who knows .
i 'm not going to tell putin what to do .
why should i tell putin what to do ?
he already did something today where he said do n't blame them , essentially , for your incompetence .
let me tell you , it 's not even about russia or china or whoever it is that 's doing the hacking .
it was about the things that were said in those e - mails .
they were terrible things , talking about jewish , talking about race , talking about atheist , trying to pin labels on people -- what was said was a disgrace , and it was debbie wasserman schultz , and believe me , as sure as you 're sitting there , hillary clinton knew about it .
she knew everything .
debbie wasserman schultz could not breathe without speaking and getting approval from hillary clinton .
could n't breathe .
and you saw that .
it also showed that it was a fixed race , but i 've been saying that long before i saw the e - mails .
it was a rigged race .
it was totally rigged .
and debbie wasserman schultz rigged it for hillary clinton , and the sad part is , bernie sanders has , to use an old word that i use on occasion , he 's lost his energy .
he wants to go home and go to sleep .
but he 's got a lot of people that walked out last night .
now , hundreds of people walked out of the democrat convention last night .
i did n't even hear about it .
nobody showed it .
i did n't see it on television .
you people do n't talk about it .
the republican convention was incredible .
i hear i had one of the biggest bounces in decades .
like , some people are saying nine points .
in fact , a poll just came out ten minutes ago , " los angeles times " , trump 47 , clinton 40 .
and the reason is that people are sick and tired of hillary clinton .
why do i have to   get involved with putin ?
i have nothing to do with putin .
i 've never spoken to him .
i do n't know anything about him other than he will respect me .
he does n't respect our president .
and if it is russia -- which it 's probably not , nobody knows who it is -- but if it is russia , it 's really bad for a different reason , because it shows how little respect they have for our country , when they would hack into a major party and get everything .
but it would be interesting to see -- i will tell you this -- russia , if you 're listening , i hope you 're able to find the 30,000 e - mails that are missing .
i think you will probably be rewarded mightily by our press .
let 's see if that happens .
that 'll be next .
yes , sir ... 

  ok .
sure .
two big questions .
the minimum wage has to go up .
people are -- at least $ 10 , but it has to go up .
but i think that states -- federal -- i think that states should really call the shot .
as an example , i live in new york .
it 's very expensive in new york .
you ca n't buy a hot dog for the money you 're talking about .
you go to other states and it 's not expensive at all .
now what it does is puts new york at a disadvantage if the minimum wage is up , companies move out and things , bad things happen .
at the same time , people have to be taken care of .
but what i 'm really going to do on the minimum wage -- but it has to go up .
now , bernie sanders lied .
bernie sanders said in his speech the other day that donald trump wants the minimum wage to go below $ 7 .
i said , where did he come up with that one ?
that one is just like joe biden lied today .
he said that donald trump wants to carpet bomb -- he was on television -- he said , donald trump wants to carpet bomb the enemy in the middle east .
now , that was ted cruz that said that .
that was not donald trump .
i mean , he 's not a very bright guy , but that was ted cruz that said it .
and he said it with such surety -- donald trump wants to carpet bomb -- i never said i wanted to carpet bomb .
that was ted cruz .
you remember ted cruz said it ?
you will confirm that , i think .
go ahead .
so i would like to raise it to at least $ 10 , and what i 'm going to do is i 'm going to bring jobs back to this country so that people can start working again so that the $ 10 and the $ 15 and the numbers you 're talking about are going to -- literally , they 're going to be peanuts compared to what people can make in the country , because i 'm going to bring jobs back from mexico , which is booming , booming .
i have a friend who builds plants and he 's a great builder of plants and i was with him the other day -- great guy .
he builds massive plants , for automobiles , for computers , for anything .
that 's what he does .
i think he 's the biggest , but certainly one of the biggest .
and i said , how 's it going ?
he said , unbelievable .
oh good , that 's good news .
the country 's doing well .
no , the country 's not doing well , but mexico is unbelievable .
the plants i 'm building in mexico , i 've never seen anything -- it 's the eighth wonder of the world .
and he 's not happy .
he 's an american guy .
he 'd rather build them here .
but he said it 's unbelievable .
that 's what 's happened to our country .
because we have leadership that does n't know what they 're doing .
yes we 're going to be listing ; yeah we 're going to be giving a list of those territories .
and if you come from those territories we have extreme vetting .
and we 're going to have extreme vetting anyway .
look we have people coming into this country who have very evil intentions .
and we have people whether in san bernardino or whether it 's the world trade center or whether it 's a lot of other things , and you look all over the world and you see what 's happening .
you look at orlando , how bad was that ?
and that was horrible .
that was going after the gay community it looks like .
we ca n't let this happen .
we can not let this happen .
we can not let people come in .
now hillary clinton likes to up it .
her running mate tim kaine , who by the way did a terrible job in new jersey .
first act he did in new jersey was ask for a $ 4 billion tax increase and he 's not very popular in new jersey .
and he still is n't .
what ?
i mean virginia .
the first thing he did , the first thing that tim kaine did , he asked for a $ 4 billion tax increase .
and he 's not very popular .
so let me just tell you , and i went all over virginia and i was there the other day .
and i thought he 'd be popular .
he 's not popular because he asked for tax increases .
big tax increases in virginia .
big .
and also the unemployment went up , i think it doubled or close to doubled during his tenure .
but what he wanted to do is very strongly and he 's on record , he wanted to have even more of the people from that region of the world come in than hillary clinton wants .
and it 's unacceptable .
ok .
yes ?
i saw that .
right .
i do have a reaction to the prosecutor in baltimore who indicted those police officers , i do .
i think she ought to prosecute herself ok ?
that 's my reaction .
i think it was disgraceful what she did and the way she did it .
and the news conference that she had where they were guilty before anybody even knew the facts .
and i give a lot of respect and a lot of credit to those police officers who probably could have made a deal .
i give a lot of respect , a lot of credit that they stuck it out .
and you had victory after victory after victory .
and she had no chance , do n't forget she prosecuted the best case , what she thought was her best cases first .
she should prosecute herself .
she should be held accountable .
well , that was a bad case to prove it .
that was a bad case .
i mean if you 're going to do that , it 's ok because you have to , you know , there are times when police officers behave very badly .
but you have to get the right time .
this was not one of those times .
and i think that she is a disgrace to the world of prosecutors for what she did .
yes ma'am ?
yeah .
i have a great relationship with governor pence .
we spent the last three days together .
he was absolutely my first choice and i never wavered despite the press .
the press was saying , and it was interesting , i spoke to him at 11:05 , him and his wife , and i told him that i was going to be choosing them if i 'd be lucky enough for him to accept .
and he accepted .
and that was it .
for me that was it .
but right around that time you had the attack in nice .
and i was going to have a news conference either the following morning or the next day .
and of course i had to delay the news conference because there was attack , a horrible attack , horrible .
in france .
and i delayed the news conference and everyone said , oh he 's having second thoughts .
i never had a second thought in my life .
it was such a lie .
i mean so many lies in the press .
but it was such a lie .
and he has been so great .
honestly he 's been even better than i thought ok ?
better .
i think everything 's is out of date .
we have a whole new world .
when i said that nato , to wolf blitzer , is obsolete , i got attacked .
three days later people that study nato said you know trump is right .
you know what ?
we have a lot of things that are out date because they 're 20 and 30 and 40 years old .
nato , you know this is n't a country from 40 years ago .
today we have a different threat .
we have a terror threat .
and we have an isis threat .
and by the way , isis is n't even mentioned .
it 's not even mentioned during the democratic convention .
and everyone 's talking about it .
the reason they ca n't mention it is because they grew it .
go ahead .
i would -- katy , i would renegotiate so much of everything .
i 'm going to renegotiate our trade deals where we 're losing with everybody , katy .
i 'm going to renegotiate our military deals where we 're protecting countries and they 're not living up to the bargain .
they 're not living up to the bargain .
and everyone agrees with me , except for the media .
and the media never says that .
i like nato , just so you understand .
i like nato .
i like the concept of nato .
it is somewhat outdated because it does n't cover terror the way it should .
i 've been saying this for six months now .
a couple of months ago , front page , wall street journal , " we are going to cover terror , " they announced   somebody .
i think nato 's great .
but it 's got to be modernized .
and -- and countries that we 're protecting have to pay what they 're supposed to be paying .
yes ?
i am a person that believes in enhanced interrogation , yes .
and by the way , it works .
i 'll tell you what .
let me say it once again .
let me say it once again .
ok ?
many countries , including the nato countries , some of which i think you have five that are current that have paid what they owe .
and they can afford to pay this .
it 's not like they ca n't afford it .
they just see us as a soft touch .
you know , in business we say somebody 's a soft touch .
i do n't know if i 've been called a soft touch , but maybe i have sometimes .
but in business , they call them a soft touch .
they have n't paid us .
ok ?
i want them to pay .
excuse me .
i 'm not saying anything .
i do n't talk .
i 'm not like obama where he tells you everything he 's going to do -- we 're going to go and do this ; we 're going to go and do that .
i do n't talk .
but they 're going to pay .
no , no -- yeah , it sends a signal .
you know what signal it says ?
it says we 're going to pay .
you know , somebody said , " but we have treaties . "
i said that 's right .
and in the treaties , they 're supposed to pay .
they 're going to pay .
and they will pay .
they will pay .
yes ?
we 're going to have a whole policy on that over the next three weeks .
i 'm going to be doing a big thing on that .
well , i 've been doing very well with the hispanic community .
i mean , really well .
i mean , the -- the poll numbers are going up very high .
i think we had one recently 35 or 36 .
but i 'm going to have a whole -- we 're going to have a news conference on that over the next three weeks .
so , and i want to just tell you because these polls cover it , so l.a. times , 47 - 40 ; cnn , way up .
they 're all way up .
biggest -- they say the biggest bounce in memory .
because today i heard a dishonest guy on television say , " well , trump did n't get much of a bounce . "
so , you know , i have to at least say .
jeremy , go ahead .
i do n't think he respects clinton .
i do n't think putin has any respect whatsoever for clinton .
i think he does respect me .
and i hope i get along great with him .
it 's possible that we wo n't , jeremy .
i hope that we get along great with putin because it would be great to have russia with a good relationship .
right now , we do n't have a good relationship .
putin has said things over the last year that are really bad things .
ok ?
he mentioned the " n " word one time .
i was shocked to hear him mention the " n " word .
you know what the " n " word is , right ?
he mentioned it .
i was shocked .
he has a total lack of respect for president obama .
number one , he does n't like him .
and number two , he does n't respect him .
i think he 's going to respect your president if i 'm elected .
and i hope he likes me .
yes ?
yes , sir ?
yes , sir .
but let me finish with jeremy .
go ahead .
president trump would be so much better for u.s .- russian relations .
you ca n't be worse .
hey look , when i was a young men studying history and studying all of these things that i 've always found fascinating , one thing that i 've always heard is you never want to do anything to unite russia and china .
well , they 're united now , in a true sense .
they 've never been closer .
they 're selling oil to china .
we forced them into this position .
no , wait a minute .
no , i 'm not going to be an adversary .
no , not at all .
i have tenants from china .
i have the biggest bank in the world from china paying me rent .
i mean , i have great relationships with china .
i 'm not blaming china for getting away with murder .
i 'm blaming our leadership is incompetent .
we do n't know what we 're doing .
i do n't blame -- i respect china .
hey , if china can get away with trade deficits every year of hundreds of billions of dollars -- if they can get away with that , my hat 's off to them .
i have no problem with china .
i have a problem with our incompetent leadership allowing that to happen .
and i believe that hillary clinton is even more bought and paid for than barack obama .
i think it will get worse .
it 's going to be four more years of obama which is unacceptable to a lot of people , you see that .
but i believe that hillary clinton will be worse , than obama .
yes ?
that 's right .
that 's right , i 'm going to be doing something over the next four weeks , very much so .
no , i 'm prepared to say we 're gon na have a great plan .
one of the things i think because i 've traveled all over the country and i 'm going -- you know where i 'm going , i guess you all know , i do n't have to say .
but i 'm going to toledo   and i 'm going to different places today and i 've met so many people .
this is such a great country , these are such great people .
one of the saddest things i see are college students that work so hard , that go to colleges , good colleges , they 're good students , they do a great job .
number one , they get out , they have no jobs .
because our jobs are going to mexico , they 're going to china , they 're going to japan , they 're going all over the place .
they 're not coming here .
just like my friend who builds the plants but he does n't build them here , much .
and the saddest thing i see is these students are leveraged debt up to their -- up to their neck .
they ca n't breathe , they 're scared , they 're so scared they have leveraged their entire life .
they have loans .
and i have to tell you , the colleges are viewing the students as just a con to it .
because the students get government money , passes through but the number gets higher and higher .
because college costs are out of control , because the colleges say what difference does it make ?
if you take a look at the salaries being paid , you take a look at what 's going on with the colleges .
because all of this is a pass through and the students are a con to it .
so the colleges are costing so much money .
we are going to help the students .
maybe that does n't fit beautifully within the republican framework .
but i told this during various times to lots of different people and nobody has a problem with it .
we have to help our students .
our students are under tremendous pressure to a point where it 's making them sick .
our students are under tremendous pressure , we have to help our students .
and i 'm going to have a plan over the next four weeks .
everything 's on the table , you 'll see .
everything -- it 's a very important -- it 's a very important subject .
yes , ma'am ?
i think my message is resonating because they have confidence on me at the border , if they do n't want people pouring into our country .
likewise , they have confidence with me on isis , not only in terms of getting rid of them but also in terms of keeping them out of our country because i will not have people come into our country who want to do damage to our people .
i think they have a lot of confidence in terms of my bringing back jobs because i see carrier and i see ford and i see all of these companies leaving and going to mexico like there 's nothing to it .
and then they make their product , they sell it back to the united states , no tax , no nothing , we get nothing except unemployment .
and i think people see that .
i can tell you i mean i 'm like a pollster myself when i 'm in front of these massive audiences , one of the things that gets constantly -- you people know because you 're there -- the biggest applause is a repeal and replacement of obamacare .
because obamacare is a disaster .
in texas , going through bluecross / blueshield they just announced a 60 percent increase .
on november 1st , you 're going to have new numbers come out for obamacare , having to do with increases .
president obama is trying to get it moved to december .
because it is election - defying .
it is going to be a massive number , the biggest number ever in our country 's history for health care .
it 's going to be announced on november 1st .
i just asked the press , do n't let him do that .
obamacare is a disaster , people are dying with it .
it 's a disaster and everybody knows and it 's going to fold , anyway .
in ' 17 unfortunately -- if i 'm president -- i mean i 've got to take over this mess .
it 's going to fold , anyway .
but repeal and replace obamacare , people like it .
they like the fact that i 'm going to protect the second amendment , they like the fact that i 'm going to rebuild our military which is very depleted .
those are the things that are resonating .
and they do n't feel hillary clinton can do it .
john , go ahead , john .
no , i have nothing to do with russia , john .
how many times do i have say that ?
are you a smart man ?
i have nothing to with russia , i have nothing to do with russia .
and even -- for anything .
what do i have to do with russia ?
you know the closest i came to russia , i bought a house a number of years ago in palm beach , florida .
palm beach is a very expensive place .
there was a man who went bankrupt and i bought the house for $ 40 million and i sold it to a russian for $ 100 million including brokerage commissions .
so i sold it .
so i bought it for 40 , i told it for 100 to a russian .
that was a number of years ago .
i guess probably i sell condos to russians , ok ?
of course i can .
i told you , other than normal stuff -- i buy a house if i sold it to a russian .
i have nothing to do with russia .
i said that putin has much better leadership qualities than obama , but who does n't know that ?
of course not .
i own the trump organization .
zero , zero .
go ahead .
i am .
i did .
i did .
because i would love to see a woman become president of the united states .
but she would be so wrong .
and even women say that .
women do n't like her .
she would be so wrong .
look , hillary clinton is a disaster .
she 's been a disaster .
and even the story told by her husband last night , he left out the most interesting chapter .
i wo n't get into that .
the chapter that i really waited for , because it was pretty boring , the chapter that i waited for , i never heard .
and he left it out .
look , hillary clinton 's a disaster .
i 'd love to see a woman become president and it 'll happen , absolutely .
but i think it would be bad for women if it were hillary clinton .
yes ma'am ?
yes , i do .
but i have spoken to about many times and i speak about it all the time and the police have to be very careful , they have to be very , very well trained .
i speak about it all the time , in fact i mentioned the most recent death , excuse me , i mentioned the most recent deaths in louisiana and in minnesota .
i speak about it all the time .
it 's a real problem because if the police do 100,000 great jobs and they have one , either a rogue policeman or a cop who was poorly trained or did a bad job , you see that incident on television for weeks .
it 's a real problem .
you do n't see the good work that they do but if they make one mistake out of 100,000 , out of more than that , it 's on television night after night after night .
the police in this country do an amazing job but likewise i agree and i do mention that all the time .
yes , ma'am , go ahead .
oh , go ahead , go ahead .
yes .
no , but they seem to be , if it 's russians .
i have no idea .
it 's probably not russia .
nobody knows if it 's russia .
you know the sad thing is ?
that with the technology and the genius we have in this country , not in government unfortunately , but with the genius we have in government , we do n't even know who took the democratic national committee e - mails .
we do n't even know who it is .
i heard this morning , one report said they do n't think it 's russia , they think it might be china .
another report said it might be just a hacker , some guy with a 200 i.q. that ca n't get up in the morning , ok ?
nobody knows .
honestly they have no idea if it 's russia .
might be russia .
but if it 's any foreign country , it shows how little respect they have for the united states .
yes , ma'am .
yes .
well , and   the biggest thing is number one we have to stop by keeping people out because these people , they 've got something bad going on up there .
that 's something really bad going on .
and then people in terms of islam and radical islamic terrorism , a term that our president refuses to use , i ca n't he 's still not using it .
he 's still not using it .
and she does n't want to use it other than i forced her into maybe using it .
she said she will use it but so far she did n't .
she 'll probably use it tonight .
like the american flags , as soon as we put out a thing they ran a couple of american flags up in the stage , it was a disgrace .
you had a room with a massive stage without flags .
i think this -- i think that the people in the community know what 's going on .
whether it 's in a mosque or whether it 's in the community and they have to report these people .
when you look at san bernardino , people knew -- many people knew what was going on .
they had bombs lying all over the floor .
they had bombs on the floor .
i mean , this is n't -- you walk into somebody 's house , there are bombs lying on the floor -- i think there 's a problem there .
you got to report it .
and by the way , david hinckley should not have been freed , ok ?
david hinckley was just released -- john hinckley -- i think that john hinckley -- excuse me , john hinckley , should not have been freed .
i just heard about it .
that 's up to the president .
let the president talk to them .
look , here 's the problem .
here 's the problem , katy .
katy , here 's the problem , very simple .
he has no respect ... 

  well , they probably have them .
i 'd like to have them released .
no , it gives me no pause .
if they have them , they have them .
we might as well -- hey , you know what gives me more pause ?
that a person in our government , crooked hillary clinton -- here 's what gives me pause .
be quiet .
i know you want to save her .
that a person in our government , katy , would delete or get rid of 33,000 e- mails .
that gives me a big problem .
after she gets a subpoena !
she gets subpoenaed , and she gets rid of 33,000 e - mails ?
that gives me a problem .
now , if russia or china or any other country has those e - mails , i mean , to be honest with you , i 'd love to see them .
that 's the most ridiculous conversation .
he never had the -- don jr. told me -- let me just tell you .
let me save you a lot of boredom .
mike pence will play a big role , but i just want to tell you about john kasich .
i never spoke to him about being vice president .
we do n't have good chemistry together .
i have never spoken to him about being vice president .
i would never pick him to be vice president .
there was never a conversation , and he has a habit of doing things like this where he says things that may be a little bit shaky .
he never spoke -- don jr. would never -- and that was so long ago , i did n't even know i was going to get the nomination at that point .
just so you understand , i would not have picked john kasich , would n't be the right guy .
i mean , for that to have gotten out , that was so ridiculous .
and then , i was going to put him in charge of national and worldwide policy .
so what 's left for the president ?
i think you know me better than that .
that was put out by him .
he 's a nice man , john kasich , he 's fine .
he 's fine .
i would never have chosen him .
now , i did speak to various people and i actually got acceptances from many people .
there are some people that called me that very much wanted to be vice president , but i picked a man that i have a lot of respect for and mike pence is doing a great job .
let me just explain -- i never asked john kasich to be vice president , nor would i. and by the way , i 'm leading in ohio by three points .
it probably has .
it probably has .
our government is so weak on this stuff .
it probably has .
possible .
i mean , i have a lot of checks and balance .
i have a good system , i guess .
i 'm not an e- mail person , myself .
i do n't believe in it , because i think it can be hacked , for one thing .
but when i send an e - mail , i mean , if i send one , i send one almost never .
i 'm just not a believer in e - mail .
a lot of people have taught me that , including hillary .
but honestly , it could be , maybe it 's hacked .
who knows ?
yes , but my message was n't dark .
my message was optimistic , because we 're going to fix the problems .
go ahead .
ok .
no basis .
no basis .
look , john , i did n't have to do this .
when i did this , believe me -- you see this incredible resort .
it 's one of the great in the world .
when i did this , i could be here enjoying myself .
i do n't have to be with you guys .
i did n't need this .
i have places that are the best in the world , ok .
i could be doing other things .
i 'm doing this because we 're going to make america great again .
i 'm doing this because when i looked at the iran deal , which was incompetent -- when i looked at what 's going on with jobs being torn out of our country and going to mexico and china , what 's happening with china .
and with all of this , with isis , with our military being so badly depleted where we have old fighter jets .
we have to take parts from museums and from graveyards .
when i look at all this i say i sort of have to do it .
you know this country 's been great to me .
i 'm giving back .
that 's all .
now as far as running a campaign , i guess it 's probably not typical .
but they said that against , you know when i ran there was 17 people , a total of 17 .
governors , senators , ben carson who 's a fantastic guy , capable people .
wait a minute .
everybody said , oh he can never win because look what he 's doing .
he 's giving a talk to 5,000 people in new hampshire instead of going to everybody 's house and having dinner .
and then i won new hampshire .
and then i won you know 38 or 39 states .
and won by the way , not by a little bit .
won with the highest vote in the history of the republican party .
so just ... 

  ok but john but the point is this , so it 's a different kind of a campaign .
but it 's what i think is good .
i think it 's good .
i think it 's working here too .
well , when joe biden says that i want to firebomb the enemy , which was on television this morning , or carpet bomb .
he used the term carpet bomb .
when he makes the statement that donald trump wants to carpet bomb , i never said that .
that was ted cruz that said that ok ?
that was ted cruz , was n't me .
when sanders , and i think a lot of his people are going to come to me because of trade .
but when bernie sanders makes a statement that i wanted to go lower than the minimum wage , lower , it 's a lie .
so i have a choice .
all my people say do n't respond to it , it does n't matter .
i say to me it does matter .
it matters .
when people tell lies , politicians who tell lies very well , that 's what they do , that 's why they 're politicians .
but when politicians tell lies , and i 'm lucky in a sense because i have a big microphone .
in other words i can say that biden lied when he said that .
or i can say that i did n't say that , bernie sanders .
and you guys know that i did n't .
in fact he was criticized by people that fact check for saying it because i never said it .
so it 's nice to be able to , president obama said a year - and - a- half ago , donald trump will never be president .
today on " the today show " he said , this is democracy .
a little bit different .
little bit different .
david , go ahead dave .
you 'll have to see it in the polls david .
you know what my positions are .
you 'll have to see it at the polls .
yeah go ahead .
david my positions are down .
you ask the question every single time .
i give you an answer .
my positions are down .
take a look .
go ahead .
yes i did .
we wanted to , yeah , i do n't know what he said .
but we wanted ...  
  excuse me , listen .
we wanted to ; we were doing miss universe 4 or 5 years ago in russia .
it was a tremendous success .
very , very successful .
and there were developers in russia that wanted to put a lot of money into developments in russia .
and they wanted us to do it .
but it never worked out .
frankly i did n't want to do it for a couple of different reasons .
but we had a major developer , particular , but numerous developers that wanted to develop property in moscow and other places .
but we decided not to do it .
yes ma'am go ahead .
he did say that .
well , i just said sort of said that .
he just said that .
he said it this morning , anything 's possible .
i think i 'm going to win .
i think people are sick and tired of incompetence .
they 're sick and tired of having politicians leading them down the tubes .
whether it 's taxes , whether it 's debt , whether it 's any one of 15 different things .
and that 's why .
i mean i think i 'll win the election .
i think you 'll see that in the polls .
all right a few more questions .
go ahead john .
i hope your arm 's ok .
well , it 's a tradition but i do n't do things that are traditional .
but i have great support from israel .
i will back israel 100 percent .
i would like to go there .
but i have great relationships as you know , to the people in israel .
and by the way , obama in my opinion is the single worst thing politically speaking that 's ever happened to israel .
he has been a disaster for israel .
i do n't know .
i do n't know .
i have n't set my schedule yet .
it could happen .
no , i think we -- it 's possible we have .
but i 'm not -- i 'm only interested in winning .
once i win , i 'll get along great with foreign leaders , but they wo n't be taking advantage .
i mean , the problem we have with foreign leaders , whether it 's china , russia , or anybody , they do n't respect our leadership .
and certainly in the case of china , they take tremendous economic advantage of us -- tremendous , to a point that is hard to believe .
i 'll get along great with the leadership .
and we 'll do well .
yes , ma'am , in the back ?
no , no .
excuse me .
in the back ?
we 'll be looking at that .
yeah , we 'll be looking .
go ahead .
federal .
right .
i 'm not making it a part .
but at some point , maybe people will change their minds , but as of right now , i 'm not making it a part .
ok .
yes , ma'am ?
go ahead .
who said that ?
who ?
i think president obama has been the most ignorant president in our history .
his views of the world , as he says , do n't jive .
and the world is a mess .
you look at what 's happening with the migration , with syria , with libya , with iraq , with everything he 's touched .
he has been a disaster as a president .
he will go down as one of the worst presidents in the history of our country .
it is a mess .
and i believe that hillary clinton will be even worse .
go ahead .
oh ,   just said that ?
many polls show that you are winning ?
i ca n't believe it .
are you katy turek   of nbc ?
it 's a disguise .
go ahead .
ok .
well , .
sure .
well , you 've been asking me a lot of questions for a lot of times .
i 've turned out to be right .
i turned out to be right on nato .
after i said that on nato , nato changed their whole program because of me .
excuse me , katy , hillary clinton said yesterday she 's going to start renegotiating trade deals .
she never said that in her life .
she said it yesterday only because of me .
i 'm the one that 's prepared .
president obama when he became president , he did n't know anything .
this guy did n't know a thing .
and honestly , today he knows less .
today , he knows less .
he 's done a terrible job .
i think i 'm very prepared .
now , with that being said , i 've been a businessman all my life , but i 've been watching it .
i 've been seeing it .
i 've been feeling .
and as you know , i 've been very much involved in politics from the other side .
i understand politics or i guess i would n't be here .
i mean , i beat a lot of very talented people .
i do .
i have great foreign advisers .
and you have a list .
and i gave you a list .
and the other day , as an example , general quinn and general flynn , and we have so many -- we have so many .
as an example , i had a meeting three or four days ago , and i 'm going to do a report on it , with seven or eight very , very talented advisers .
now , with all of that being said , a lot of people want the people that are doing it now ; people that have certain names .
look at the mess they 've gotten us into .
they said , " have you spoken to so and so ? "
well , i said , but he was in favor of the war in iraq many years ago , which i was not in favor of . "
have you spoken to this one or that one ? "
i said , they were all -- look at the job they 've done .
so a lot of the people that you think are good because you know their name or because you see them on television , i do n't think are good .
because look at the end result .
the end result is our country is a mess .
the middle east has never been worse .
had we done nothing with the middle east ; had our presidents , with an " s , " gone to the beach and relaxed , we 'd be in better shape than we are right now .
all right , tom .
a couple more .
go ahead , tom .
yeah .
well , we 'll have to see .
i mean , that 's my opinion .
that 's my opinion .
we 'll have to see .
i have a real problem when hillary clinton , who gives open access to a phony server , is allowed to get these briefings .
how does hillary clinton get a national security briefing when she 's been probably hacked , when so much of her information , the director of the fbi said it was essentially negligent .
it was negligent .
now why are they giving her briefings , why are these people with great knowledge of the inner workings of our country and our security , why are they giving hillary clinton briefings ?
because it 's going to get revealed .
i mean her number one person , huma abedin , is married to anthony weiner , who 's a sleazeball and a pervert .
and i 'm not saying that , i mean that 's recorded history , right ?
i do n't like huma going home at night and telling anthony weiner all of these secrets , ok ?
so how can hillary clinton be briefed on this unbelievably delicate information when it was just proven that she lied and that her server should n't have had it and that they 're missing 33,000 e - mails and that 's just the beginning .
so i do n't think that i know at some point , they 're going to be calling , they 're going to want to brief me , but i 'm not a talker about this stuff .
i do n't think that it 's safe to have hillary clinton , in light of what just happened , and in light of what we just found out , i do n't think it 's safe to have hillary clinton be briefed on national security because the word will get out .
no .
he 's not going to run for mayor .
oh , don ?
he 's not going to run for mayor .
don   has no attention of running for mayor .
but he did a great job the other night with his speech .
because he made a good speech , everyone says he should run for mayor .
you know why ?
because we have a democratic mayor who 's horrible , he 's doing a horrible job , de blasio .
but don   is not going to run for -- he has no interest in running for mayor .
yes .
unbelievable what he said .
i think it 's disgraceful .
hillary clinton , because of me , said that tpp is not going to happen .
but we all know it is going to happen if she won .
terry mcauliffe said with a wink that if hillary gets in , she 's lying and it will happen .
and there is nobody closer , i know this for a fact , there is nobody , including her own husband , closer to hillary clinton than terry mcauliffe , ok ?
go ahead .
oh i do n't know what he said , jon , i really -- anthony weiner 's -- look , look , look -- anthony weiner is a proven loser .
i mean the poor guy , he 's locked up in a room .
they lock him up in a room , they do n't let him out .
i do n't know what anthony -- my son does n't want to run for mayor .
he has no intention of running for mayor .
and besides that , as a republican , you have a very tiny sliver in manhattan , as you know , and in that area .
it 's almost impossible for a republican to win .
so , and my son likes to win , but my son has no intention of running for mayor so let 's just put that to bed .
go ahead .
yes , in   very sad .
not .
yes , i 'm looking at it .
i actually want to find out what causes it .
it 's a problem in many areas , ok ?
yes , go ahead .
well , they shouted -- you know what was interesting .
yesterday i made a speech in front of the great veterans as you saw , and it was very well received , she was there the day before .
and when i started talking about hillary clinton , the veterans who saw her 24 hours before , started screaming , " lock her up !
lock her up !
lock her up . "
they also screamed that , as you know , during the speech i made .
the big speech .
and i said , " do n't do that . "
now , i did n't do that for any reason .
i really -- i did n't like it .
and they stopped .
not one reporter said that i said that .
they all said -- they started screaming " lock her up !
lock her up . "
i said , " do n't do that . "
nobody reported that i said that , because it 's dishonest reporting .
you do agree i said that , right ?
ok .
well , why did n't somebody report that ?
no , i think it 's -- i think it 's a shame that they said it , but a lot of people would say that should happen .
ok , one more question , yes -- yes , ma'am , go ahead .
well , doral is great .
and doral -- i think i have over 1,000 hispanics working at doral , and they 're doing a great job .
yes , ma'am , in the yellow , go ahead .
yellow .
excuse me .
yellow .
who ?
no , i do n't think it has any impact .
he 's been very bad -- her running mate has been very , very bad on employment .
and all you have to do is go to virginia and speak to the people of virginia , he has been so bad .
i figured when she chose him , he was very popular in virginia .
they do n't like him .
they do n't like him .
it has been very close races , and his polling is very bad .
so , ladies and gentlemen , thank you very much .
i think it 's time for hillary clinton to do a news conference , because it 's almost a year now and it would be interesting to see how she does .
thank you all very much .
might as well tell him to have a good time .
he has done one bad job .
ok , thank you , everybody .
i want to tell you , you happen to have a truly great governor .
and he said something that really caught my imagination .
he used the term " the queen of corruption . "
i think we 're going to have to ...   ... we 're going to have to use that a little bit .
she is the queen of corruption .
so , as you -- thank you , thank you .
thank you , man   thank you .
thank you very much .
it 's very nice .
it 's a very , very rambunctious and beautiful crowd , i will say .
wow .
that 's a lot of people .
that 's a lot of people , so thank you all very much .
this has just been amazing .
this has been an amazing , an amazing period of time .
no matter what we do , no matter where we go , it 's incredible .
we were in florida yesterday , two tremendous -- and just big , big arena sold out , packed , thousands of people outside could n't get in .
that 's the bad news .
but this is really nice .
and i have to tell you i woke up yesterday , and i saw $ 400 million , different currencies -- they probably do n't want our currency .
different currencies , $ 400 million being flown to iran .
i mean , folks , what 's going on here ?
what 's going on ?
what is going on ?
you see it .
you do n't believe it .
$ 400 million in cash is being flown in an airplane to iran .
i wonder where that money really goes by the way , right ?
i wonder where it really goes .
well , it went to , one , either in their pockets , which i actually think more so or toward terrorism , probably a combination of both .
so $ 400 million in cash , now you really -- who -- who can authorize even in terms of a president , who can authorize $ 400,000 in cash , different currencies .
they did n't want the dollar .
they wanted different countries , different currencies .
they got a little of everything over there .
just   spread it around , right ?
i mean , how stupid are we -- how stupid are we to allow this to continue to go on , to see what 's happening ?
and you know it 's interesting because a tape was made , right ?
you saw that with the airplane coming in , nice plane .
and the airplane coming in , and the money coming off , i guess , right ?
that was given to us -- has to be by the iranians .
and you know why the tape was given to us ?
because they want to embarrass our country , they want to embarrass our country .
and they want to embarrass our president because we have a president who 's incompetent .
they want to -- they want to embarrass ...   ... they want to embarrass our president .
i mean , who would ever think that they would be taking all of this money off the plane and then providing us with a tape .
it 's only for one reason , and it 's very , very sad .
so , we have a lot of problems in our country .
we have border problems .
people are pouring into our country .
we have no idea who they are .
we have people -- we 're going to build a wall , folks .
do n't worry about it .
we 're building , yeah .
up here , you have tremendous heroin problems .
you have tremendous problems , comes from the southern border , but you have tremendous problems .
and i 'll tell you what , we 're going to get -- so we 're going to build a wall .
you know , we have another thing .
we have 16,500 -- you can do whatever you want .
do whatever you want .
do whatever you want .
well , you have to say , you know , a trump rally is the safest place in our country to be , believe me -- believe me , right ?
we do say .
but if we keep going the way it is , our whole country is becoming different .
they 're shooting our police at record levels .
you saw where i said in my speech 50 percent higher , and then they went out , and they looked ... ai n't that amazing ?
ai n't that amazing ?
sorta rude .
you know , when you think of it -- and what are we looking for ?
we want strong military .
we want jobs .
we want good education , health care , right ?
we 're all like looking for the first .
we 're looking for the same thing sort of you want to have a good life .
you want to have a good life .
you want safety , and then we have people interrupting constantly .
but actually , it has n't been happening much .
it 's happening a little bit today , but it has n't been happening much .
i sort of missed my protesters , you know .
and we do n't get it from hillary because there 's no -- you know , the bernie people had spirit .
we do n't get it from hillary because they do n't care .
they do n't care .
but you look at what 's happening in terms of our police where they 're shooting our police at record levels -- 50 percent up .
and i said 50 percent , it 's actually much higher than that from last year .
so , we need law and order .
we have to have it .
we have to have it .
we need law and order .
we got to protect our police .
and our police have to be careful , and they have to do their job and they have to do it correctly , and they will do it correctly , but we have to take care of our police .
i 'll tell you .
they 're really going through a tough time .
so , i wrote a little thing down that i thought i 'd have because in light of the $ 400 million that just got ripped away from our country , all right ?
and , you know , the real number -- you look at it , $ 150 billion , we got nothing .
we got nothing .
and they think they probably paid the $ 400 million for the hostages , which is even worse .
and now since then , i do n't know if you know , we have two more hostages right now .
why would n't they ?
we have two more hostages right now who were fairly recently grabbed , and they 're in iran .
and i guess , what are we going to do with that one , right ?
so they do $ 400 million , gets flown at night into iran .
i think it 's so sad and so disgusting .
and you also wonder about a government , who can approve a thing like that ?
will they take cash into a country and just hand it to them ?
bushels and bushels of cash .
and then you look at our country where we owe $ 20 trillion as i used to say 18 , used to say 17 .
when i started , i was saying 16 and 17 .
now it 's 18 and 19 .
now it 's going to very soon be 20 .
it 's going to be 22 very soon because we have a budget that is very , very expensive , but it does n't take good care of our military .
our military is depleted , and we have to fix our military and i know for the -- for the navy .
one of the reporters was talking about -- one of the reporters -- how do you feel about building ships because you have a lot of ships you 're building up here , good ones , right ?
so our navy , as you know , has one of the lowest numbers of ships that they 've had in decades and decades .
and we 've got to rebuild our navy .
we 've got to rebuild our whole military , folks , and we 're going to do it ...   ... probably almost never have needed it more than we need it now with all of the people out there that do n't like us very much .
and we 're going to be very strong , we 're going to be very smart .
we 're going to build up our military .
it 's so depleted .
we 're going to take care of our vets .
we 're going to take care of our vets .
our vets -- our vets are so badly treated .
you look at what 's going on where they wait on the line six , seven , eight days .
think of it .
you 're not a vet , think of it .
in the audience , think of it , six , seven , eight days .
people are dying on the line waiting for doctors and committing suicide .
the suicides are at numbers that nobody has ever thought possible .
we 're going to take care of our vets .
i put a plan , and people are loving the plan .
people are loving the plan .
and if you 're waiting , if you 're waiting on the line for an extended period of time , you 're going to walk outside , you 're going to go to a doctor who 's looking for business .
you 're going to go to a hospital , private or public , you 're going to get taken care of and it 's going to be less expensive .
the government is going to pay the bill .
it 's going to be far less expensive than what 's been happening .
people are dying , waiting on the line for a simple pill or a simple prescription .
they are dying .
our great veterans are dying waiting on the line , and we 're not going to do it .
we 're not going to do it .
no more , no more .
so , i wrote a few things down and i -- to isis , ok , huge portions .
we do n't know .
is isis coming into our country ?
with all of the people that are pouring in , we have no idea who they are .
we have absolutely no -- you know the harm they want to inflict .
you look at what 's taking place in our country -- san bernardino and orlando .
and look at what -- what 's going on all over the world .
i mean , look at the world trade center .
look at what 's happening .
look at what 's happening .
oh , boy .
the wildlife , so you look at what we 've sacrificed and what we 've given up , and the level of viciousness where heads are being chopped off , where people are being drowned in steel cages .
we have n't seen this since medieval times .
i mean , you know , i love history .
we talk about medieval times and you would never have thought you would have seen the things we 're seeing today , and it 's gotten out of control .
and obama has let it get out of control .
and then you have hillary 's made tremendous mistakes in every way .
i guarantee you this , if obama had it to do again , he would have never picture -- never as secretary of state because he has gotten ...   ... into such trouble with the decision that she probably made or convinced him to make that it 's ridiculous .
so , the obama - clinton foreign policy has handed huge portions of iraq , libya , and syria to isis .
i mean , huge portions , undermining the stability and strength in egypt and empowered iran as never before .
iran is like this major power .
and when they made this horrible deal , why did n't they solve other problems with iran ?
you know , iran is fighting us in other places , right ?
they 're fighting us in other places .
why we did n't we say , wait a minute , we 're giving you back all of this money .
we 're giving you all .
it is a horrible deal in every way .
we got nothing in that deal .
we got our hostages back and now we find out what we actually paid for the hostages and it was in cash , which is terrible , because that sets a terrible , terrible precedent .
and it 's just sickening and you 'll have four more years of obama if you elect hillary clinton ...   ... four more years .
the most important issues facing civilization right now is radical islamic terrorism , and we have a president ...   ... we have a president that wo n't use the term , wo n't say it .
he wo n't say it .
maybe he does n't believe it .
he right now thinks that global warming is the greatest threat that this world has .
so we 've just seen many , many crimes getting worse all the time and as maine knows , a major destination for somali refugees , right ?
am i right ?
well , they 're all talking about it -- maine , somali refugees .
we admit hundreds of thousands , you admit , into maine and to other places in the united states , hundreds of thousands of refugees .
and they 're coming from among the most dangerous territories and countries anywhere in the world , right , a practice which has to be -- has to stop , has to stop .
this is n't like you 're smarter than other people or ...   ... this is a practice that has to stop .
not like we say , oh , let 's do something .
we want to be nice , and we want to -- as in the case of syria , we 'll build safe havens .
we 'll do something .
we 'll get other nations that are near the gulf states as an example .
they do n't spend money .
they do n't spend money .
they do n't take people .
we take people .
they do n't take people and they 're right there to spend money .
believe me , folks , they 're going to spend money .
they would n't be there if it were n't for us .
so the washington times reported of a somali refugee program in minnesota that the effort to resettle large groups of somali refugees is having the unintended consequence of creating an enclave of immigrants with high unemployment that is both stressing the states -- i mean , the state is having tremendous problems -- its safety net and creating a rich pool of potential recruiting charges for islamist terror groups .
it 's happening -- it 's happening .
you see it happening .
you read about it .
you see it and you could be smart , and you can be cunning and tough or you can be very , very dumb and not want to see what 's going on , folks .
all you have to do is take a look at what 's happening in germany , ok ?
it 's a mess .
it 's a mess .
take a look -- take a look at what 's happening in france .
take a look at what 's happening in france .
two weeks ago , nice -- you remember in paris .
in paris we had the disaster , 130 people viciously violently killed .
and by the way , if you had some guns on the other side of that equation , it would n't happen .
believe me , you would n't have had the tragedy that you have .
remember this , hillary clinton essentially wants to take away your rights under the second amendment .
she wants to take away your guns .
she wants to take away those bullets .
she wants to take away your rights .
now the national rifle association not only endorsed me , they endorsed me , i think , earlier than anybody they have ever endorsed .
we need to protect our second amendment .
we have to do it , we have to do it .
believe me -- believe me , you 're going to have things happening with you -- if she gets in , remember , justices of the supreme court -- very important -- so it goes along with that second amendment because they 'll be ruling very negatively ...   ... if you put her there .
very important , i said to a friend of mine , i said , " well , you have to vote . "
he 's a democrat , so you have to vote for me .
why ?
number one , i 'm your friend .
he said , " you 'll be the first republican i 'll ever voted for that 's , ok . "
but i said justices of the supreme court , she will put because she was forced so far left .
she will put super , super liberal judges into what could be four or five slots .
i mean , you have one before you 've even started -- judge scalia who 's terrific , but you have a situation where she could have or the next president could have as many as five .
more likely it will be three or four , but it 's going to be perhaps a record number of justices of the supreme court .
and if no other reason you have to go out and you have to vote for trump , right ?
so just few other instances , the boston bombers , remember the boston bombers ?
what a horrible thing that was .
arrived through the political asylum process , right ?
the younger brother applied for citizenship and was naturalized on september 11 , 2012 .
the older brother had a pending application for citizenship .
oh , that 's wonderful .
we take them , right ?
we take them .
and you see what happened .
how violent and how vicious and how horrible was that ?
ok .
and if they 're not here , we do n't have that incident , which killed so many and so badly wounded so many .
and what i said -- and what i said is so true .
so many of these -- you look at san bernardino , what i said is so true , second amendment .
if guns , a couple , one where on one of the people , two of the people , three of the people in san bernardino so the bullets are flying in the opposite direction .
number one , they probably would not have made the attack .
and number two , if they were -- right ?
and number two , the carnage -- and it was carnage , 14 people killed , many , many people in the hospital even to this day it would n't have happened or it certainly would have been a lot less .
and we have to get smart .
this is the way the world works , and we have to get smart .
and , you know , in paris where they walked in -- and the same with san bernardino , they walked in .
no guns they knew , and they go boom , boom , get over , boom , boom , boom .
130 , the other case 14 , and we have many other cases .
and this is all over the world now , this is now all over the world .
and we are letting people come in from terrorist nations that should n't be allowed because you ca n't vet them .
there 's no way of vetting them .
you have no idea .
this could be the great trojan horse of all time .
a moroccan national who came to the united states on a student visa was arrested for plotting to blow up a university and a federal courthouse .
ubek , you know where that is .
you know where it is ?
uzbek refugee living in idaho was arrested and charged with providing support to a terrorist organization in the form of teaching terror , and this is what they do -- teaching terror recruits how to build bombs .
wonderful , wonderful .
i do n't want them in this country .
wonderful , wonderful .
and by the way , you got to turn these people in .
you got to turn -- you know , when you go to san bernardino , they had bombs all over the floor of the apartment .
people saw those bombs .
they did n't turn them in .
those people are guilty of a crime believe me .
an immigrant from syria who later applied and received united states citizenship was accused by federal prosecutors of planning to go to a military base in texas and killed three or four american soldiers but preferably execution style .
we 're dealing with animals -- preferably execution style .
a college student who immigrated from somalia who later applied for and received u.s. citizenship attempted to blow up a christmas tree with the lighting at a major ceremony in oregon .
an immigrant from afghanistan who later applied for and received u.s. citizenship and a legal permanent resident from the philippines were convicted for plotting to join al - qaeda and the taliban in order to kill as many americans as possible .
hillary clinton wants to have them come in by the hundreds of thousands .
just remember , this has nothing to do with politics , folks .
this is a whole different level .
this has to do with pure raw stupidity , ok ?
an iraqi immigrant who later applied for and received u.s. citizenship was arrested for lying to federal agents about pledging allegiance to isis and has traveled to syria , wanted to kill as many americans as possible , did n't care how , did n't care how , any way he could do it .
two immigrants from pakistan who later applied for and received u.s. citizenship were sentenced to decades - long prison terms for plotting to detonate a bomb in the middle of new york city .
an immigrant from yemen who were , by the way , were fighting -- were fighting .
were working -- we 're working with one side .
we have no idea who this side is .
you know , we spend billions and billions on equipment and guns and rifles , and then the enemy has them .
we spend millions and tens of millions of dollars on all of this equipment .
and as soon as the shots fired , you know , we always go -- we always seem to pick the wrong side in terms of winning because we do n't win anymore .
but , you know , iran is on the other side of that , right ?
so you say to yourself , why -- you know , they want yemen because of the border between saudi arabia .
they do n't want yemen .
they want what they want as they want the oil in saudi arabia .
they have a very beautiful , big , big drill .
when they look at it , right ?
so , here we are , $ 150 billion , and you say to yourself why , and they ask secretary of state kerry , why did n't they solve that problem ?
we 're fighting and our side is fighting people led by iran .
why did n't you solve that problem ?
why did n't you make a deal when you 're making this horrible deal that you made while we lost everything ?
we did n't get anything .
that 's a deal we did n't get anything .
they say nuclear weapons , they 'll have nuclear weapons much faster because of that deal than they would have had them otherwise .
and now they can buy them with all the money they get and they can buy them .
what do they have to do with them ?
they can buy them .
they 'll have nuclear weapons .
believe me , i 've called a lot of shots right mostly , believe me .
mostly i 've called them ...   ... just about all right , including not going into iraq in the first place and destabilizing the middle east .
but when secretary kerry who is probably better than crooked hillary , but who knows ?
they both terrible .
but when he said -- and when the president asked them about this , why did n't they solve their problem when they solved the other ?
he said , " it got too complicated . "
ok , got too complicated .
here 's what we have , really complicated , get out .
we do n't want to fight over there .
we 're going to solve -- you solve the problem or you do n't solve the problem .
all right .
an immigrant from yemen who later applied for and received u.s. citizenship was arrested for trying to join isis .
he was also charged with attempting to illegally buy firearms and to try and shoot american military personnel as many as possible .
ok .
these are people we have coming into our country .
and by the way , they are the ones we know about .
there are so many that we do n't know about .
you 're going to have problems like you 've never seen just like i said .
the one thing i predicted , i predict is you 're going to have problems like you 've never seen .
we do n't know where these people are .
you know , when the government puts them around , we do n't even , for the most part , very few people know where they even are .
they do n't even know where they are located .
i 'm telling you , i said it before , this could be the great trojan horse of all time .
they 're coming in .
they 're coming in .
and you have many more like that , many more -- thousands , thousands , thousands .
we have more people right now being looked at by the fbi and others than we 've ever had in the history of our country , ok ?
and it 's impossible to do this .
thousands of people are being looked at and studied , thousands .
and this is what we 're living with .
and she wants to allow 550 percent more than obama has allowed coming into the country .
so if you want to -- if you want to let her do it , folks , that 's going to be your choice , but i think you 're making a very big mistake .
hillary clinton , furthermore , can never be trusted with national security .
ca n't .
in fact , we 're both supposed to be briefed in a not too distant future , and i 'm saying you ca n't brief her .
you ca n't brief her .
let 's protest .
her email scandal put our entire country at risk , made our sensitive secrets vulnerable to hacking by foreign adversaries .
i mean , they hacked all over the place .
they hacked .
i guess , who 's got them ?
she lost 33,000 emails .
what happened ?
thirty - three thousand , ok .
so what -- what happened ?
how is it possible ?
first of all , what kind of a number is that ?
she said it was the wedding and yoga .
and then they accused her of lying .
they said she lied .
they said she was negligent -- all these things .
and the other day this weekend , she went out and said , " no , no , no , i think you must have misunderstood . "
she 's a big problem .
i mean , she 's -- she 's -- i do n't know .
there 's something going on there .
look , look .
she has got a problem .
did you see this weekend when she was interviewed ?
she said , " no , i think you misunderstood .
no , we 're doing a lot . "
i 've never seen -- has anyone ever seen a liar like that ever before ?
she 's made everybody less safe .
those 33,000 emails are potentially a danger to our country .
and if anybody thinks that was for a wedding and for yoga ... ... and when she got away with that , i said , that 's probably the greatest accomplishment that she has ever had in politics .
and i think it 's a great insult to our country .
i think it 's a tremendous insult to our country and to law enforcement .
i see policemen and they come up to me , and the policemen like me for whatever reason , ok , maybe because i like them .
and they 're shaking their head .
they 're saying , " mr. trump was so embarrassed . "
it 's such an embarrassment what took place .
thirty - three thousand deleted or gone .
remember they used to say " wiped the server " ?
and what about the server ?
what about the server ?
how did that happen ?
how did that happen ?
and then they put petraeus and destroyed his life over nothing by comparison and many others .
and she walks , and then the president has a meeting for 39 minutes with a very important person in the back of an airplane and they talked about grandchildren and golf .
no , it 's sad .
and then deleted the emails to cover up her crime -- she deleted them to cover up her crime , folks , 100 percent , not 99 percent .
a hundred percent .
she deleted those emails to cover up what could be a major crime .
and it is actually a major crime .
i would watch it , i would read , and i found it very interesting .
i think the reason bernie sanders may be lost because it was so close .
and , you know , it 's a rigged system to start off with , ok , with the super delegates .
and i said he was going to -- but that day in the debate when he said , " no , no , let 's not worry about the emails .
let 's get , " you know , it sounded so nice as a sound bite .
had he gone the other way and had he demanded something , it would have been a whole different story .
i think that 's when he lost his primary election , i really do .
i believe that .
so in any line , he did sold out .
by the way , no offense , i know we have some bernie sanders people here actually .
do we have bernie sanders people here ?
i hear we do , yes .
so we 're going to get a lot of bernie sanders ' votes because of trade , because bernie sanders was right about one thing that i really believe -- not i believe in , it 's a fact .
we are dying with our trade deals .
our trade deals are a disaster .
our trade deals with other countries ...   ... we 're going to lose almost $ 800 billion this year in trade deficits with other countries .
china , alone , $ 500 billion .
he was right on that , he was right on that .
but had bernie sanders not made that deal , and he made the deal with the devil .
i 've said it before .
had he not made that deal -- and then she picked a vice presidential candidate , tim kaine -- tim kaine .
now , i thought he 'd be a really popular guy because i just left virginia .
i was in loudoun county , virginia .
we had a tremendous crowd of people -- tremendous crowd , great people .
i think that he 'd -- you know , really a popular guy .
he was n't popular .
you know , when he was governor of virginia , in the first week , he raised taxes by $ 4 billion .
does anyone know that ?
and unemployment doubled .
unemployment doubled under his governorship .
i mean -- and i said , oh , gee , are we going to have to sacrifice virginia ?
and people said , " no , i think you probably just won virginia .
he 's not popular at all . "
not popular at all .
and -- and by the way , we have a great vice president .
we have a great -- mike pence .
mike pence from indiana , aaa rating , one of the most incredible stories for any state .
indiana , great state , great people .
bobby knight endorsed me .
that was the end of that , right ?
bobby knight , great guy .
eight hundred -- 900 wins , but bobby knight is terrific , but indiana , the job that mike pence has done there has been amazing .
i mean , he 's aaa bond rating , you do n't see that very often .
not many states have that .
unemployment was just -- it was terrible , it was out of control .
then he -- and the previous republican governor , good guy .
they -- the job they have done has been absolutely astounding .
it 's one of the reasons i picked it , maybe the primary reason .
now i 'm seeing the incredible job he did .
he came to me , called me the other day .
he said , " do you mind ? "
because he likes paul ryan .
paul ryan is a good guy actually .
paul ryan is -- no , he 's a good guy .
so mike called me and he said -- yesterday and he said , " would you mind if i endorsed ? "
i wo n't do that if it could cause any complications or problems .
i would absolutely not .
he 's the greatest guy .
he 's the greatest human being .
and he said that .
he said -- but i like him .
he 's a friend of mine . "
would you mind if i endorsed him ?
and i will not do it if you say no . "
i said , " mike , you like him ?
yes , go ahead and do it 100 percent . "
and he endorsed him .
and then -- and then we have like a great relationship .
it 's short but , you know , it has n't been that long , but i 've known him through the campaign and then a couple of the papers , not all of them i must say , most of them wrote it legitimately , but a couple of them said , " there 's a fissure between pence and trump .
there 's a fissure , " it 's so dishonest .
these newspapers , the media folks , they are so dishonest .
there is nothing so dishonest .
there 's nothing .
really .
so -- so she deleted the emails to cover up her crime .
she lied about it all over , and over and over and over .
and most recently , she lied to chris wallace of fox .
i mean , it was a pure lie .
anybody that saw that interview , they would n't even believe it .
if i ever did that interview and if i ever gave that answer , i want to tell you i think i 'd get the electric chair , i swear .
i think i will .
it would be headlines all over the world .
it 's true -- double- standard .
this is n't a -- this is a quadruple standard .
seriously , if i ever gave the answer that she gave to chris wallace , it would be -- honestly , it would be pretty close to execution .
and you know what ?
maybe worse , horrible headlines , ok .
horrible .
it 's amazing .
you know , when she said that i said , " oh , this is going to be a big story .
it 's a story , but not very big . "
it 's lingering though , it 's lingering .
you know , it 's sort of like one of those things .
you ca n't get rid of it , right ?
it 's lingering .
but the press wants to get rid of it , but it 's lingering and it 's out there .
she lied -- boy , has she lied .
meanwhile , the obama - clinton economic disaster -- it 's an economic disaster -- has brought suffering across the nation .
nearly four in 10 african - american youth are living in poverty .
another two million latinos have joined the ranks of those in poverty .
nearly one in four people in their prime working years are now not working .
you see the numbers .
the numbers are very -- they 're out there for everyone to see .
the obama - clinton economy has been a total disaster for all working people , but especially people in the inner cities especially .
we 're going to bring back our jobs , folks .
we 're going to bring them back .
hillary clinton , and i 've been saying this for a long time .
hillary clinton works only for her donors , special interests , and lobbyists .
you have lobbyists that have stamped on their forehead i can produce hillary so -- and they 're very good .
and they raise millions of dollars .
did you see yesterday it was announced that hillary clinton got $ 48 million or so from hedge funds ?
and donald trump got $ 18,000 from hedge funds or $ 19,000 .
i 'm trying to figure out who they were .
i want to give it back .
who is it ?
folks , folks , look , there was nobody better at the game or certainly much better at the game than i was .
i was on the other side for a long time .
do n't forget on june 15 i was established .
on june 16 , when i announced that i was running coming down that now very famous escalator with melania , i announced ..   ... she did a great job -- did a great job with her speech .
she did and ivanka did , and eric did , and don did , and tiffany did .
great job .
they did a great job .
thank you .
that 's so -- i 'm going to tell them about those .
i 'm going to tell them about this .
wow , that 's so nice .
that 's so nice .
i 'm going to tell them about this .
they 'll be happy .
they worked hard on it and they were good .
they worked hard .
i think a couple of them now want to be politicians they felt so good up there , right ?
i told them do n't -- do n't do it .
it 's not .
but you know , speaking of politicians , we 've created a movement .
we have a movement going on like they have n't seen in this country ...   ... where major anchors and major political figures have said what trump has done , meaning what we have done together -- it 's a movement -- is perhaps the greatest political phenomenon they 've seen in their lifetime .
and i do n't want to think about it .
i just want to keep going .
but i 'll tell you everywhere we go , we have crowds like this .
we have -- i mean , it 's only constrained by the size of the theater or the arena .
you had to see -- honestly , you had to see florida last night .
you had to see -- thank you , i love you , too , darling .
you had to see ...   ... you had to see what was going on in pennsylvania , the love that was in pennsylvania who have been stripped of their jobs .
the nafta -- the nafta has been a disaster .
signed by bill clinton , the nafta has stripped pennsylvania of so many of their jobs , stripped everybody , stripped you folks , too .
but hillary clinton works only for our donors and special interests and you know that .
and her whole life , the clinton foundation -- you ever seen this , the clinton foundation like saudi arabia gives $ 25 million of the clinton foundation , right ?
and -- and then you wonder and people naively say , will she be good for the energy business ?
yes , she 's going to be good for the energy business in saudi arabia .
she 's going to make it impossible for our energy business .
and that 's the way it works .
i mean , it 's a sad thing .
she is going to be so good for the energy business of saudi arabia .
look , taxes , i 'm going to cut your taxes in half .
we 're going to cut your taxes .
we have the biggest tax decrease proposed by anybody running for the presidency .
that includes all of the republicans , all of the democrats .
we have the biggest one .
we are by far the biggest one .
so we 're going to have much lower taxes .
we 're going to cut our taxes very importantly .
we 're going to cut our taxes for the middle class .
we 're going to cut our taxes for business .
we 're going to have massive dollars pouring into this country , and we 're going to create jobs like we 've never seen before .
taxes are so high ...   ... that businesses can not produce jobs .
and one other thing , which is actually more important to these people -- to everybody -- regulations .
regulations are so bad they are so out of control that when i go around -- and it surprises me , frankly .
when i go around and i look at taxes and regulations , people , if they could only have one , they would cut the massive regulations .
they ca n't start businesses ...   ... and businesses they have ca n't thrive .
so we 're going to take that out , yeah .
we 're going to take that out .
we are going to make our country strong again .
we 're going to make our country powerful again .
you saw the two jetfighters that went down in the last short period of time ?
they 're old , they 're old .
they 're tired .
it was just announced today , two fighters went down .
they 're old .
they 're tired .
these are all fighters .
we sell fighters to other nations that are far better than what we have .
we do n't have -- look , folks .
we -- when we fix a part for some of our jetfighters that we 're currently using , they have to go to the plane graveyards .
they call them airplane graveyards to take them off old planes because they do n't make the parts anymore .
they 're too old .
we go to museums and take parts out of planes .
this is what we 're using to fight .
this is the united states of america .
this is what we 're using .
so here 's what we 're going to do .
i 've been up here a lot .
i 've been to maine a lot .
smaller number of you know what ...   ... we have a smaller -- what is it , four ?
four , right , four .
so we have -- but i 've been here a lot because we have such incredible people up here .
we have people that like donald trump ...   ... like donald trump .
we have people up here that are very , very proud of their country .
they want to see great things happen .
they know great things are going to happen .
they know great things are going to happen .
and -- and they want to see our country be safe , and we want to see safety , but we 're going to see many things .
we 're going to see many things .
and we want to see if we can win the whole state .
somebody was saying not four but you 'll get one .
and somebody else was saying , you know , what , i think you can get all four .
i think you can get all four , so we 'll see , we 'll see .
but as everybody knows , and i say it , and nobody ever challenges me .
you know , when i was young , i was going to high school , and we had wars , but we never lost a war .
we had never lost a war .
then all of a sudden you had the vietnam war and you had other wars , and you had -- now we never win anything .
we never win anything .
we do n't win anymore .
we do n't win with trade .
we do n't win for our vets .
we got to take care of our vets .
we got to take great care of our vets .
our military , we ca n't beat isis .
we ca n't beat isis .
can you imagine general douglas mcarthur ?
can you imagine general patton ?
these were tough , tough cookies .
and we had those people , we have them .
how about general flynn ?
we love general flynn , right ?
mike flynn .
we have those people .
but i guess , we 're not using them .
i guess , we 're not using them .
we ca n't defeat isis .
so here 's the story , folks .
yes , we can , you 're right .
very quickly .
who said that ?
that was very good .
thank you .
thanks .
so , we 're going to start winning again .
we 're going to win on trade .
we 're going to win with our military .
we 're going to knock the hell out of isis .
we 're going to win for our vets .
we 're going to win for our vets .
we 're going to win at the border and we 're going to build this beautiful , beautiful powerful big wall ...   ... and mexico is going to pay for that wall .
mexico is going to pay .
they know it .
mexico is going to pay for the wall , and that 's an easy one .
and you know why they 're going to pay ?
because mexico is making a fortune , the trade deficit .
i 'm not talking about the drugs pouring across , ok ?
we 're not even including that -- massive amounts of drugs .
you know , when i won new hampshire , i made a pledge .
who 's from new hampshire here ?
i love them .
so i made a pledge because i went around and it never made sense to me , you know , you see new hampshire and you do n't associate the beautiful streams and -- and all of the beautiful things that you see there , even the little roadways and -- and the forests , the lakes .
and i said to the people of new hampshire , what 's the biggest problem ?
they said heroin .
they said heroin .
it just does n't look like it , right ?
am i right ?
and i got to know the people and we had a tremendous victory in - that was my first victory -- first victory politically .
amazing people .
and i said to the people of new hampshire , " and if i win , we 're going to stop this poison from flowing in and destroying your children and others . "
and that 's what we 're going to do .
we need to stop it .
and then we have to help the people that are hooked because you have many , many people in this community , in new hampshire , all over -- all over the country not just new hampshire .
but somehow new hampshire because it just did n't seem like , you know , it 's so delicate , so beautiful .
this is so beautiful .
who would think that you 're loaded up with drugs in maine , and they 're coming mostly from the southern border ?
we 're going to stop it 100 percent .
we 're going to stop it , we 're going to stop it .
and then we 're going to work with people to get them unhooked .
we got to get them unhooked .
there 's tremendous problems .
we got to get them unhooked .
and that 's all over the country by the way .
but i really learned more about that problem from new hampshire than any place else .
so here 's the story , folks .
we 're going to start winning again .
we 're going to save our second amendment .
we 're going to get rid of common core .
you 're going to have your education locally .
you have your education locally .
save our second amendment .
and the bottom line is this .
you are going to be again very , very proud of your country .
very important .
you 're going to be hopefully very proud of your president .
we 're going to win again .
we 're going to win at every level , and we 're going to make america safe again .
we 're going to make america first .
remember , we do n't make america first , not anymore .
we do n't make america .
we 're more worried about other nations than we are ourselves , that 's why they 're ripping us off .
we 're using the wrong people .
we 're going to make america first .
we are going to make america great again .
thank you .
thank you everybody .
thank you .
thank you everybody .
thank you , everybody .
thank you .
thank you .
oh look at this .
boy , what a -- what a response from our greatest people .
thank you very much .
thank you .
well , at least i definitely know the military likes trump , right ?
that 's great , it 's -- you 're amazing people , are   great people and i very much appreciate it .
and speaking of that , we will have this week over 200 admirals and generals endorsing trump , and that to me is a fantastic honor .
in addition , we had 17 , now we have 19 folks congressional medal of honor recipients .
and to have that many is very unusual and a tremendous honor .
i 've met many of them over the last two weeks and that , to me , is just a great honor .
so i wanna thank everybody -- i wanna thank everybody in this room .
and it 's a privilege to be here this morning with you .
so many distinguished members of our services , and that 's really what you are , very , very highly distinguished members .
before we get started , we 're going to have a q&amp;a. in a little while , i 'd like to address one of the most important aspects of america 's national security , and that 's cyber security .
to truly make america safe , we must make cyber security a major priority , which i do n't believe we 're doing right now , for both government and the private sector .
cyber theft is the fastest growing crime in the united states by far .
as president , improving cyber security will be an immediate and top priority for my administration .
one of the very first things i will do is to order a thorough review of our cyber defenses and weaknesses .
we have very substantial weaknesses , including all vital infrastructures .
cyber attacks from foreign governments , especially china , russia , north korea along with non - state terrorist actors and organized criminal groups constitute one of our most critical national security concerns .
they 're leaning everything about us and we do n't have -- wanna have any servers in the basements , by the way folks .
has anybody here ...   has anybody in this group -- i know our congressmen has n't done it , has anybody put a server in their basement ?
oh boy , hillary clinton 's only -- hillary clinton 's only experience in cyber security involves her criminal scheme to violate federal law , engineering a massive cover up and putting the entire nation in harm 's way .
the fact that a former senator and secretary of state claimed not to know what the letter c means is just one more example of why she is totally unfit to hold the office of president .
totally unfit .
it 's interesting that during her fbi review , which took place on a massive holiday and which was n't recorded and lots of other things , that she went 39 times .
she did n't remember , she did n't remember .
she does n't remember anything .
she remembered practically nothing .
but when she has to remember something , she remembers .
it 's a very sad situation , i will tell you .
i 'm sure the folks in this room are not thrilled .
the scope of our cybersecurity problem is enormous .
our government , our businesses , our trade secrets and our citizens ' most sensitive information are all facing constant cyberattacks and reviews   by the enemy .
just consider some of these recent hacks , jpmorgan chase , massive bank , had 73 million e - mails stolen .
ebay was involved and gave up 150 million passwords .
target was attacked and gave up 40 million credit card numbers .
attacks like these are happening on a regular basis both in the united states and around the world , and the costs in terms of privacy , our security and our financial sector are truly extraordinary .
identity theft , financial laundering , as well as ransom and ransomware -- i mean , think of it -- all involving extortion of a hacked institution are becoming increasingly common .
they are extorting institutions .
incredibly , hackers were able to obtain at least 20 million identities of people who under fbi background and were under fbi background investigations .
the information hack contains facts discovered by the fbi in doing background checks for people seeking positions with the federal government .
it 's a treasure trove which can easily be used for blackmail and other reasons by the enemy .
the fact that this highly classified information of very , very important people in many cases was so poorly protected demonstrates that cybersecurity is just one more area where the obama administration has failed .
and speaking of failure , when we do our question and answer period , you look at what 's happened with our navy in terms of the number of ships and our armed forces generally , how they are so depleted , how they are at almost record - setting lows and in some cases absolute record - setting lows , it is very , very unfortunate and very , very dangerous for our country .
we should not let this be like the history of the mafia , which was allowed to grow into a nationwide organization which infiltrated and corrupted so many areas of society for such a long period of time .
we can learn from this history , that when the department of justice , the fbi , the dea and the state and local police and prosecutors were combined in a task force directed by and at the mafia , when they looked at the mafia and really went after them , they were able to get great great successes and prosecutions out of them and seizing their business interests , did a lot of things , including their business interests , taking them away and removing their infiltration from legitimate areas of society .
they 've been very , very effective when everybody got together .
that was a long time ago .
as president , i will instruct the department of justice to create a joint task force throughout the united states to work together with federal , state and local law enforcement authorities and international law enforcement to crush this still - developing area of crime .
and it 's getting bigger very fast .
it 's gon na be harder and harder to do .
i will make certain that our military is the best in the world in both cyber offense and defense and in every other way , by the way , every other way .
we 've rarely needed it more than we do right now .
i will also ask my secretary of defense and joint chiefs to present recommendations for strengthening and augmenting our cyber command .
as a deterrent against attacks on our critical resources , the united states must possess -- and has to -- the unquestioned capacity to launch crippling cyber counter attacks .
and i mean crippling , crippling .
this is the warfare of the future .
america 's dominance in this arena must be unquestioned .
and today , it 's totally questioned .
people do n't even know if we have the capability that we 're supposed to have when you look at what 's going on with other countries .
cybersecurity is not only a question of developing defensive technologies but offensive technologies , as well .
for non - state terror actors , the united states must develop the ability , no matter how difficult , to track down and incapacitate those responsible and do it rapidly .
we should turn cyber warfare into one of our greatest weapons against the terrorists .
and they have to know its coming because right now , they know nothing about us .
it just seems they have an open blanket .
it 's like an open mark , do whatever you wanna do , nothing 's gon na happen .
take our youth out of the country , infiltrate our country in so many different ways .
we ca n't let this happen .
we have to have it stopped immediately before it 's too late .
to enhance the defense of the other agencies of government , including our law enforcement agencies -- so important , they 're doing such a great job , by the way -- we will put together a team of our best military , civilian and private sector cybersecurity experts to comprehensively review all of our cybersecurity systems and technologies .
the cyber review team will proceed with the most sensitive systems first , but ultimately all systems will be analyzed and made as secure as modern technology permits .
and hopefully , that 's gon na be our technology .
we will also require that follow - up reviews take place on a regular basis determined by the sensitive nature of the security involved .
the review will be very much exact and recommended by experts .
we want experts , our finest people .
we do n't want people that are b level , c level , d level .
we have to get our absolute best and the recommendations have to be a combination of defensive technologies tailored to specific agencies and every other discipline involved .
this will include the various methods of internal monitoring , attack and penetration , investigation of suspected hackers or rogue employees -- and you have plenty of rogue employees -- and identity protection for government employees .
the review team will also remain current on the constantly evolving new methods of attack and will attempt to anticipate them and develop defenses as often as possible before breaches occur .
and there are ways of doing this through modern technology , but we are not using that , and frankly , our technology is not up to date .
we 're letting it slip by .
and with technology , as we know , it can go very , very rapidly .
this group of experts will set up protocols for each agency and government officials , requiring them to follow best and strongest practices .
they will also establish a training program for all government employees to make certain that they understand what defenses are available and utilize them , along with a continuing education program so everyone is aware of the newest methods of both attack and defense .
that means attack and defense .
those who violate classification rules will be held responsible to the fullest extent of the law , something which we do n't do too much anymore .
you know , in our country lately , we 're more interested in protecting the criminals than we are in making sure that we 're strong and powerful and know what we 're doing .
we 're so , so interested in protecting criminals and people that want to do us harm and i think we have to go back to a little more old - fashioned method of thinking , if that makes sense .
i will appoint an attorney general who will reform the department of justice like it was necessary after watergate .
my attorney general will restore the integrity of the department of justice , which has been severely questioned .
today is just ...   frankly , nobody 's every seen anything like what 's happening today .
when you have somebody getting a subpoena from the united states congress to have your e - mails and all other information sent , and after -- not before , after getting the subpoena , 33,000 e - mails are deleted and acid washed .
and nobody even knows what that means , acid wash .
it 's a very expensive thing to do .
most people do n't even know what it means .
when you see something like that , and there 's no crime , everything 's just wonderful .
you know , if you were in a private case with mr. smith and they call for your records and you get rid of your records so blatantly as this , you have serious consequences .
like , the most serious consequences .
the congressman sends out a tremendous subpoena , they want to see the e - mails , and they delete the e - mails .
i ca n't think of anything , in terms of we 're talking about , much more serious than that .
congressman , do you agree ?
it 's hard to believe .
hard to believe that they can get away with this kind of thing .
today is just to the beginning of a long and overdue national discussion on how to protect ourselves from modern cyber crime and evolving national security threats and how to develop the cyber offense strategies necessary to gain a critical security edge in the 21st century .
we need the edge , and ideally , a big one .
i want to thank everybody in this room .
i have such respect for the people in this room for being here , and now let 's begin our discussion .
thank you very much , folks .
thank you .
well , general , thank you .
and thank you for your bravery , amazing .
i 've heard your name mentioned many times , so thank you for being here and thank you for the question .
not only the army , the navy , the air force , the marines , everything is going away at a time when certainly we are at a top priority for making sure that does n't happen .
we 're not respected to the extent that we were .
and if we keep going like this , we wo n't be respected at all .
you look at russia 's doing with their nuclear capability and the newness of their capability , and look at we 're -- what we 're doing , and nobody wants to do that with respect to nukes because nukes are horrible .
but you have countries that are going out of their way to do things that we 're not doing .
and we have to be very , very careful .
the size of the army , absolutely it 's getting too small .
in fact a certain general , when he left about a year and a half ago said we are not only too small , we 're the least prepared that we 've ever been since he can remember -- the least prepared .
so , it 's a combination of that -- of both .
look , i feel so strongly that i use a different word in going around that our forces are depleted -- they 're depleted .
we have the greatest people on earth , but they 're depleted .
you see where the fighter jets are so old that they ca n't get parts anymore .
they have to go to plane -- airplane graveyards and museums to get parts for our fighter jets that we 're currently using .
they do n't make the parts .
and you have other countries that have brand new equipment .
and in some cases , we sell them the equipment .
the whole thing is ridiculous .
now , we 're gon na build up our forces , including the army .
but we are gon na build up our forces .
we have no choice .
you know , they can talk about sequester , they can talk about all of the different things that they 've -- they 're doing .
but this is n't like we have a choice .
this is something where -- and we 're gon na be cutting elements of government certainly .
but when it comes to the military , we have no choice .
we can not have a depleted military .
we have to have the strongest military by far .
and with that being said , as you know , we spend a lot of money on protecting other countries .
and yet , those other countries are n't paying nearly what it costs us for that protection .
where -- they 're getting one of the great bargains of all time .
but we 're spending on numerous countries , very substantial countries .
you know the countries we 're talking about .
but we 're defending them for a fraction of the cost .
we have to go to those countries and we have to ask them to make contributions that are greater than the contributions they 're making right now .
you know , we 're gon na protect them .
we 're gon na remain loyal to them .
but at the same time , it 's a two - way street .
they have to help us also .
so i think your question is a great one .
we will build our military forces to a level that will be , i believe , stronger than ever before if i become president of the united states .
ok ?
thank you .
hello , general .
well , it is confusion not only there , but it 's confusion in many other fields long beyond military and defense .
the country 's confused in terms of even the divide in our country .
we have such a divide and really divides , we have many different forms of divides .
so there 's a lot of confusion .
but we have a president that wo n't use the term radical islamic terrorism , wo n't use it .
will spend long periods of time explaining to people why he wo n't use it .
at the end of the explanation , nobody knows why he still wo n't use it because the explanation is no good .
and i mean , honestly we have a president that in my opinion really does n't know what he 's doing .
we have a president that does n't know what 's happening , and when it comes to the military , you know , i always say , keep the oil .
i said do n't go in , but i said keep the oil .
had we kept the oil , you would n't have isis , because they fuel their growth with the oil .
but i read something and saw something over the weekend that really bothered me because i believe in -- i 'm a big fan of general douglas macarthur and general george patton , and you know , these great generals , some of the generals -- big fan of some of the generals in this room .
we have -- general flynn is with us and general kellogg .
we have a few generals that have been so incredible to me .
now we have 200 .
but generals and admirals .
i 'm never gon na forget admirals , right ?
those admirals .
i will never forget the admirals .
that i can promise you .
but it was very disconcerting when i saw that an attack is planned on mosul , an attack is planned .
and you know , we 're involved in the attack , but the iraqi forces are planning an attack on mosul .
it should happen over a short period of time and the work will be -- why do we have to talk about it ?
why ?
i never saw anything like this .
every time we are going to attack somebody , we explain .
we 're going to attack , we 'll be attacking at three , noon on march 25th .
i do n't know , unless you disagree with me , would n't it be better if we were going to go after mosul to not say anything and do it , as opposed to announcing -- they 're announcing all over television they 're planning to attack mosul .
and whenever they asked me the question about what are you going to do about isis , i say , you know , i have a real chance of winning .
i do n't really want to tell you .
i have very strong ideas and i 'll be dealing with the people in this room and other folks that are , you know , very good at this , but the last thing you want to do is give notice to the enemy .
when president obama announced that he was leaving iraq , i mean , he was talking about dates and times and what we 're going to do .
the enemy pulls back .
we think we 're doing well .
well , they pull back .
they 're not stupid .
and then after we leave , you see what happened .
so i just -- i just want to say that we are going to hit isis hard , and i mean really hard , but i do think this .
the american public does n't have to know the date and hour and second that we 're going to attack and from what side we 're going to attack .
we 're going to attack from the eastern quadrant and it 'll take place on a certain day , at a certain hour .
we do n't need to -- they just want to see victory .
we do n't have victory .
i mean , we 're dropping our -- we 're dropping things all over the place .
who knows what they 're hitting .
who knows how many people are being killed and who knows if they 're the right people .
but at some point , we have to stop a force that 's going out and drowning people in steel cages and chopping off heads .
these are barbaric people .
these are people that -- you know , i used to study medieval times , and you know , they chopped off heads .
but until recently , this was a phenomena that you would n't see , the level of barbarism is unbelievable .
so we 're gon na stop them , we 're gon na stop them cold .
we 're gon na stop them very powerfully .
but i do n't think all of us should be -- unless it 's a very confined room , we should n't be giving up our plans and it bothers me every time i see where we 're planning to attack this one , that one .
but the one i saw over the weekend was mosul and they 're talking about attacking .
the other problem is , you have a lot of the leaders in mosul .
well , they 're not gon na be there , they 're getting out because they hear they 're gon na be attacked , so they 're getting out , they 're going some place .
congressman , would you agree with this ?
if i 'm a leader and i 'm seeing and i 'm watching what everybody else is watching and an attack on mosul is imminent , i 'm saying bye folks , have a good time i 'm moving into a different city .
so what are they doing ?
can there be allowed -- are we allowed to have any more in the military , general , the element of surprise ?
you know , i would think it would be a good thing .
it 's called an ancient strength and we do n't use it anymore .
i think its one of the great principles .
the element of surprise , i mean , you could take a force that 's not nearly as strong and with the element of surprise you could wipe out a much more powerful force .
and i do n't pretend to be a general or an admiral or anything else , but i just -- every time i see -- i see president obama get up , " ladies and gentleman , we are sending 50 people to iraq , " 50 .
so that 's bad in two ways .
number one , it 's such a low number that the enemy 's saying is that all ?
and number two , when you think 50 , those people now have a target on their back .
they wanna find those 50 people and they look for those 50 people .
when hillary clinton says no boots on the ground , now , whether you want boots on the ground or not you should n't say it because you 've just taken -- so she said there will be no boots on the ground , she 's very strong   because politics , you know , it sounds a little bit better to say no boots on the ground .
but by doing that , she has empowered the enemy , she 's empowered the enemy .
and i think she possibly means it , i 'm not sure if she means it or not .
but she says no boots on the ground .
she has taken a tremendous -- i mean , that 's really giving strength to the enemy .
and even if she felt that , she should never admit that .
she should never admit that .
you have to leave all your options open .
and if you do n't leave your options open , you 're a fool .
and i hated to hear her say that .
their days -- their days will be numbered very quickly .
i will never .
i do n't have the courage to do that .
ok .
so first of all , i want to ask you one question .
you had all those aircraft landings on the carriers , right ?
so can an otherwise excellent pilot , a very , very good pilot , because i 've heard that some just ca n't do this .
what percentage of very , very good pilots can not land on an aircraft carrier with training ?
after training .
because i understand it 's a very , very special talent .
ok .
very good .
see , he puts it down a little bit .
that 's very good .
that 's very good .
i 've heard it 's very , very tough .
the veteran 's administration is a disaster , the v.a. , it 's a disaster .
i have gone to all over the country and i 've met so many veterans and i have tremendous veteran support .
and i see what those people are going through .
to see a doctor , sometimes it takes six and seven days and then you finally get there and the doctor is gone on vacation .
we have to change that whole system .
it starts with management .
we have to have a whole different set of protocols .
and we have to get people off the lines .
you know , people are dying , not only the 22 suicides a day which is inconceivable when you hear that .
when i first heard that i said , no you mean a month .
i mean , can you imagine a day , 22 suicides a day ?
a lot of the suicide is people ca n't get to see doctors , a lot of it because the waits are so long .
that 's an administrative problem .
and by the way , the v.a. has some great doctors .
i 've been told by some of the veterans the doctors are great when you can get to see them in many cases .
so we have a plan and it 's been put out on my website and people love it .
if you 're going to have a wait of six days , five days , two days , one day , we 're going to give our great veterans the right to go out , go across the street to a private doctor or a private hospital or a public hospital , whatever happens to be in that community , without having to drive 400 miles to another hospital .
and we 're going to give them the right to see their private doctor , get taken care of it , perhaps the private or public hospital .
get taken care of quickly , effectively and go about their business .
and the government , we are going to pay the bill .
that will totally reduce all of the waiting times , all of the problems .
and i think it may actually get the v.a. to respond better to things because , you know , there is a little competition you would think .
but it 's not like we have a choice .
we ca n't let what 's happening happen .
i mean , i 've heard stories that are so horrible .
i mean , people are killing themselves while they 're waiting on line because they ca n't -- you know , they know it 's days and days before they can have what could be a simple procedure , what could be a simple prescription .
they have to wait so long that they end up -- they ca n't take it .
they ca n't take it .
so we 're going to establish a procedure where people can leave the line , go outside , take care of themselves and the government 's gon na pay .
and by the way , that 's a far less expensive solution than other very foolish solutions i 've heard .
the veterans love it , they love it .
but it 's a far better solution than anything anybody 's heard and its common sense and it 's there .
and the doctors need the business and the private hospitals and public hospitals need the business and they 're sitting there , waiting .
so we do n't have a choice .
we have to do that .
ok ?
thank you .
well , we 're gon na get away from political correctness and we 're gon na have to do that , and ...   like the whole concept of profiling , you know , i mentioned the other day profiling , everyone goes , profile and profiling .
well , profiling is you know , in israel they 're doing it and they 're doing it well .
and we may have to do that , and we may have to do other things .
but you 're right , we have a politically correct military and it 's getting more and more politically correct every day .
and a lot of the great people in this room do n't even understand how it 's possible to do that .
and that 's through intelligence , not through ignorance , believe me .
because some of the things that they 're asking you to do and be politically correct about are ridiculous .
i will say i would leave many of the decisions of some of the things you mentioned to the generals , the admirals , the people on top , and we get some of the -- the congressmen just mentioned to me and i -- i think it 's true 100 percent , you get your top enlisted people in that and you have some discussions with some of these top enlisted people who know it better than probably anybody .
but we get our military people to come back and make recommendations to me and i will follow those recommendations .
i will follow them very strongly .
any relation to ted cruz ?
and tom cruise ?
ok now you can take the question .
well , thank you , that 's a great question .
and have we ever had a time like this ?
have we ever -- has there ever been a thing like what 's going on ?
the other day just to add to your list , i was watching one of the news programs and they had a -- i think high school football coach , you know they 're going into battle ... 

  is he here ?
oh stand up .
wow .
they really went after him .
for saying a prayer before the -- that is just -- i did n't know you 'd be here .
wow .
the world is changing is n't it ?
so you 're not allowed to pray before a football game .
i thought it was horrible .
i thought it was horrible .
so what did they do to you ?
what happened ?
sorry to take away from your question but it 's sort of an extension of your question .
what did they do ?
i think that is absolutely outrageous .
i think it 's outrageous .
i think it 's very , very sad and outrageous .
religious liberty , hey , it 's about religious liberty .
and there has to be a melding of both .
we 're living in a time where you have to have a melding of both .
but it 's very unfair what they 're doing to religion in this country .
and you know one of the things that i 'm doing and i 'm -- we have the johnson amendment .
you know what that is .
that lyndon johnson in the 1950s passed an amendment because supposedly he was having a hard time with a church in houston , with a pastor .
and he passed an amendment saying basically if you 're a pastor , if you 're a religious person , you can not get up and talk politics .
you ca n't really , here 's a prime example of it .
you know how strongly i feel about it .
and i had 50 pastors , ministers , i had priests , i had a couple of rabbis in a big conference room in one of my buildings .
and we 're talking and i could see they really liked me .
but i could also see they could n't endorse me .
and i said , " just out of curiosity , why ? " "
well , we ca n't do it because we 'll lose our tax - exempt status . "
i said , " why is that ?
in other words , you 're taking away your freedom of speech .
and they started telling me about the johnson amendment which really was the first time -- and i started studying it and we had a meeting a month later and i said , " we 're gon na get rid of the johnson amendment because they 're stopping you and our great people from talking . "
and tony and all the people , i mean these are the people we have to hear from and we wanna hear from them .
and you do n't mind opposing views but they 're stopping you from speaking .
and actually , your opposing views are able to speak because they do n't have to worry about tax exempt status and things .
so i think it 's very unfair .
and one of the things i will do very early in my administration is to get rid of the johnson amendment so that our great pastors and ministers and rabbis and -- and everybody -- and priests and everybody can go and tell and can participate in the process .
i actually looked at 50 people in the room , they 're strong people , powerful people by personality and i said they 're really holding your voice back .
so you have these powerful people , some were incredible speakers , just a natural gift for speaking .
and i pointed down , way down on the street on 5th avenue , i said so those people walking along the street have more power than you do ?
and i think that 's very unfair .
you should be able to speak .
and i think that we 'll go a long way to addressing the problem that you had but you have lost a lot of the -- the -- its amazing , the church and religion has lost tremendous power and positive power .
this is n't negative power , this is positive power by the fact that they are essentially prohibited from speaking because of the tremendous problem they have .
so one of the things i 'm gon na do and i have tremendous support with the evangelicals and with the christians and with everybody , is we 're going to get rid of the johnson amendment that is very , very unfair , ok ?
i 'm very honored by that , yeah they did it last week so that 's the beginning of my process .
that 's on the assumption i win .
if i do n't win you just wasted because that 's never happening , folks .
you 've wasted a lot of time and energy and money .
why is your sermon on the way , did they ask you for it ?
ok good , but that is a terrible situation , is n't it ?
where they can say we do n't like the way you 're speaking about christianity , about god .
we do n't like what you just said and we 're gon na take away your tax exempt status which you know how important it is .
it 's very , very -- it 's a very sad thing .
no that 's what i 'm talking about .
we wanna get their advice also , believe me .
yes i would .
look we need that so badly and when you ...   when you talk about the mental health problems , when people come back from war and combat and they see things that maybe a lot of the folks in this room have seen many times over and you 're strong and you can handle it .
but a lot of people ca n't handle it .
and they see horror stories .
they see events that you could n't see in a movie , nobody would believe it .
now we need a mental health help and medical .
and it 's one of the things that i think is least addressed and is one of the things that -- like your question -- one of the things that i hear the most about when i go around and talk to the veterans .
so we 're going to have a very , very robust , level of performance having to do with mental health .
we are losing so many great people that can be taken care of if they have proper care .
you know when you hear the 22 suicides a day it 's a big part of your question .
but when you hear the 22 suicides a day that should never be .
that should never be .
so we 're going to be addressing that very strongly and the whole mental health issue is going to be a very important issue when i take over and the v.a. is going to be fixed in so many ways but that 's going to be one of the ways we 're going to help .
and that 's in many respects going to be the number one thing we have to do .
because i think it 's really been left behind .
ok ?
thank you very much .
that 's true .
kellyanne .
i do want that .
i actually like that , i think -- i mean who else should i be listening to but the people in this room ?
i agree 100 percent , general .
well , tony , thank you very much and i will say this .
just as the general said i 'm beholding to nobody , i 've spent you know , tens and tens of millions of dollars on the campaign .
i am going to spending a lot more over the next month .
in addition , we 've raised a lot of money from small people that -- people that give small donations , people that wanna be a part of it and they 've been very much left behind .
we call them the forgotten man and woman .
and we 've raised millions of -- more than any republican ever thought possible and you know , you 've heard $ 28 million one month and $ 41 million and that these are in small , $ 61 average donations approximately .
and we 've very proud of that but the truth is i am beholden to no one , nobody 's gon na tell me what to do , no -- no group that owns a military firm that gives military supplies .
because i know -- i 've heard the case where often times you wanna buy certain weapons or something and you like one but you get the other one because that one has a contact to our politicians .
those days are over , those days are over .
you 're gon na get the best -- you 're gon na get the best equipment .
you 're gon na get what 's good , you 're gon na get what the generals and what the admirals and what -- and the enlisted and they 'll -- we 'll get together , we wanna get the right stuff .
but the truth is , that the people in this room and your representatives all over this country , the military people are so important to our country .
without you , we would n't be here .
i do n't think you 've been given the respect that you deserve .
i do n't think you 've been allowed to fight isis as an example the way you wanted .
i do n't think you 've been allowed to fight for iraq the way you 've wanted .
if they listen to the military people , we probably would n't be having an isis right now .
i think i can say not probably , i think we definitely would n't be having an isis right now .
but we 're running a war by politicians and we 're running a war by political correctness as per that question .
i can only tell you this and i used to speak about it all the time , we have a navy that has n't been in this position since world war i. 
  we have an army that has n't been in this position since world war ii , in terms of levels and in terms of readiness and in terms of everything else .
we are not capable like we have to be .
this will be one of my most important elements .
when i talk cost cutting , i do for so many different departments where the money is pouring and they do n't even know what to do with it .
but when it comes to the military we have to enhance our military .
it 's depleted .
that 's the word i tend to use .
it 's a depleted -- we have a very depleted military .
we have great people , we have a depleted military .
i told you about the jet fighters .
well it 's like that with so many other things .
so we are going to take care of our military .
we 're going to take care of our military -- the people in our military , the finest people we have .
we are going to take care of our law enforcement because in some ways that 's going hand in hand now more and more when you see what 's going on .
and the people that we 're allowing into our country , we are allowing people into our country that are going to cause us tremendous problems .
this is n't a question of will it happen ; this a question of when .
where people coming into our country who are going to cause you and our law enforcement tremendous problems and therefore our society in the future .
because we have politicians that should be ashamed of themselves .
so i can only say this , a very , very important element of any country , but our country , and in my opinion , the single most important thing that a president can do is the defense of our country .
i mean we can talk all of the elements .
we can talk about medicare and medicaid and social security .
we can talk about school , we can talk about everything .
defense is number one or we do n't have a country .
our military and the strength of our military and the strengthening of our military is a number one priority for the trump administration .
and the world 's going to respect us again and they do n't now .
a lot of that has to do with the leader .
and a lot of it has to do with leadership .
but our country is going to be respected again and we are going to make america great again .
thank you all very much .
thank you , everybody .
wow !
this is amazing .
this is amazing .
unbelievable .
thank you very much .
thank you very much everybody .
this is amazing .
and you know what , we have 7,000 people outside trying to get in , can you believe this ?
in four days we are going to win the great state of pennsylvania ...   ... and we are going to win back the white house .
we are going to win it back .
unbelievable , look at this , maybe because i went to school in pennsylvania , maybe that 's the reason .
maybe .
my kids went to school in pennsylvania .
a smart place , pennsylvania .
real change begins with immediately repealing and replacing obamacare .
it 's just been announced that the residents of pennsylvania are going to experience a massive double - digit premium hike .
no good .
in the great state of arizona , where i just left , premiums are going up more than 116 percent .
all 67 counties in pennsylvania are losing obamacare insurers next year , lots of luck negotiating , folks , but it wo n't matter because it will be terminated , you wo n't have to bother .
we 'll have great health care at much less expense ...   ... much lower price .
you 'll be paying a fraction of what you 're paying and you 're going to get really good stuff , i can tell you .
premiums are surging on obamacare , companies are leaving , insurers are fleeing , doctors are quitting , and deductibles are through the roof .
you have deductibles -- $ 13,000 , $ 14,000 , $ 15,000 .
nobody has ever seen anything so ridiculous .
and yet hillary clinton wants to double down on obamacare , making it even more expensive .
and she also wants to , by the way , raise your taxes very substantially .
i am asking for your vote so we can repeal and replace obamacare and save health care for every family in pennsylvania and our country .
we 're going to do it , folks .
we 're going to do it .
oh , boy , are we going to win -- we are going to win pennsylvania big .
look at this .
i hear we set a new record for this building .
and by the way , i did n't have to bring jlo or jay z , the only way she gets anybody .
i 'm here all by myself .
i am here all by myself .
just me , no guitar , no piano , no nothing .
but you know what we do have and it 's all of us , it 's all the same , we all have great ideas and great vision for our country , that 's what we have .
so i know we have two of our great congressman here , tom marino , lou barletta , they 're here .
where are they ?
no , we love them .
folks , they 're great .
real change also means restoring honesty to our government .
as you know , the fbi -- and you know this -- has anybody heard ?
has anybody heard ?
just a little rumor , just a little rumor , i think a couple of you have heard .
as you know ...   ... the fbi has reopened its criminal investigation into hillary clinton .
they are also conducting a second criminal investigation into hillary 's pay - for - play corruption at the state department .
last night it was just confirmed that the 650,000 -- can you believe that number -- emails they discovered include brand - new emails not previously seen by authorities .
likely , they will be classified information , loaded .
however , the reports also show that the political leadership at the department of justice is trying very hard , actually as hard as they can , to protect hillary clinton from the fbi -- from the fbi .
and i salute the fbi for taking the step .
remember , john podesta -- her top person -- said hillary clinton has bad instincts -- wikileaks .
bernie sanders said she has bad judgment .
so , if she 's got bad instincts , i mean , if she 's got bad judgment , why are we putting her to run for president , right ?
i mean , why is she running ?
bad instincts .
you know , sanders was running against her so he says bad judgment .
works with her all the time , and he puts in an email that hillary has bad instincts .
that 's not who we want for president , folks .
and then you have president obama , instead of getting jobs , instead of taking care of our military ...   ... instead of beating isis , he is out campaigning all the time .
he ought to go back to the oval office and go to work .
she created an illegal email server to shield her criminal activity and then she illegally destroyed 33,000 e - mails after receiving a congressional subpoena .
the key word is after .
so she gets the subpoena -- congressional subpoena .
you do n't get any better than that , and she said you better get rid of these .
well , she said it was about the wedding and about yoga , remember ?
thirty - three thousand .
but i have a feeling the 650,000 will do very nicely .
if she were to win , it would create an unprecedented constitutional crisis .
this will go on for years , folks .
if she ever got into the oval office , hillary and her special interests would rob our country blind .
my contract with the american voter begins with a plan to end government corruption .
i want the entire corrupt washington establishment to hear the words we are all about to say .
when we win on november 8th , we are going to drain the swamp .
i keep telling people , i hated that expression .
i said it 's so hokey .
and then one group heard it , they went crazy .
another group heard it , then we had a big , big rally in florida .
they went crazy about it , and now i love it .
it 's true .
it 's very accurate .
at the core of my contract is my plan to bring back our jobs .
the great state of pennsylvania has lost almost 40 percent of its manufacturing jobs since nafta , a deal signed by bill clinton and supported by crooked hillary clinton .
one of the most amazing statistics that i 've ever heard , something i thought was a typographical error , america has lost , not 700 , not 7,000 , which i assumed it might be , has lost 70,000 factories since china entered the world trade organization , another bill clinton and hillary backed deal .
we are living through the greatest job theft in the history of the world .
tyco laid off 808 workers in harrisburg and carlisle , and moved their jobs to china , india and mexico .
g.e. connectivity laid off 102 workers in middletown , and moved their jobs to china , vietnam and singapore .
codai   laid off 100 workers , moved their jobs to china .
dura - bond pipe laid off 145 workers and moved their jobs overseas .
a trump administration will stop the jobs from leaving america , and we will stop the jobs from leaving pennsylvania .
the theft of american prosperity will end .
it 's ending .
if a company wants to fire their workers , leave pennsylvania , move to another country like mexico , which is taking so many of our companies , and the ship their products back into the united states where we will soon have , by the way , a very strong and powerful border .
we will make them pay a 35 percent tax on those products coming in .
now you know what 's going to happen , right ?
they 're not leaving .
they wo n't leave .
and if they do , we 're going to make a lot of money .
they 're going to pay a lot of tax .
but they wo n't leave , they wo n't leave .
a trump administration will renegotiate nafta , and if we do n't get the deal we want , we will terminate nafta and get a much , much , much better deal for our workers .
we will also immediately stop the job killing trans - pacific partnership , another disaster in the making .
as part of her plan to bring back jobs , we are going to lower taxes on american businesses from 35 percent to 15 percent .
we will massively cut taxes for the middle class , most importantly .
and by the way , hillary clinton is going to raise taxes very substantially .
you saw that during the debate .
by the way , who won the debates ?
who won the debates ?
you know , she kept saying she is working on debate prep for weeks .
oh , she 's always working on debate prep .
you know , if you 're doing this stuff for 35 years , why does she need so much debate prep ?
like a week and a half before the debate , she was at her home .
why is n't she leaving ?
she is working on debate prep .
i felt guilty .
i mean , how much you have to learn , right ?
that was just an excuse to rest and go to sleep , ok ?
believe me .
by the way , two friends of mine -- and have to tell you -- they are -- i do n't even know where they are .
this is a hard one to find .
i 'll tell you why .
you know , a great , great couple , barbara and hugh rone .
do you know about their son riley , riley rone ?
where are they ?
are they around here someplace ?
where are they ?
come up here if you can .
do you mind ?
do you mind ?
come on , tell the secret service .
believe me , they 're ok to come up , right ?
that would be the surprise of all time .
these are incredible people .
their son recently passed away in a horrible accident .
he was the biggest supporter i had , young guy , beautiful guy , the most popular person there was .
and he was just very special .
and i want to introduce -- and if you 'd like to say a few words -- riley .
riley was their son .
as much as some of you like trump , i like you more than you like me if you want to know the truth .
this boy was our biggest fan .
he loved our country , believe me .
he loved our country .
say a few words about our boy , ok ?
they know him .
she does a good job , does n't she ?
wow !
oh boy , i did n't expect that .
so we 'll dedicate this evening to riley , ok ?
boy , that takes courage .
hard to go back to the economy after that , right ?
thank you very much .
that was so beautiful .
thank you .
thank you .
thank you .
we will unleash american energy , including shale , oil , natural gas and clean coal .
we will put our miners back to work .
we will put our steel workers back to work .
you know what 's happened to your state with respect to miners and steelworkers , and hillary wants to do the opposite .
we 're going to put them back to work .
they 're going to be happier than ever before .
and my infrastructure plan will provide help for projects like -- did you ever hear of a place called the " pennsylvania turnpike . "
needs some help .
needs some work .
we spend all these trillions all over the place ; we ca n't fix our potholes in the pennsylvania turnpike or anywhere else .
our country is going to hell .
unbelievable , you look at our infrastructure of this country .
we will also rebuild our inner cities .
they are so bad .
the african - american community , the hispanic community , people living in the inner cities have been treated so unfairly .
they have been run for -- sometimes more than 100 years unbroken by democrats and people with the wrong ideas .
they 're unsafe .
you can go shot walking to the store for a loaf of red .
they 're unsafe .
they have the worst education .
they have no jobs -- no jobs .
you look at unemployment rate of african - american youth , you look at it , it 's 58 percent -- 58 percent .
and i say , give me a chance , i will fix it .
i actually go , " what the hell do you have to lose ? "
believe me , i will fix it .
we will all fix it together .
it will be a great thing .
we have to fix it .
we have to fix it .
we 're going to fix it .
we 're going to fix the inner cities .
we will become a rich nation once again , but to be a rich nation , we must also be a safe nation .
hillary clinton wants a 550 percent increase in syrian refugees ...   ... and that 's over and above the thousands and thousands and thousands that are right now pouring into our country under obama .
her plan will import generations of terrorism , extremism and radicalism into your schools and throughout your communities .
you know what 's happened .
when i 'm elected president , we will suspend the syrian refugee program .
and we will keep radical islamic terrorists the hell out of our country .
you know , just in standing and watching and looking at this incredible spirit , right up to the tiny corners of the room ...   ... with thousands and thousands of people standing outside watching big screens , anybody want to switch places with them ?
i say , is n't it sad that the most dishonest people there are -- the media -- do n't spin the cameras and show them this crowd ?
is n't it sad ?
they never show the crowd .
they never show the crowds .
today , obama had a protester and the protester -- if i have one , they immediately pick out the protester even though the protesters , we just found out through wikileaks , were paid $ 1,500 to go into our rallies and be violent , right ?
and in chicago , they badly hurt policemen .
they badly hurt other people , although our people can take care of themselves very nicely .
but whenever there 's a protester , the only time those cameras move , the only time they pick out a protester because that 's a negative thing , right ?
and yet , obama today spoke in front of a much smaller crowd than this , by the way , and there was a protester and a protester that likes us .
and what happened is they would n't put the cameras on them .
they kept the cameras on obama , and i said , ' " that 's strange . "
you saw it today on television , right ?
he was talking to the protester , screaming at him , really screaming at him .
by the way , if i spoke the way obama spoke to that protester , they would say , he became on his , he .
you have to go back and look and study , and see what happened .
they never moved the camera , and he spent so much time screaming at this protester .
and frankly , it was a disgrace .
it was -- and he should n't be there , and he should n't be there to start off with .
but i 'd love to see them spin the cameras .
i 'd love to see them go outside and see -- i mean , this arena is massive , but i 'd love to see them go outside and see the thousands and thousands of people ...   ... that are outside .
look at the cameras , they do n't move , folks .
they do n't move .
they do n't move .
they 're right here .
they do n't move .
they do n't want to show it , folks .
they do n't want to show it , but they 're not happy .
they see the polls .
we 're leading in ohio .
we 're leading in iowa .
we 're leading in north carolina .
we 're leading in new hampshire .
we 're leading in florida .
and i actually think we 're leading in the great state of pennsylvania .
i love you people , but they wo n't show .
watch , you go home , you wo n't see the crowds .
they wo n't -- they wo n't talk about them .
you got to see hillary show have like 300 , 400 people .
what a joke .
what dishonesty .
a trump administration will also secure and defend the borders of the united states , and yes ...   ... and yes , we will build a great wall .
build a great wall .
who is going to pay for the wall ?
one hundred percent .
they do n't know it , but they 're paying .
honestly , they do know it , they do know it and that 's all right .
i met two months ago with the president of mexico , good guy .
we 'll work things out .
we 'll have better relationships with mexico .
we 'll have better relationships with china .
look at china , we have a trade deficit with china of almost $ 500 billion a year .
think of it .
china , think of it .
and yet they taunt us with building a massive fortress right smack in the middle of the south china sea .
they 're not supposed to be doing it .
we have no relationship with china and yet they rip us .
i 've had a great relationship with china .
the largest bank in the world is a tenant of mine in manhattan , so many other things .
we 're going to have a great relationship with china , and i 'm not angry at china , i 'm angry at our leaders for allowing so many different countries to rip is off .
that 's who i 'm angry with .
all right .
that will end .
does anybody have any doubt that that 's -- and we will have -- honestly , we 're going to have a better relationship with most of these countries .
the reason is they do n't respect us .
they do n't respect obama .
he 's like a cheerleader , he 's jumping up and down all over the place for hillary .
he should n't be doing that .
he should n't be with her .
he 's got to be working .
you know what , we 're better off if he does n't work .
he 'll only make bad deals we 'll have to unscramble .
we 're better off .
we received the first ever endorsement from our ice and border patrol officers , 16,500 , first time they 've ever endorsed a candidate .
it 's just been reported that as a result of our open borders , violent cartels have spread into all 50 of our states .
more than 90 % of those arrested are here illegally -- thank you very much .
they are killing innocent , threatening schools and totally destroying communities .
a government that will not protect its people is a government that is unworthy to lead .
as secretary of state , hillary clinton allowed thousands and thousands of the most dangerous and violent criminals to go free because their home countries would n't take them back .
they bring them to their countries and very intelligently , these countries would say we do n't want the murderers , drug kings , the gang members , so they 'd bring them in and the countries would say , " we 're not taking them back .
bring them back to your country . "
and she was head of state department and she said bring them back , we do n't want to -- believe me , i promise you this .
never once -- never once will we be bringing anybody back , never once , never once .
and if they come back into our country one year in jail , and if they come back a second time into our country , five years in jail and then 10 years in jail , and they wo n't be coming back .
they 're not going to be coming .
very few , believe me , when they know that , you know what we do , we capture them over and over and over , and we let them go .
there have to be consequences , folks .
there have to be consequences .
hillary supports totally open borders -- there goes your country -- and strongly supports sanctuary cities like san francisco ...   ... where kate steinle was murdered by an illegal immigrant .
and this immigrant , this illegal immigrant was deported at least five times .
not going to happen anymore , folks .
thousands of americans would be alive today if not for the open border policies of obama and clinton .
this includes americans like josh wilkerson , whose mother i 've gotten to know during the campaign .
josh was a student in a high school , good student , good kids , everybody loved him , who 's murdered at the age of 17 .
he was tortured , strangled , beaten to death by the illegal immigrant , and then his body was set on fire .
everybody wanted this guy out .
they wanted him incarcerated .
in july , right here in pennsylvania , an illegal immigrant with a previous deportation record , horrible record , raped a young child .
the illegal immigrant had been arrested for aggravated assault on numerous occasions , but he was set free .
he was set free .
everybody that knew him said , " please , please do n't set him free . "
he was set free by weak , ineffective policy -- by weak , ineffective leadership .
a trump administration will end this vast nightmare of violence .
we 're talking about thousands and thousands of incidents .
we will protect american lives .
we will cancel all federal funding to sanctuary cities .
we will stop illegal immigration , deport criminal aliens and dismantle every last criminal cartel that 's in this country .
and by the way , our local police who are so incredible , they know every one of these people .
they know everyone .
they have to put with them every day .
when we win , you will finally have a government on your side fighting for your community and protecting your family .
we will also repeal the obama - clinton defense sequester and rebuild our badly depleted military .
we have no choice .
that means new resources for the nearby army war college that will train the next generation of army leaders .
now mosul , i talk about mosul because i ca n't believe it , first of all , we have mosul .
it was the way we got out whether you wanted to be in iraq .
you should have been in iraq , but we had mosul .
it was all done , but then clinton and obama did that crazy -- get out .
they got out the wrong way , so they took mosul back .
now , four months ago , i start hearing we 're going to take mosul , we 're going to take -- and i say whatever happened to the element of surprise , right ?
so we had mosul , but we essentially gave it up .
now we 're going to take it .
by the way , just so you understand , i 've never even said this before , who benefits by us getting mosul ?
you know , it 's going to benefit iran .
we 're not going to benefit because iran is taking over iraq .
we handed that to them along with one of the dumbest deals i 've ever seen , the $ 150 billion back .
the $ 1.7 billion in cash that we gave these people , a terrorist -- number one terrorist nation -- $ 1.7 billion in cash and now they feel emboldened and they go and they harass our ships and they take our 10 sailors and humiliate the sailors , humiliate our country .
it 's not going to happen .
well , he said , " never happen with you , i promise . "
it will never happen with me .
i promise you that .
i promise you that .
but just to finish because we see the army college , just to finish , so mosul , we want to go into mosul just four months ago because we want to get isis leaders , we think they 're in mosul .
well , if you want to get them you do n't talk about it , right ?
you do n't talk about it .
you go get them and have the news conference later .
would n't that be nice ?
i always say what ever happened to the element of surprise .
so four months ago i heard it , then three months , then two months .
in the meantime , you know , they 're buried in there .
they are using human shields .
we have no choice but to take isis out , we have to because they 're chopping off heads .
they 're doing things .
when you read the history books not since medieval times has anything like this happen .
and it formed during this period of time of hillary clinton .
now hillary is saying , " we will get isis . "
what the hell did she let it start for ?
now isis is in 32 countries all around the world , and what a shame it is .
we have people in leadership that are grossly incompetent .
we 're going to change it , we 're going to change it fast , ok ?
i 'm honored to have the endorsement of more than 200 top admirals and generals , and 22 medal of honor recipients .
you saw that last night , right near fort bragg -- great place , great people .
we had 21,000 people last night .
we had more people last night than i have tonight , although if you include the people outside , we may have them .
we may have them .
i 'm not sure .
i think if you include outside , we may have more than that .
hillary clinton brought death and disaster to iraq , syria , libya and she empowered iran , and she unleashed isis all across the world .
hillary and our failed establishment have spent $ 6 trillion on wars in the middle east that we do n't win , and now the middle east is in far worst shape and far more dangerous than it ever was before .
they dragged us into foreign wars that makes us less safe , shipped our jobs and wealth to other countries , and they had left our borders wide open at home .
we go into wars and we set strong borders , but at home we have no borders .
we send our troops to foreign countries to defend their borders , but our politicians refuse to defend our borders .
that will change on november 8th , believe me .
that will change , november 8th .
that will be a big day .
a trump administration will never ever put the interest of a foreign country before the interest of our country ever .
to the people of pennsylvania , to all of the people in the united states i say , from now on , it 's going to be america first .
to all americans i say it is time for change and time for new leadership .
we need it .
we just can not have four more years of obama because that 's what we 're getting if we do this .
it 's four more years .
it 's isis running rampant .
it 's no borders .
it 's bad jobs .
you see the jobs reports , they 're horrible .
you saw what happened just two days ago .
the jobs report is a disaster , and they 're all bad jobs because our good jobs are disappearing .
it 's -- it 's no good folks .
four more years , we ca n't have it .
can you imagine -- can you imagine ?
i saw these great men , these great admirals last night , these great generals , these are great people , strong , smart .
i saw these unbelievably brave recipients of the medal of honor , and i said to them , " how would you feel to have hillary clinton as your leader ? "
and they 're -- they 're wonderful americans ...   ... and i refuse to tell you what they said , but it was n't good , believe me .
can you imagine these people taking orders ?
these great people taking orders from her ?
bad judgment , remember .
just think about what we can accomplish in the first 100 days of a trump administration .
we are going to have the biggest tax cut since ronald reagan and maybe bigger , and hillary is going to raise that .
we 're going to eliminate every unnecessary job - killing regulation .
we will cancel every illegal obama executive order ...   ... protect religious liberty ...   ... that , that .
it 's time .
rebuild our military and take care of our great , great veterans , our great people .
they 've been horribly , horribly taken care of .
provide school choice and put an end to common core , we 're bringing our education local .
support the incredible men and women of law enforcement .
and today in new york city , two policemen were -- as you know , were horribly shot .
it goes on and on and on .
we 're going to save our second amendment , which is totally under siege ...   ... and appoint justices to the united states supreme court who will uphold and defend the constitution of the united states , so important .
it 's time to cut our ties with the failed politicians of the past .
hillary clinton is the candidate of yesterday .
we are the movement of the future .
we are the movement of the future .
this is a great movement .
this is a movement that 's never happened before ever in the history of our country , ever in the history .
there 's never been anything like it .
and i will say -- and i understand how the system works , i understand the system , i guess , as well as anybody understands .
i was on the other side .
i was enjoying it very much .
i also love our country and it can no longer work that way , it 's not fair .
it can no longer work .
we wo n't have a country .
and boy , oh boy , so i went from being an insider .
did i ever become an outsider ?
wow !
i became a serious outsider .
but we 're all outsiders , and that 's the way we like it .
we 're all outsiders , but it 's a movement like it 's never been seen before .
and even of the dishonest people back there and the pundits , they say -- some of them say it 's the single greatest political phenomena that they 've ever seen in this country .
and it is .
and that 's why we can not do anything that 's going to stop it .
we have to get out .
pennsylvania , you are so important .
everyone talks pennsylvania , if you win pennsylvania , you 're going to win , pennsylvania .
now we 're doing great all over the state .
and i really believe i 'm going to do well in philadelphia because that 's where i went to school specifically .
i love philadelphia .
do n't disappoint us , philadelphia .
we 'll do great things for philadelphia .
but there 's so much about pennsylvania that 's so important .
and get out november 8th and vote .
we are fighting for every parent who lost their child to gangs and drugs and violence .
we are fighting for every community who 's jobs have been ripped out and shift to other countries .
and we are fighting for every american who believes government should serve the people not the donors and not the special interests .
i 'm asking you to dream big because with your vote , can you believe this ?
we 're just four days away .
you will get the change you 've been waiting for for your entire lifetime .
and -- and folks , i 'll tell you what , it 's not going to happen again .
it 's not going to happen in four years .
it 's over .
this is it .
he 's just saying that 's it .
this is it , folks .
in four years , it 's going to be a whole -- it will never -- it will never ever happen again .
it 's our last chance , the last chance .
together we will make america wealthy again .
we will make america strong again .
we will make america safe again .
we will make america great again .
thank you .
god bless you everybody .
go out and vote .
thank you .
wow , thank you , thank you everybody .
i know so many people in this room .
this is a room i really know the people , there 's no question about it .
mike , i just want to thank you .
i 've known mike so long and it 's -- i knew he -- when he was a young handsome ...   ... beautiful guy .
now , he 's a little older but still handsome , right .
but , thank you , mike , it 's a great honor having the conservative party .
and , just so you understand , we are going to play new york .
you know , we 're not just doing this for fun .
we 're going to play new york .
and i want to wish the best to wendy .
and , i 've watched wendy over the years and know wendy and she 's a terrific woman and she 's going to be fighting hard , and i think she 's going to surprise a lot of people .
so wendy , wherever you may be back there -- right there ...   ... great luck , you 're going to do very well .
i want to just thank a few people that are here .
i assume that we have carl paladino somewhere , where 's carl ?
carl .
john jay , we have , and joe from nasa , we have .
and we have i think ed -- i do n't know , is ed here ?
ed cox ?
where 's ed ?
where 's ed ?
where the heck is ed ?
ah , hello , ed .
we 're going to play it ed , okay ?
we 're going to -- we 're also going to do those others that you told me about but we wo n't get ahead .
i think we 're going to do very well .
i think we 're going to do very well .
we have been , and i have been in love with this state for a long time .
and , this is i guess , the first time in a long time , that you really have a competitive person running for president that comes from new york .
and , i think we 're going to do very well .
the polls are looking great .
we 're playing a lot of states that a lot of people never thought of in terms of a republican .
i do n't know , maybe they 're just not thinking , i 'm as much of a republican as i think i am .
but , states are in play that are never in play for republicans .
and , you probably saw the polls coming in .
the recent cnn poll that came out i guess this morning , has us 2 up on hillary .
so ...   so i 'm a long time new yorker .
i 've spent billions and billions of dollars in this state and city .
i 've produced tremendous numbers of jobs , it 's been very good to me also .
and , we want to win it .
we want to win it , and we 're going to help new york .
we have to help new york because it 's got very difficult problems .
taxes are too high by far .
you had a lot of great opportunities to reduce taxes .
you had a lot great opportunities upstate that were n't taken advantage of .
you know what i mean ?
when i went around , and when new york is so big in the primary , this was the one that was just boom , we won new york .
it was -- it was massive .
just about everything .
we won just about every location , every place you could be .
and , it was an honor .
and , i always tell people you know , winning new york by such a landslide against very capable people in the primaries that was an honor for me .
because nobody knows me better than new yorkers .
and i say it 's always bad ...   it 's always bad , never good , when you lose your state , and you lose it badly .
so , we won it in a landslide and just won every area of it .
and , with the help of all of the folks i just mentioned and carl , and i were just talking , we 're going to make a very , very heavy play upstate .
we 're going to do unbelievably well .
i see the ads , i do n't know how much money they spent on that ad , but i guarantee you the money would have been better spent doing something else .
because , i do n't think a lot of people have signed up .
but i 'm hearing numbers like hundreds of millions of dollars .
i 've never seen an ad that 's been on so much and so long .
but , it 's a -- it 's an ad nevertheless about bringing your business to new york , right .
and , you 've all seen it , and i just wonder how much business has been got from that ad .
mike , how much business has been gotten from that ad ?
would you rather have the ad money or the business that 's been got ?
he 'd take the money .
come here , get over here .
this is like old home week .
come here , say something .
take care of yourself .
nice to see you rob .
good man , he 's going to do very well .
he 's going to do very , very well .
so , over the years i 've watched a lot of bad things happen , a lot of good things happen .
but i 've watched up state , i 've watched out on the island , i 've watched businesses leave .
and , i think one of the reasons i 'm standing here instead of somebody else is that frankly , we have really hit a chord with jobs .
and , we 've also hit it with illegal immigration .
lots of different things , the military .
in fact i 'm going from here , i 'm going over to nbc , we 're doing an interview with matt lauer , i 'm sure that 'll be a lot of fun .
it will be a lot of fun .
it 'll be a lot of fun .
i 'm sure it 'll be very fair .
and , maybe it will be .
hey , he 's a good guy .
maybe , it will be , let 's see .
we 'll let you know , right ?
but , i just -- you know , it 's so sad when i toured the state during the primaries and i got to see every part of the state .
i was in syracuse , and i was in albany , and i was everywhere .
and , i saw those great beautiful buildings that were empty and rotting , and falling down from the wind , and the rain , and the snow .
and , they 're all over the state .
and , there 's no hope .
there 's no hope .
other than if i become president because they will be great then .
they will be great .
because , we 're going to bring our jobs back to new york .
we 're going to bring our jobs back to our country .
but , we 're going to bring our jobs back to new york .
what happened is so sad .
those companies have moved to mexico and other places .
but , a lot are moving to mexico .
i tell this to -- i have a friend who builds plants , that 's what he does , he builds plants .
building apartment house , maybe he would n't know where .
but i 'll tell you , this is a great guy .
i think he 's just about the biggest in the world at doing this .
and , i say to him , how are you doing , how 's business ?
he said unbelievable .
oh , good , where are you building mostly ?
mexico .
oh , that 's not so good .
that 's not so good .
well why ?
he said donald what we 're doing in mexico is the 8th wonder of the world .
the 8th wonder of the world , think of that .
this is a man who builds these massive factories and car plants et cetera .
he said it 's unbelievable when you see what 's happening .
i said how are you doing in the united states , where he 's from , and where he really would like to be doing the building .
he goes , meh , not so good .
and , he said but you have to come to mexico , i just left mexico by the way .
that worked out very well .
very , well .
and , i do n't blame mexico for doing what they 're doing , i mean i respect mexico .
i have great respect for the leaders and the president was very , very nice .
but you know , our businesses -- we 're building -- our business is just pouring -- it 's just pouring into mexico and other places .
and then china , in a different way they are making our product and they 're dumping it all over .
you look at what 's happening with our steelworkers .
you look at what 's happening with our miners , and all of the -- it 's just incredible what 's happening to our country , and we 've got to stop it .
and we will stop it .
by the way , 100 % we will stop it .
we 're not going to let this continue to happen .
so ...   so , i just have to say it 's been such an honor to be involved for so long with the conservative party , with the republican party too .
ed , i could n't forget you , i would be in trouble if i forgot ed .
but for tonight , the conservative party , i have been a supporter -- i 've been a supporter of mike 's for a long time .
and , we 're going to do a great job .
you know , it 's a little bit like fixing the country , fixing the state .
we have to fix it .
when i last time -- when i was with the republicans at the grand hyatt , which i built , i told the story of the wollman rink , how it was closed for eight years , a total disaster , the city could n't get it built .
they had no clue .
they had engineers that came from miami .
you do n't want an engineer for an ice skating rink that comes from miami .
and they could n't make ice .
and they 'd try , and they had copper tubing and it was going miles , and miles , and miles , and they 'd lay it and the next day it would be stolen .
and , then they 'd lay it , and it would be stolen .
this went on for years ' right .
they 'd lay it down , copper was , and is very expensive .
and what happened is i went to koch , ed koch , the mayor of new york .
i said mr. mayor , my kids are growing up , i want them to be able to ice skate at least once before they 're at a point where they do n't want to ice skate anymore ...   ... and i see people sitting in the rink all day long .
they had two lunch breaks , one in the morning , one in the afternoon , and there was no work .
and , hundreds of people would be sitting in this massive slab .
and when they poured the slab , they 'd pour it in little chunks .
okay a lot of construction people , because i have a lot of friends here .
but they 'd pour it in little chunks and then they 'd come in the next day , and by the time it was all finished they had chunks all over the place , and it was n't even .
and , it was like this , it was a big level .
so , when they put the water on , on one side they had like a foot and a half of water , and the other one they had like an inch .
and , they did n't know what they were doing .
and , i said to ed koch , and it went to the newspapers .
i said , you know , because they did n't want to let me do it , they did n't want to be stood up , or they did n't want to be shown up .
and , they went -- i went to the newspapers , the editorial board who actually , even though i 'm much more successful now they do n't treat me nearly as well , i 'm trying to figure this out .
but they actually did treat me very well , and they said let trump , do it .
and there was a lot of pressure put on and they let me do it .
and , i did it in four months .
they had spent , i think , probably $ 20 , $ 21 million .
sometimes i hear $ 18 , i hear $ 17 .
honestly they had no idea what they spent .
whatever it was , they spent a fortune .
and , i took it over .
and , the first thing i did is i had to get an engineer .
so , i fired the guy from miami because he obviously did n't know what he was doing .
and , he recommended actually -- he said why do n't you try somebody mr. trump from montreal .
i said that 's good .
and , then i remember i have a friend who was involved with the montreal canadians , the ice hockey team .
so i called him .
i said edgar , would you do me a favor .
do you have an engineer -- do you have anybody that knows how to make ice ?
he said oh , i have the greatest guy , and he gave me the name .
the guy came to new york , really nice person .
and , he said , mr. trump , this is terrible .
they 're using gases , they 're using freon .
and , in that pipe , if you have one little pinhole , one little tiny pinhole in miles , and miles of pipe , it 'll escape and you ca n't make the ice .
it 's a horrible thing .
that stuff is meant for refrigerators , not for ice skating rinks .
i said that makes sense .
you know in the back of the refrigerator right .
not quite , you know 20 miles of stuff .
so , he said what you want is brine .
i said what 's brine ?
he said well it 's basically water with salt in it , so it does n't freeze .
and , you put it in rubber hoses .
and you make it very cold , it does n't freeze , and all of a sudden you have ice .
i said boy , that sounds good .
so , i thanked him , he drew it up , i went out , i hired some really good contractors .
i got rid of all the copper , there was really none left , it was mostly stolen and i put down the rubber hose .
nobody was stealing the rubber hose .
like , nobody stole the rubber hose .
it 's amazing , rubber hose does n't have quite the same allure .
but it was rubber hose , clamps at each end .
miles , and miles of rubber hose .
and we put it down quickly , and beautifully .
we got the right machine that froze the water .
and , the water went through the rubber hose .
and we checked it for leaks .
because , even if it had leaked it would n't have mattered that much , unlike the other .
but , i said , i do n't want it to leak anyway .
so before the concrete went down we checked .
then i got a concrete guy who was great , and we had trucks lined up to harlem .
all the way back to harlem .
one continuous pour because that 's the only way to do it .
one continuous pour .
we laid the rebar , and we had these trucks .
they poured for 24 hours straight , it 's a big surface , massive surface actually .
and it was like perfect .
we laser finished it .
and then , we let it heal , and we poured water over it .
two inches .
they said two inches is perfect .
and we turned on the machine and low and behold shortly thereafter , there was ice .
and , amazing .
amazing .
now it 's been a story that 's been documented in the wharton school and the harvard business school , and all over .
because it 's really -- it 's private enterprise .
free enterprise .
private versus government .
and there are others .
you know , i just did the ferry point job where this thing was under construction for like 25 years or something , nobody even knows .
you know , you ask them how long , and they do n't really even know .
they have no idea how much they spend .
and we got that one open .
it 's a tremendously big success in the bronx .
but somehow the wollman rink , it 's just -- it 's just a case study .
then we fix up the building which was real easy , and i have it to this day .
there 's no ice rink in the world that does more business than our ice rink .
and it 's been tremendously successful and we really , you know , have a good time .
and , you know , in a very , very large scale version , we have to do the same for new york state .
that 's what we have to do .
we have to bring back our businesses .
we ca n't let our remaining businesses go .
if they go , and they make a product and they want to move to mexico , and they want to fire all of the employees like they have , in all fairness , been doing , we 've very late to the picture .
this speech should have been made 15 years ago but i was doing other things .
i was one of those companies that was doing well in new york .
but , if they want to leave and if they want to make product in a different country and they want to send it over to our borders , and yet fire all our people and not pay taxes and they think they 're going to send that over the border .
and there 's not going to be consequences ?
not going to happen .
and , once you say look , we hope you enjoy your stay in mexico , or wherever .
it 's a beautiful location and you 're building a lovely looking plant .
but , every time you make your product and you think you 're going to send it over , what will be very soon , a very strong border .
you will pay a 35 percent tax every single time you send your product over here .
now , i 'll tell you , it 's very late in the game unfortunately but , this should have been done years ago , and you would have had nobody leave .
because , two things are going to happen .
number one , they 're not going to leave , that 's about 95 percent .
and , then if they do , that 's okay too , because we 're going to make a fortune .
okay .
but , they 're not going to leave .
and nobody wants to do this because these people and these politicians are all controlled by the special interests that own the companies that want to move to other countries that make lots of money .
and , that 's the way it is .
so , we 're going to bring our businesses back .
we 're going to make sure that they 're going to come back into new york , and new york state .
i 'm tired when i looked out at suffolk , and different places on long island , when i made that tour , i could n't believe what i saw .
i could n't believe it actually .
i 've been here all my life , i could n't believe it .
the devastation that has happened in this state , i could n't believe it .
so , we 're going to turn things around , we 're going to bring back our jobs .
we 're going to bring back companies and we 're going to start a lot of new companies .
but not with an ad .
we 're going to start it by having low taxes and being smart .
and , i just want to tell you folks , i 'm being 100 percent serious , you know everybody would say , oh do n't bother with new york because republicans do n't win new york .
i do n't think that we 're going to be in that position .
i think we 're going to win new york , i think we 're going to do great in new york .
do n't forget , hillary , she 's not a new yorker .
and , by the way , in arkansas , and she 's really not from arkansas either .
but in arkansas , what do i have ?
a 25 point lead .
i think i have a 25 point lead .
you know she is from arkansas , but she 's really from illinois .
i 'm a real new yorker folks .
i will say this .
you will never get more of a new yorker if you want a president than you 're getting with me .
so , i want to thank mike , i want to thank the conservative party .
i want to thank everybody in this room .
i want to thank my son , eric trump who has been working , and his wife lara .
and , we have so many supporters .
but , i just want to say to you , we are going to play so hard .
we are going to play so hard and win .
we are going to win this state .
it 's going to shock people .
and , by the way , you know if we win this state , it 's over .
we win , ok .
we win .
so , i appreciate the endorsement of mike , always .
i really ...   ... appreciate being given this great honor by the conservative party .
and , i will tell you , mike , get up here for one second , come here .
come here , come here .
i want , to thank you a man .
we 're a hell of a job for this man .
thank you , thank you everybody , thank you .
thank you very much everybody .
thank you , thank you carl .
is that mic working ?
it 's like the presidential debate , the commission where they gave us a bum mic .
some commission that is .
so , i want to thank everybody .
this is great .
you know , new hampshire -- we won new hampshire in the primaries big league .
far exceeding the numbers that everybody thought and now i hear we 're winning by one and tied and winning by two and tied in another one .
how are you ?
so , i just want to thank everybody .
this is great to be with you .
so these just came out .
remember whenever we won i like to talk about polls .
if we 're doing badly , i do n't talk about polls .
no , it 's true .
when we do badly , i do n't know about polls , right .
but when we 're doing well i know about polls .
i used to drive -- chris christie is here , our friend .
where is chris ?
right over here .
and he was a tough competitor and he said , you used to drive me crazy when you talk about the polls .
why did you talk about the polls ?
i said because i was number one .
but if i was number two or something , we would n't be talking .
but , first of all , thank you everyone .
and new hampshire was where we had our first victory .
you remember that , right .
and then we went on to lots of other places -- lots of other places .
and we had tremendous support from so many of our friends and tremendous complements .
tom brady and coach belichick and so many people we just have great relationships with and great relationships up here .
so , these just came out , just literally came out .
rasmussen , that 's national polls , trump 43 , clinton , 41 .
los angeles times , national , great polls supposedly .
well , that 's because i 'm leading .
trump , 46 national , clinton , 42 .
upi national , trump 49 , clinton 47 .
reuters ipsos , south carolina , trump 49 , clinton 44 .
south carolina is great .
that is where we had another great -- had another great attendance .
the results in south carolina during the primary were amazing and it was fantastic .
great people .
colorado , trump 45 , clinton 43 .
i just left , that was a good one .
and wisconsin , where i 'm going tomorrow -- wisconsin they have trump at 42 and clinton at 42 , and that 's ok because i was about 15 points behind three or four weeks ago , i think , right ?
so , what 'd i tell you ?
so , that 's one .
all right , anybody can check them .
you can check them .
now here 's one that 's a biggie , upi just came out like a little while ago .
virginia , i love the virginia .
tremendous properties in virginia , a lot of employees .
i think all my employees are voting , i tell you .
virginia , trump 50 , clinton 45 .
upi -- upi , that 's a big one -- that 's big one .
it 's a little surprise .
look at the media , they 're going crazy .
they do n't know what 's happened .
they do n't know , they ca n't believe this .
they are not happy , i want to tell you .
this is not the way it 's supposed to be happening .
the american people , right .
this is not -- this is not what they had in mind .
the crooked , media with the crooked hillary .
new hampshire , 48 - 48 .
what 's wrong ?
what 's going on here ?
new hampshire , 48 - 48 .
i do n't like that .
that does not sound like my friends from .
we 're going to win new hampshire .
we 're going to win new hampshire .
these all just came out a little while ago .
arizona , 52 , clinton , 42 .
wow , up by 10 .
here 's a good one , north carolina , upi -- north carolina , trump 50 , clinton , 46 .
whoa !
look at this one .
the state of pennsylvania where i went to school , went to college , pennsylvania , trump 50 , clinton , 46 .
and here 's another good one , great state , i love the people of georgia .
trump , 52 , clinton , 43 .
wow you send it back to the press so they can examine it .
so , i just want to thank you very much , it 's really amazing , and i want to thank chris for being here , and all of my friends .
so many -- steve i see over here and all of the friends that i have , it 's been incredible .
and you know , i wanted to be here because we have lots of energy and we love the people .
and we love the people , in particular because it was my first day it meant so much for me .
and i use to come up -- thank you , i feel the same way .
but i used to come up and we used to have meetings with people and they kept talking about heroin , heroin , heroin .
i tell the story all over new hampshire because it 's so different than these beautiful little valleys and the trees and the lakes and the beautiful roads that we just rode over , and you talk about heroin and it does n't work .
it just sort of -- it does n't seem right , but it 's a tremendous problem here and it 's a tremendous problem all over the country .
and we 're going to close up that border , we 're going to build a wall .
you know , we got the ice endorsement just yesterday .
ice , great people .
and we got the border patrol endorsement and the border patrol agents endorsed 16,500 .
and sheriff joe endorsed us -- sheriff joe -- tough .
sheriff joe is tough and good .
but getting ice yesterday was a tremendous thing for us .
so , i just want to make a quick remark and then we 'll start with howie , and i know it 's very hot in here and we want to keep this small .
and by the way , they were saying this is practice this sunday .
this is is n't practice .
this has nothing to do with sunday .
we 're are just here because we just wanted to be here .
and you know , hillary , frankly , they talk about debate prep .
it 's not debate prep , she 's resting , she 's resting .
and i want to be with the american people .
i want to be with the people from new hampshire , and she wants to rest .
debate prep .
tonight we 'll discuss many issues of great importance to new hampshire and few states in america have been hurt worse by the trade policies of my opponent , and you know that .
nafta has been a disaster , signed by her husband .
and you 've lost nearly one in three jobs , think of it .
i mean , think of it , one in three jobs since nafta and china made deals .
we made deals with china , world trade organizations , what a disaster that was , supported by hillary clinton .
but the nafta deal signed by her husband , although he did a great thing two days ago when he was willing to say how bad obamacare was .
that was crazy .
that was pretty good .
the open border policies , and i just wrote this out but i feel it 's so important , the open border policies of hillary clinton including catch and release , another terrible practice , have allowed a massive influx of drugs into new hampshire and frankly , into states all over our country -- almost every state .
and it 's really fueled the tremendous heroin and drug crisis that we have .
we 're going to close up those borders folks , believe me , and i promise that to you , in new hampshire more than anything else , i said and i talk about it no matter where i go when i mentioned this state .
because it was really the first glimpse i got of how serious a problem we have .
they 're poisoning our youth , they 're poisoning more than our youth .
they 're poisoning everybody .
but they are poisoning our youth .
it 's tough enough out there .
our youth that does n't have a chance with what 's happening and we 're not going to let it happen anymore .
and we 're going to help the people that are so badly addicted .
we 're going to help them .
so , i 'm going to bring your jobs back -- jobs are leaving like you 've never seen before , record levels .
i 'm going to stop the drugs from coming in .
i 'm going to create school choice and we 're going to get rid of common core , which is a disaster .
and we 're going to create something very special for every disadvantaged child in this country of which , we have far too many .
we are going to repeal and replace obamacare .
which bill admitted this week is a crazy system .
could you believe that ?
hey , at least he 's honest .
boy , has he suffered .
can you imagine ?
can you imagine that ?
has he suffered ?
but he said it 's a crazy system that does n't make sense and does n't work , and where people end up with premiums doubled and coverage cut in half .
i could n't have said it better myself .
i 've been saying it -- hey , i 've been saying it for two years , longer .
i know , i 'm going to put him on the campaign .
oh , i 'm sure -- do you think anybody has called him and said let 's recheck ?
he did a minor retraction , but you can see he was unhappy about it .
remember jonathan gruber .
do we remember the name ?
i do n't ever forget .
jonathan gruber the architect of the bill admitted it was sold on lies .
remember that ?
he thought he was talking to his friend .
unfortunately , he 's friend turned out not to be such a good friend because his friend had a little cell phone -- those cell phones are brutal , just like e - mails are brutal unless you want to delete them all .
unless you delete about 33,000 .
but jonathan gruber , the architect of obamacare admitted it was sold on lies , and talked about the stupidity of the american voter , right ?
remember that , the stupidity of the american voter ?
the only stupidity was that the politicians , who ignored the american people and forced this thing , absolutely forced it down their throats and hillary clinton wants to double down .
she wants to make it even worse .
i mean , that 's ultimately what 's going to happen .
and me , you 've seen what we 're going to do .
in a much , much better health care at a much lower price and people are going to be very happy , extremely happy .
and we 're going to take care of those that are disadvantaged and ca n't afford to do what others can afford to do .
but you 're going to be spending -- and we 're going to take care of them better than they 're being taken care of now .
but you 're going to have health care that works , you 're going to have health care where companies compete to get your business , and they 'll come up with plans that you have n't even seen or thought about right now .
it will be a beautiful thing to see .
and i 'm sure we 'll be talking about it on sunday night during the debate because there 's no way we 'll lose this issue .
it 's a disaster .
obamacare is a disaster .
we 're going to create a more honest government , our government is a disaster .
how about the $ 1.7 billion in cash that was given to iran ?
cash .
remember it was going to be $ 400 million , turned out to be $ 1.7 billion in cash .
you know what that is ?
that 's more than this room .
you would put it probably in hundreds , although it was all different currencies from different nationalities .
maybe they did n't want american dollars .
they said , anybody so stupid to make a deal like this , we do n't want their money .
but can you imagine this , these people ?
they never saw anything like it .
and by the way , that 's not going to fight terror .
they got plenty of money that they 'll use .
that 's going to their swiss bank accounts , ok , just in case you had any questions , all right .
anyway , we gave it to them , and boy , did we give it to them .
so , i want to let you know that we are going to be a country that 's going to be run properly and i 'm going to be -- by the time this finishes , i 'll be in for tremendous amounts of money , tremendous amounts of money that i fund myself .
we also have a lot of wonderful people , in terms of small donations and that 's coming in fantastically .
we have some people that just feel very good about our country under proper leadership .
but we 're spending a lot of money and we 're doing it ourselves and we 're very proud of it .
we 're going to be very proud of our country , and when people call up to ask for certain favors that are bad for the country but good for them -- the nice part i do n't even have to take their phone call .
i do n't need them .
i do n't have to take their phone call .
before we go any further , i want to send our thoughts and hearts with all of the people , and prayers , to the millions in the path of what 's now known as hurricane matthew .
it looks like it 's a big one and it 's going to be a bad one it looks like .
hopefully it takes that right turn , but it looks like it 's going the opposite direction , not good .
it 's one of the strongest storms to hit in many decades , and our neighbors in florida , georgia and the carolinas are in a direct path , it seems .
southeast florida is taking the brunt .
we have a lot of friends in florida , a lot of buildings , a lot of investments in florida .
a lot of great employees in florida .
southeast florida is taking the brunt of the storm .
to all of my friends in florida , please know we are praying for you and everyone in the path , you got to take care of yourself .
you 've got to get out of the area .
you 've got to listen .
you have a great governor , governor scott , and you got to listen because it could be a really , really bad one .
so , it 's going to be a rough couple of days and maybe beyond that but we 'll see what the path ultimately is .
we 've seen the damage throughout the caribbean and cuba , the bahamas , haiti and others .
in fact , they say in haiti , almost 270 people -- they think around 270 have already been killed by this terrible storm .
so , to the folks in haiti and all over , we 're going to be helping you .
we 'll be with you and we send our best wishes and prayers .
we have a tremendous problem that i think is brewing right now as we speak here .
so , we 'll know in about four or five hours .
i just spoke to rick scott and governor christie just spoke to rick scott and it looks like four or five hours away so , we 'll know .
but whatever happens , we 're with everybody because it looks like it 's going to be a very bad one , maybe the worst in a long period of time .
ok , with that , howie carr has been amazing .
he 's been very -- i do n't know if he 's allowed support but he sounds like he supports me a lot .
i 'm not sure if he 's allowed to .
i 'm not sure he 's allowed to but i think probably .
but he certainly been amazing , and he 's a very talented guy and he 's a terrific guy with a terrific family .
so when we came up and a lot of people wanted us to do this , we said let 's get howie .
so , howie , let 's got .
you have some questions .
ok .
i 'll tell you what , i 'll make a you a deal .
if i 'm doing well , do n't call me .
if i 'm answering the question poorly , please call me immediately .
in fact you can go ... 

  you could go in 30 seconds , you could do it , all right .
all right .
ok , got it .
where is matthew ?
hi matthew .
yeah , i did hold back .
i thought it was just inappropriate to say what i was really thinking i would say .
and i held back i think for good reason -- i think for good reason .
i 'd much rather have it be on policy and i did n't like getting into the gutter and so i did hold back .
i also , i mean honestly , this was , you know , the commission , the so - called commission on presidential debates .
give me a break .
did you see where they came from ?
one of them comes from the hillary camp , the head person .
well , this microphone is wonderful .
but i had a problem with the mic .
we had a guy inside the room oscillating my mic .
was it that the mic did n't work ?
and you know it 's interesting , i went there a little bit before and i said , boy , the mic the is so great .
unfortunately when i went to talk they turn the mic up and down .
and you saw it -- everybody in the room saw it so we had a real problem .
and the head of the debate said , you 're right it was a serious problem -- told this to mayor giuliani .
it was a serious problem after the debate , an hour and a half .
he said , and now that the debate is over i 'm going backstage to find out what was wrong .
and i said , great that helped .
but i felt that -- i really felt that i wanted to keep it on as higher level as possible .
let 's see what happens .
i mean , let 's see what happens .
i think we 're all better off if we can do that because it is about issues , it is about policies .
good .
wow .
do we have about 24 hours to talk about this ?
look , we 've had failures at every level .
we 've had failures -- i think the iran deal is one of the worst deals i 've ever seen , ok .
it 's going to lead to nuclear weapons .
i was with bibi netanyahu the other day and we talked and we talked about it , and not to reveal what he said , but i will tell you , i can tell you what i said .
this is horrible for israel .
it 's horrible for our country .
it 's a horrible deal because over a period of time , over a short period of time , it leads to -- within 10 years there 's going to be some of them , then they 're going to end up with nuclear weapons and they have like a path .
on top of it , we gave them back $ 150 billion .
we obviously paid ransom for our hostages , obviously , and obama said this had nothing to do -- well , why did they delay it until all this money came in ?
but most importantly , it 's just a bad deal , and i 'm all for this because i happen to think that nuclear is just about the biggest problem that we have in the world today .
i think it 's one of -- you know , obama thinks its global warming .
i think it is nuclear in the hands of the wrong players .
this is devastating .
there is no winner .
there 's never going to be a winner with nuclear , believe me .
and so i think deals are fine , but they have to be good deals .
the deal made by secretary kerry -- never left the table -- he just agreed , agreed , agreed .
he 'd want something then says no and he 'd agree .
so sad but there is one example of a just horrible , horrible thing .
we should never have gone into iraq -- we should have never gone into iraq .
but of equal importance or most equal importance is the way we got out .
obama took us out with hillary clinton , create this incredible vacuum .
isis was formed , a lot of different problems happened and totally destabilized .
you know , the surge , whether you are in favor of going in or not , the surge really did work .
then all of a sudden , boom .
and not only that , we announced always we 're leaving here , we 're leaving them , how about mosul ?
did you see mosul where they announced yesterday -- i 'm seeing all about we 're going to attack mosul -- we 're going to attack mosul .
i mean , why do they say that ?
now , a lot of the bad hombres are in mosul .
the leaders of isis -- they think .
but they 're not there anymore because they say , hey wait a minute , they 're going to attack , let 's go someplace else .
is n't there an element of surprise ?
remember when we were young and we were studying history and they would talk about some of the great generals and great attacks and was called the element of surprise .
would n't it be nice if we attacked first and talked about our great victory later ?
now , you know , seriously who 's going to ...   it 's almost like they 're wasting their time attacking mosul because everyone that we want is going to be gone .
you 're going to have all civilians and there 'll be tremendous death and carnage , but the people that we want , they 're going to say , hey -- which are the leaders -- get the hell out of here .
it 's a very , very sad thing .
we are being run by people that are incompetent , i will tell you that .
charlene .
hi .
how are you ?
well , first of all thank you very much and i appreciate it .
interestingly i was listening the other day .
there was a gentleman who owns a big radio station , hispanics mostly -- all hispanic callers , and he was arguing with one of the hosts .
he said , no , you do n't understand , the people that are calling in , hispanics , they love trump .
they 're all for trump .
and he said , i was even surprised but now i 'm for trump also .
you know , i mean , this is happening more and more .
i just got back from las vegas where we gave a tremendous -- i mean , we had a tremendous crowd of people .
a lot of hispanics -- latinos , they like to be called in that area , you know that , right , hispanics and latinos .
but we had tremendous response and just tremendous -- it was an outpouring of love .
and you know , people that are here legally , they do n't want people coming across the border illegally taking their jobs , taking their homes , taking whatever they want to take .
and we want people to come in now .
i want people to come in to our country so bad , but they have to come in legally .
you know , we have a country and we have laws .
we have a border .
and if you do n't have a border , you do n't have a country .
but i think the biggest surprise , two big surprises -- we 're going to do great with african - american .
you look at what 's happening with inner cities , it 's a disgrace .
and the democrats have been running them for up to 100 years unbroken .
and the african - americans , believe me , i think we 're doing -- and you see how the numbers are changing .
one thing they do n't have a lot of confidence in hillary clinton , she 's lied to them for years , she does n't produce , she just does n't produce .
but i think we 're going to do great with the african - americans .
you look at the poverty in the inner cities .
you look at the crime in the inner cities .
you look at the education -- and there are no jobs -- and we are going to do fantastic with the hispanics .
i believe that .
we 're keeping it down right .
hi , karen .
thank you .
thank you .
i like this audience .
i like this audience .
well , look , the way i look at it , the middle - class has been forgotten in this country .
taxes are too high , jobs have been taken away from you , a lot of our companies -- a lot of great companies have left our country .
they have gone to mexico and other places .
china is making so much of our product , we do n't make any product anymore anywhere near like we used to .
and i will tell you , such a great question , because our middle - class has been treated so badly by the politicians .
i mean , just like forgotten .
and we are lowering taxes , as you know , way down for the middle class .
we 're changing the tax structure completely .
we had seven brackets , now we have three .
and we are bringing it down actually for those making not a lot at zero .
and we do n't want them to send in because that 's huge bureaucratically and extremely costly , but we are bringing the rates down to numbers that are much lower .
you have seen the numbers , much lower .
and you 're going to have a much lower tax base .
hillary clinton is raising your taxes way up .
i do n't even know what she 's thinking .
we are already the highest taxed nation in the world .
just about , they can maybe find every once a while , they 'll fact check me .
well , now there 's a nation that you never heard of .
we are slightly higher -- we are just about of the industrialized nations , we 're the highest taxpayers in the world .
we 're the highest taxed nation in the world .
our business taxes are going to be brought from 35 percent to 15 percent .
we 're cutting regulations which are -- we want regulation for environmental .
we want regulation for safety .
but the regulations are massive , howie , their massive .
and we 're cutting the regulations at a tremendous clip and i would say 70 percent of the regulations can go .
it 's just stopping businesses from growing .
and i think you 're going to see a tremendous change in this country .
we 're going to see jobs come back .
we 're going to see companies come back into our country .
and right now they 're just leaving .
it 's a one - way street out .
we have a one - way street right out of the country and they are going largely to mexico and other places , but mexico is the eighth wonder of the world .
i tell this story a lot , i have a friend who builds plants and he builds these massive plants and he says donald , you have to see what 's going on in mexico .
i said , how about our country ?
he goes , not so much .
we 're going to switch that around a little bit and we 'll get along great with mexico by the way .
but we 've got to switch that around .
it 's been a one - way highway out of the united states .
well , that 's the biggest problem and that takes place with so many .
and even though it 's over 100 degrees in this room , i do n't feel it , but you know , this room was not meant for this many people , you do know that , right .
i heard the other night , i was making a speech and we had tremendous , massive crowds and it was really hot .
so , i 'm a little warm and there might 've been a little bit of sweat and one of these dishonest people said donald trump was sweating .
and i said , sweating ?
it was 100 degrees .
and guess what , we 're all sweating tonight also , right ?
but that 's ok .
that 's good .
that 's healthy .
the biggest problem you have is people got to college , i mean , that 's great getting out now , that 's fantastic .
that means real smart .
but people go to college , they borrow money , they 're up to here .
they 're up to their neck in debt .
and then they get out and they ca n't get a job .
i mean , it 's such a massive problem .
they ca n't get a job because our really good jobs are gone , and they 've gone to other countries .
and so many other countries are making our product .
i want to see the day when you can get those great marks and that incredible profession , which you love probably , or you would n't have been so high up in the class , right , at the top ?
but i want to see the day when we can have those jobs back in this country at the highest level .
i want to see the day when apple will make their iphones in this country , instead of making them in china , in vietnam , and all over the place , ok .
and believe me , if i 'm president that 's going to happen .
and i use apple as an example but in all fairness , apple makes all this products all over the place , they 're not making them here , mostly in china , now vietnam which is becoming very strong for this .
they 're going to start making them here .
they 're going to start making them here .
we have the most people .
we have the most unbelievable people .
if i learned one thing in going around , we started on june 16th of last year and i 've gotten to know the people and we have by far the biggest rallies that people have seen , far bigger than bernie , and he was second -- but far bigger .
not that bernie 's are n't so big , by the way -- they 're very small .
bernie made a big mistake by the way .
bernie sanders would have been legendary if he did n't make a deal with the devil .
when he made that deal , his stock went way down , it went way down .
i mean honestly , even as somebody that is , you know , disagrees with him on a lot of things , other than trade , we agree very much on trade , very , very much on trade , except i will do things about it because i like free trade but i want to make a great deal in free trade .
but he was right on trade because our country is being ripped off of jobs and everything .
but we 're going to have a country that makes product again .
we 're going to have a country that apple and these other great companies are going to make their product in our country , and we 're going to have lots of people working , including yourself .
we have to do that .
ok ?
thank you .
hi bob .
well , i guess we 'll be talking about this for a while to come , but i have to tell you it 's one of the saddest things i 've ever seen happen to our country .
what 's happened with hillary clinton , where you send e - mails , where they send a subpoena , and they want all of your e - mails , i mean , if you 're in private business and you do what she did , it is called the , ok .
the united states congress -- congress sends a subpoena wanting e - mails and she gets the subpoena and she deletes 33,000 e - mails , and many other things including lying all over the place .
and you see people who have suffered greatly , including general petraeus for doing a tiny fraction of what she did .
that 's only -- we ca n't stay here all night and talk about it , but the lies she told to congress -- the lies she told to the people -- but the lie she told to congress .
and then you see the fbi give her a no tape , no anything , no swearing in .
i believe they said no swearing -- you do n't have to even swear in .
and they questioned her on the 4th of july , and then they released their finding on labor day , right before labor day when everyone is gone .
they 're gone here , they 're gone there .
i think what 's happened with respect to , because i have such respect for the people in the fbi and i have such incredible respect for the fbi .
what 's happened to the fbi and to the justice department at the highest level , honestly , i think it 's one of the saddest things i 've ever seen in this country .
whether we like it or do n't like it , to look at what 's happened and to look at the way that 's been handled , and you know , every time i speak , this is mentioned as subject and the people are going crazy .
the people of this country are very , very angry -- very , very , angry .
and i would think , i do n't know this , but i would think that some of these great fbi agents and the people that work within the fbi , i would imagine they are just furious as to what has happened to the reputation of the fbi .
so , i mean , i think it is an amazing question .
honestly , it 's like we are a third world country .
it is one of the saddest things that i have ever seen happen in this country , and it happened to justice and that 's probably i guess the way you feel also ?
yes , it is very sad .
i just am very disappointed .
i mean , you know , when he read the charges and he 's going one , two , three , four , and i 'm saying , wow , they 're going to do the right thing .
and then , he goes , essentially , however , it was , i mean , it was amazing -- it was amazing .
to go after point after point , and that was only a few of them .
so , it is very disappointing .
it 's very disappointing .
well , you know , we do n't have too many howie .
i 'll be honest with you .
you know , the press likes to report we have some of these long - term people that have done such a bad job .
look at the problem our country is in .
i would never use these people and they know that .
so then they announce in a group that they 're going over to hillary , right ?
you understand , and they announce in the group .
but you know , we have tremendous support , including a couple of your very distinguished folks from new hampshire who were against me , who are now for me .
and you are allowed to announce their names , but we have tremendous support in new hampshire .
one of them was very tough and very smart .
go ahead .
that 's true .
i 've watched him and i said , boy , he 's tough .
oh , that 's good .
well , that 's good because i 'm -- i mean , i thought it was terrific .
i met him the other day and -- father and son -- and i think they 're great people , but he was tough .
i tell you what , he was really hunting for trump .
and you know what , i respect for somebody that can go other way .
it 's not that easy to pivot , as you would say .
but i very much appreciate the sununu family and the fact that they are with me and i am with them , and they 're going to do very well .
he 's going to do very well and i see the numbers .
and you know , one of the things that have really happened , they all thought oh , trump -- because look , i 've never done this but i 've done very well in my life and business and did a lot of good things , but i 've never done this .
saw all of the reports , well , you 'll take down the senator and you 'll take down this senator .
you know how well the republicans are doing ?
i guess there is a gentleman in illinois that 's not doing so well .
this guy was actually taking out ads against me .
i said , are you sure he 's a republican , maybe he 's a democrat ?
and he 's not doing well , but hey , that 's his problem .
i mean , you know , he was not for me .
but if you look at -- and that was for political reasons -- but if you look at what is going on , now they 're all talking about -- in fact , the other day i saw very interestingly one of the announcer , you know , donald trump is having a very positive effect on these races .
the republicans are going to hold .
they 're doing terrifically well , far better than anyone thought .
and frankly , we are winning states and we 're going to win some states that would never in a million years -- you know this , be in play .
i mean , we have some states like , we 're doing great in colorado , and somebody else would n't do well .
nobody else would do well .
we 're doing great .
i think we 're leading colorado in one of the polls as you know just came out .
we 're leading colorado .
i just left .
we 're leading a lot of places and we 're doing at least very competitively in a lot of states that absolutely would not be for republicans .
and , you know , one of the funny things , they do the maps , and remember to -- i 've watched the different people that do the maps and they 're very small path .
it 's tougher for the republicans , i have to tell you .
but they said there 's very small path but i was watching the other day and the same person was saying , wow , this path is getting a lot wider .
does n't mean they were happy about it , but the path now , there are four different paths , before there was one little one .
well , nate silver has been , you know , he did n't predict us in the primary and he had never called a loser before .
i mean , you know , he 's always been on the right side of what happened , in terms of at least his predictions and he did n't predict me in the primaries and in all fairness , you know , he 's never seen me , never spoke to me , never saw what we did .
you know , we had 17 very talented people and one by one by one , it was a beautiful sight to watch , was n't it ?
beautiful .
and by the way , howie , those people , most of them endorse me , ben carson , chris christie , so many of them endorse me and they are great endorsements .
scott walker has been incredible .
he helped pence too .
mike pence by the way has been fantastic and he did a great job last night .
he did a great job last night .
thank you , lois .
john harwood was the worst moderator out of all the debates we had .
how many did we have , 11 or 12 ?
he was so bad .
this guy knows nothing about me .
i was so happy -- and i saw it today that somebody on cnn , the clinton news network , who knows nothing about us , you know , they used john king actually .
he 's a nice guy .
i like him on the maps .
he does a good job with the maps .
i like them better now than i did a couple months ago because a couple of months ago i had no chance , now all of a sudden that map is getting very red .
but john king said ...   you know , they always have a source , they always have a source , a source with -- nobody talks to him .
nobody talks because he is like the enemy .
he 's like the enemy .
but he said , and a few other people said donald trump was at first happy and then he was unhappy because mike pence did so well .
i said , unhappy ?
we 're jumping up and down .
he was so good -- and i tell you what , he 's a great human being .
you ca n't root against him , you ca n't .
i was telling chris christie , i said , can you imagine these people are saying that i would have loved to , you know , see him not do well because that makes me look better ?
these people , that is why a guy like john king has stayed in the same position for like , how long has been at cnn ?
i used to say i think someday he 'll be an anchor , guess what ?
he is still doing the maps .
but no , i was so happy , i mean , i can give you my word on this .
i was so happy that mike did well and i was rooting him on we were talking all during the day and i was giving him some ideas and we were running things by each other .
and it 's so disconcerting when you -- even tonight they said donald trump is going to new hampshire to practice for sunday .
this has nothing to do with sunday .
it 's like they make you like a child .
i love the people of new hampshire .
this was set up a little while ago .
they were going to cancel it , and i said why are you going to cancel it ?
well , you want a debate prep .
i said , forget debate prep .
i mean , give me a break .
do you really think that hillary clinton is debate prepping for three or four days ?
hillary clintons is resting , ok .
she 's resting .
she wants to build up her energy for sunday night and you know what , that 's fine .
but the narrative is so foolish .
i 'm here for one reason .
i love the people of new hampshire .
i said i was going to be here and i 'm here .
very simple .
that 's trouble .
always go into what you love doing .
and you may have parents that are trying to push you one way or another but you know what you love .
you have to do what you love .
and i say this all the time , i say it in speeches and everything , i mean , i will speak in front of young people because i love doing it and i say always follow your dream .
always go into what you love .
and never , ever quit or give up .
i 've seen a lot of people over the years , big people and not so big , usually it 's not so big because if they quit they 're not going to get so big , but the most successful people i 've ever met are the people that never quit , they never give up .
they just do n't take no for an answer .
so do something that you really love doing because that is not work and never , ever quit or give up .
do one or two more howie .
thank you .
hello , al .
well , the veterans , as al can tell you and there are a lot of veterans in this room because i recognize some of you and i 've become very close to the vets and a lot of it started with new hampshire to be honest and iowa , but i really got close to the vets .
and i 'll tell you what , in many cases , they 're living in hell .
what is going on with the veterans administration between the corruption , the long , long waits , 22 suicides a day .
i thought that was a typo .
when i heard 22 suicides a day , i said that 's impossible .
twenty - two suicides a day .
much of it caused by the fact that they ca n't get to see doctors .
howie , they wait in line for five and six days and at the end of the six day , the doctor says sorry , you know , i 'm going on vacation .
and actually the veterans administration and the vets tell me this , they have some really great doctors , but getting to see them is sometimes almost impossible .
we are going to solve finally the problem of the veterans administration .
we have illegal immigrants that in many cases are treated better than our great veterans and you know that and everybody knows that .
they 're being treated better than our veterans , and that 's not going to happen .
one of the things we 're going to do is the lines are impossible .
getting to see a doctor is in many cases just days and days .
when that circumstance happens , we 're going to let our veterans go across the street , around the corner , two miles away , and see a doctor , private or a hospital , public or private , where they are looking for work where they have wonderful people and they 're looking for work , take care of their problem and we will pay the bill .
and that 's going to be the cheapest thing we can do .
it 's going to be the cheapest thing we can do .
and al can tell you a lot of the vets that i recognize in the room , they can tell you everybody is in love with the plan .
and we 're going to keep the v.a. , but -- we 're going to keep the veterans administration , we 're going to keep the hospitals , we 're going to keep the buildings because i think that 's important .
you know , we have to take care of our vets .
these are people that we would n't be here if it were n't for the vets .
but when they 're waiting in line and they know there is no end in sight , and honestly , they 're dying .
they need a simple procedure , they need a prescription , they need something very easy , and they end up dying and it 's a very sad thing .
so , they 're going to be able to go across the street to a public or private hospital , to a doctor , and we 're going to take care of our vets .
for the first time , we 're really going to take care of our vets , ok .
well , let me tell you , you 've heard that and most people did n't even believe it but that 's true .
and you know , she 's open border .
she wants people to just flow through -- look , when the border patrol agents , 16,500 , and when ice , when they come up -- and they 've never endorsed a presidential candidate before , but these are great people that want to do their jobs .
you know , it 's much harder for them to do their jobs to just stand back .
right now , its stand back and let them in .
it 's much and catch and release which is a disaster .
but when they want to do their jobs and it 's much more difficult and they come out and endorse trump , who 's going to have them do their jobs ?
and we 're going to build the wall , and we 're going to stop things from coming in .
look , we 're going to stop -- and this was the pledge i made to new hampshire , more than any other place because this is where i really could n't believe it .
but i said if i win and i become president , first got the nomination -- that happened -- become president , i promise the people of new hampshire that we are going to stop this crap from coming into your state 100 percent , 100 percent .
and it can be done , and it can be done even before the wall goes up .
the wall is a necessary edge .
you know , i asked the patrol , i asked really the ice folks that endorsed me , and i asked the border patrol folks that endorsed me .
i said , how important is the wall ?
and you know , i 'm so committed to the wall , i was pretty sure they were going to say this , but i was n't 100 percent , they said mr. trump , it is absolutely necessary for us to do our proper job , which made me , you know , gave me a little additional security as far as the wall is concerned .
we need the wall .
we have to stop the drugs , heroine , but mainly drugs , but we have to stop the drugs from pouring into our country .
and believe me it is poisoning our country and it 's poisoning our youth .
and we 're going to stop it and we 're going to stop it fast long before the wall gets up .
we 're going to start that wall fast .
i get them built fast .
but i tell you , long before , we 're going to stop that poison from flowing into our country , ok ?
one more .
we 'll do another question .
she gets easy once .
do you ever notice , by the way , did you see the difference .
i 'm getting boom , boom , boom , with here , what would you do to fix the economy ?
well , of course , that 's actually a much tougher question than you would understand , and she does n't have a clue , but you see the questions i was getting .
let 's have a fun question .
thank you , thank you .
i think just the relationship i had with my parents .
you know , my father built houses in brooklyn and queens and the apartments .
and he was a very good negotiator .
i 'd sit at his knee , and it was n't that he taught me .
he did n't really say , son , you have to learn , but he 'd be on the telephone negotiating with a plumber or an electrician or a sheet rocker , and i would hear this and i 'd be playing with blocks at his knee on the floor and i 'd be listening , and it was always so vivid .
and he was always negotiating and you know what , that 's what we need in this country because people are running away with our country .
you look at what 's going on , whether it 's the border , whether it 's our depleted military -- the greatest people on earth are military people , but they have old equipment .
you saw the piece they did on many of the networks where they show fighter jets with their 18 years old .
they 're so old that they do n't make the parts anymore .
these are fighter jets that our people are flying now and they have to go into plane graveyards .
they have to go into graveyards to get parts and they have to go into museums to get parts because they do n't make the parts anymore .
now , we need a strong military .
we need to protect our second amendment .
we need to take care of our vets .
we need borders .
we need great education , getting rid of common core , so important .
we need so many things , and by the way , one thing , and i know john sununu and a lot of other people felt this was so important when they came out so strongly , united states supreme court .
we need -- we lost a great justice , justice scalia .
great justice -- we need great justices , who are going to uphold our constitution .
and if hillary clinton gets in , you 're going to have a much different country .
so , so many people feel that 's so important , i personally feel it 's one of the most important things .
defense always being we have to defend our country , and we have to stop people coming in from parts of the world where they 're looking to do us harm , believe me .
and they 're pouring in and hillary clinton wants to have them come in at a rate of 550 percent more than president obama .
we 're going to stop it .
and you know the statement , " we are going to make america great again . "
and it is going to happen quickly .
so , thank you very much , everybody .
thank you .
the world series , you know , look , of is course it 's boston .

thank you very much .
we had an amazing convention .
that was one of the best .
i think it was one of the best ever .
in terms -- in terms of enthusiasm , in terms of i think what it represents , getting our word out .
ivanka was incredible last night .
she did an incredible job .
and so many of the speakers were so amazing and ground - setting .
i mean , really ground - setting .
we were -- it was just something very , very special .
we 're even getting good marks on television .
can you believe this ?
hard to believe .
oh , they 'll change .
do n't worry .
but it has been -- it has been just an incredible four days .
i want to thank the people of cleveland and the people of ohio .
because it 's -- i mean , what -- what they 've done .
you know , we read two , three weeks ago , " this is going to be horrible ; we 're going to have riots ; we 're going to have problems . "
everything was a problem , a problem .
this was probably one of the most peaceful , one of the most beautiful , one of the most love - filled conventions in the history of conventions .
and when they talk about unity , i want to tell you , that was unity .
that was unity .
right ?
i saw you last night .
that was unity .
that was amazing .
and the party has just come together .
the party has come together .
and the few people that are n't there , it 's ok .
you know .
you 've got to understand .
i ran as an outsider .
i did n't want anybody .
now , i have guys like mike pence .
i mean , this is n't supposed to happen .
see , now if i do n't win , i 'm going to blame mike , right ?
we have to blame mike .
but we want to thank a number of people because , in particular , and we 're going to leave out some because that always happens and it 's very sad .
the set -- i 'm a real estate guy -- i build buildings .
i build things .
i want to tell you , that was the most beautiful set i think i 've ever seen , not only for conventions , but for anything .
and the folks that worked on that , especially the carpenters , the electricians .
you know , we forget about -- we forget about this stuff .
those sheet - rockers were up there .
they did a heck of a job .
i said , " you 're going to wrap that sheet rock ? "
and he said , " yeah , mr. trump , we just cut it . "
i said , " i know what you do , but you do n't see it very much . "
we have our chairman from new york i see right over there -- my man , my leader .
right ?
we 're going to win new york .
we 're going to try and win new york .
you know , if we win new york , it 's over .
right ?
it 's over .
thank you , chairman .
i really appreciate it .
so , a few of the people .
harold hamm is here .
where is harold ?
he 's around here -- look at harold here .
oh , boy .
you talk about money .
oy , yoy , yoy .
you know , barry switzer , the great football coach , won a super bowl , won a national championship .
and i guess he 's harold 's best friend , or one of them .
so he came up to my office and he 's sitting there and says , " you know mr. trump , harold is one of the great energy tycoons , but more importantly from our standpoint , one of the people that really understands energy better than anybody else . "
you know we hired these consultants , they do n't know what they 're doing .
if they were any good , they 'd be worth $ 10 billion , ok ?
but harold is one of the really knowledgeable people in energy .
and barry switzer -- and he 's a tough cookie and a good guy , but a tough cookie .
he said , " you know mr. trump , that harold hamm , he 's my friend , but these other companies they go out and they spend millions of dollars looking for oil .
that guy takes a straw , puts in the ground and oil pours out of it . "
that 's the kind of a guy we want telling us about energy , right ?
harold , and you made a great speech the other night , great to have you .
we want the real players right ?
we do n't want the consultants , we do n't want the guys that he hires , we want him .
so , harold , great that you 're here , i did n't know you 'd be here .
i appreciate it .
and your speech was terrific , by the way .
we also have , and i think very important , jeff sessions , who may or may not be here , still but i want to tell you he was the first one .
mike , he was right at the beginning .
and he 's so highly respected and honestly ted cruz has so much respect for jeff sessions , and everybody knew that jeff sessions was going to be with ted cruz during the campaign .
and jeff said , " you know , i 've never seen anything like what 's happening .
you 've got a movement going on . "
and he was really the first big , big player -- u.s. senator , highly respected by everybody , one of the really smart people and low key .
i like that , everyone once and a while , you know that low key genius .
" well , donald , i do n't know if i 'd do it that way , why do n't you try doing it this way ? "
i say that 's genius .
every once and a while we have people like that right ?
but jeff sessions was there right at the beginning , and it was a huge upset , because when jeff came on , everybody thought he was going to just routinely be with ted .
and frankly he 's never endorsed anybody before .
you know , he 's not an endorser .
this is -- he 's called a tough endorsement .
and he went out and he endorsed me , and that was a fantastic thing .
and he 's been a great help ever since .
so jeff sessions , i appreciate it .
jeff larson 's around here someplace -- where 's jeff larson ?
he 's around here someplace .
what a job jeff did .
reince , of course , where 's my superstar ?
i think he 's probably on a plane flying to our next meeting .
this guy works so hard .
you know i said yesterday in front of a small group , because we 're raising money like it 's crazy what 's going on -- and you know the nice thing ?
first of all , i put in over $ 60 million .
last month , i think i put in $ 3.8 million .
but we 're raising money also for the republican party , which is very important .
and -- and the beautiful thing -- i ca n't guarantee these figures , but i heard yesterday alone was like $ 3.5 million from small donors .
the average donation was just over $ 50 .
and we 're raising tremendous amount of money from the small donors .
to me , that 's more important in a sense .
i mean harold can write his checks but harold 's only one vote , right ?
these other people give you $ 50 , but they vote by the millions , that 's what we want .
to hell with harold , right ?
but -- but we have , you know , just tremendous numbers of people coming in , and we 're really building up a war chest that 's going to be great .
and i 'm continuing to fund my campaign , large portions of it .
and in fact , i thought i gave $ 2 million last month , and they said " no , you actually gave $ 3.8 . "
i said " oh . "
it 's always good when you do n't even know what you gave , and it does n't matter .
you know it 's nice when they say you gave $ 3.8 instead of two , and i do n't even get angry at anybody , right ?
but i 'm over $ 60 million , because i said i was going to fund the primaries .
and i did n't know this was going to happen , so i guess we just keep going along , right ?
but i 'll tell you , it 's an honor , it 's an honor .
and i -- and i 've said this , a lot of the television people have come up to me , and a lot of the -- actually , one very highly respected writer called up and i 've told this story a few times , but i said -- he said , " what you 've done is incredible . "
and this was actually in september .
they called it the " summer of trump . "
and he said , " what you 've done is incredible . "
i said " nothing 's incredible unless i win . "
and i was n't talking about the primaries .
he said " no , no , no .
what you 've done is incredible .
it 's been the summer of trump , it 's down in the history books , there 's never been anything like it . "
bill o'reilly said it 's the greatest single political phenomena he 's ever seen in his life .
a couple of weeks ago , did you see that ?
yeah .
and brit hume said it , and i 'm not so sure if brit hume likes me , but he said it .
so -- but i like him .
so what happened is they said that .
i said no , no , no , you do n't understand .
i do n't care .
i do n't do anything unless i win , and i 'm not talking about the primaries .
i mean , the whole thing -- because otherwise , what have we done ?
what have we done ?
then i got a call from somebody else a month ago saying the same thing .
but now , it was the summer of trump .
it was the autumn of trump .
it was the christmas of trump .
it was everything .
and it 's really of you because it 's a movement .
what we have going is a movement .
i was just on the cover of time again this week .
time magazine 's like , eh , ok .
you know , i think i was on the cover of time magazine twice in my life and like six times in the last number of months .
so you tell me , which is more important , real estate or politic , ok ?
that 's -- that 's the way -- is that true , harold ?
because i have six for politics and i have two for real estate or whatever they put me on for .
but it 's been -- it 's been amazing .
but i said , look , it really to me matters .
they said no , no , no , believe me , what you 've done is in the history books .
there 's never been anything like it .
then i won the primaries .
they said the same thing .
this is crazy , now you 're really in the history -- i said no , it does n't matter .
unless we beat hillary clinton , and i mean beat her badly .
i will consider it -- and i should n't say this , because you know what ?
if it does n't work out , i could say , well , i did a good job .
so i 'm hurting myself by saying this .
if i do n't win , meaning that final stage , beat 17 people -- because actually 17 including , but it was actually 17 because there was one that we do n't even talk about who joined who left very quickly .
one statement , he was gone , ok ?
and then do n't forget hillary had a couple of guys who dropped out and bernie was tough , bernie was tough .
we 're going to get a lot of the bernie voters , by the way .
because they did n't treat bernie right .
they did n't treat him right .
i mean , i do n't know bernie .
i do n't -- you know , i do n't know him , i 've never met him .
but they did n't treat him right , honestly .
and what happened -- he ran a very , very good campaign .
and hillary 's people just swamped him .
you 're looking at debra wasserman schultz .
i 'll take   reince over her any day in terms of competence .
forget it .
not for being nice or any of those things .
who cares ?
i will take reince in terms of competence over her -- believe me -- any day .
any day .
you see what she 's done to that party .
so i will tell you that i think we 're going to get a lot of his voters because of the trade issue .
because they understand , but because of the trade issue .
i think we 're going to get a lot of their voters .
so i have to thank reince .
i want to thank steve king .
where 's steve king ?
that 's our local -- where 's steve ?
where ?
thank you , steve .
i want to thank some of our security guys .
first of all , the secret service is unbelievable .
unbelievable .
they 've been hit a little bit over the last couple of years .
let me tell you , these guys are fantastic .
i 'm the best thing that ever happened to the secret service .
because i go around , mark and all these guys , i go around saying how great they are .
they are great .
these are great , great people , ok ?
so i want to thank the secret service .
i want to thank the police of cleveland , the cleveland police department .
the mayor , i want to thank .
i want to thank your police chief .
he is amazing .
i do n't know if he 's here .
but boy , he has done some job working -- working with all of the folks from law enforcement .
and you heard last night , we 're going to be protecting the law enforcement .
they are doing some job .
so we 're going to be protecting them .
i want to thank eddie dick .
where 's eddie ?
is eddied here ?
i want to thank kevin schroeder , keith schiller .
become famous .
he 's becoming more famous than me .
i have to thank -- and again , your police chief has done a fantastic job in cleveland , done a fantastic -- and we have .
in terms of some of the folks , david gilbert .
where 's david ?
david around some place ?
joe roman , chris conner , chris kelly .
these people are all here .
do n't bother , you do n't have to come up and speak .
beth mooney .
where 's brian jack ?
brian jack .
boy , brian .
brian .
what a job you did , brian .
ok .
that 's all .
now , you can leave , go to the next location , brian .
go to the next location .
hillary 's trying the to pick her vice president as fast as possible , because she wants to take away a little of the success that we had at this convention .
this convention has been a success .
you know , people , if you turn on television , you turn on some of the dishonest media , you 'll see that oh , wow , this happened and that happened .
what happened ?
you know , somebody got booed the hell out of a place by thousands and thousands of people .
there was n't one person in the room -- not one .
and then they said , " there may not be unity . "
unity ?
there was n't one person in the room who was -- including the texas delegation , right ?
honestly , he may have ruined his political career .
i feel so badly .
i feel so badly .
and , you know , he 'll come and endorse over the next little while , he 'll come and endorse , because he has no choice .
but i do n't want his endorsement .
what difference does it make ?
i do n't want his endorsement .
i have such great endorse -- i do n't want his endorsement .
just -- ted , stay home , relax , enjoy yourself .
just a couple of things .
i knew his speech , they gave me his speech , i saw exactly what his speech was , because when you go up to speak , you have to give your speech , you know ?
we do n't want surprises , right ?
so they gave it .
they came to me and said " it 's a boring speech , mr. trump .
nothing good , nothing bad .
he congratulates you on the victory , and here 's the speech . "
well , he got up , and of the first two sentences , he added a sentence .
in other words , he got up and he added a sentence , which could have been viewed as a nasty thing in terms of what he said , because he was implying something which is wrong , but that 's ok .
so he took his speech -- and you 're bound by the speech , just like you 're bound by the pledge , right ?
you 're bound by the pledge .
so ted cruz took his speech that was done , was on the teleprompter , said hello , then made a statement that was n't on the speech , and then went back to his speech .
see , to me , that 's dishonorable .
to me , not signing a pledge is dishonorable .
ok ?
it 's dishonorable , but not a nice thing to do .
and i talk this way , because we 're all together .
we created one of the most successful conventions in the history of conventions .
and the television ratings for this convention were through the roof .
i get a kick out of cnn . "
i do n't know if this is a successful convention .
i do n't know . "
in the meantime , all they talk about is trump and the convention , are right ?
and i have to tell you , melania did a great job .
what a great speech .
what a great speech .
what a great speech .
and the presentation is still being talked about .
what a beautiful speech .
ivanka last night , unbelievable , unbelievable .
unbelievable , to have that kind of an introduction .
and tiffany , who 's never done it , the biggest group she 's ever been in front of is probably 22 people in a classroom .
tiffany was amazing .
and eric and don .
i just do n't want them running for political office , because somebody 's got to stay behind and run the business .
i mean , you know , we ca n't go crazy .
but i get a kick , because the ratings on television are through the roof .
and nobody 's going to watch -- look , i 'll -- this has nothing to do with politics , but maybe it has a little to do .
nobody 's going to watch this next convention coming .
who the -- who 's going to -- i 'm going to have a hard time watching her final speech .
number one , i know her too well .
number two , boring , it 's boring .
very boring .
oh , how about that final speech ?
and our final speech , our final speech .
now , it was n't my fault , but i think it went like an hour and 25 minutes , and the networks did n't know what to do , because they had all of their programming , big programming -- the local news is a very big factor on television .
you never , ever move your local news .
they all moved it .
they said , the heck with the local news , mike , they said we 're moving it .
and kimmel and fallon and the shows , they all went back a long way , because they were n't going to miss this convention .
i love that , you know ?
i love it .
i knew i said , oh , wow , i 'm supposed to be off .
let 's keep going , but it was n't my fault .
what happened -- what happened was the applause was so long and so crazy .
it really was .
i mean , if you look , the speech was fine , but the applause were longer than the speech .
so it was -- it was amazing .
there was great love in that room .
honestly , that was all about unity .
and we may be missing a couple of people .
we may be missing just a couple of people .
two other things , two other things , just to finish with ted .
because i like ted .
he 's fine .
again , i do n't want his endorsement .
if he gives it , i will not accept it .
just so you understand .
if he gives it , i will -- i will not accept .
it wo n't matter .
honestly , he should have done it because nobody cares .
and he would have been in better shape for four years from now if he 's going to -- i do n't think -- i do n't see him winning anyway , frankly .
but if he did , it 's fine .
although maybe i 'll set up a super - pac if he decides to run .
are you allowed to set up a super - pac , mike , if you are the president , to fight somebody ?
but -- but there were two things that he said yesterday were lies .
ready ?
i did n't start anything with the wife .
a pac , which he 's very friendly with , released a cover story on my wife , who was a tremendously successful and elegant model .
and she was on the cover of gq magazine .
i think it was gq , right ?
gq magazine is not exactly penthouse .
but she was on the cover of gq magazine , an artsy picture .
but you know , she was a model , really successful .
she did n't need to marry me .
she was making a lot of money , believe me .
in fact , i had to work hard to get her to marry me .
it was n't that easy .
it 's true .
it 's so true .
you think i 'm kidding .
so -- so they released this picture which was , you know , to the people of the state of utah .
i love utah .
i love the people of utah .
but that 's not where you want to necessarily send a risque picture .
everybody in utah got a picture .
and i do n't think they showed that it was gq .
i do n't even think they showed .
they took the gq off .
they just had -- they cut all the stuff out so they did n't see it was a magazine cover from , you know , a reasonably respected magazine .
and it was melania trump .
now , and i 'm saying this just to clear it up , because that 's a -- " he took . "
i did n't do anything .
then when i saw somebody tweeted a picture of melania , and a picture of heidi , who i think , by the way , is a very nice woman and a very beautiful woman .
i have to tell you , i think heidi cruz is a great person .
i think it 's the best thing he 'd got going , and his kids , if you want to know the truth .
in a certain way , although he 's got good intellect , but he does n't know how to use it .
and he was a good debater , but he did n't do well in the debates against me , according to every poll .
i mean , every poll , you know , he 's this great debater , except he lost in every single poll and every single debate .
so that takes care of the heidi thing .
because heidi 's a terrific woman , but they sent out -- now , he said , " that was a pac ; we had nothing to do . "
folks , a lot of us are political people , right ?
we 're not babies .
his people were on the pac .
so he said , " we had nothing to do ; we had ... " now , probably you could trace it down with e - mails , but they 're pretty smart .
they do n't even send -- probably just phone calls .
but look , it was a pac with many of his friends .
it was a cruz super - pac .
i think he even said , " well , it was n't really meant for us . "
it was a cruz pac .
it was his people .
ok , so they sent out the first picture .
please remember that .
number two , his father .
i do n't know his father .
i met him once .
i think he 's a lovely guy .
i think he 's a lovely guy .
all i did is point out the fact that on the cover of the national enquirer there was a picture of him and crazy lee harvey oswald having breakfast .
now , ted never denied that it was his father .
instead , he said , " donald trump " -- i had nothing to do with it .
this was a magazine that , frankly , in many respects , should be very respected .
they got o.j. they got edwards .
i mean , if that was the new york times , they would have gotten pulitzer prizes for their reporting .
i 've always said , why did n't the national enquirer get the pulitzer prize for edwards and o.j. simpson and all of these things ?
but anyway , so they have a picture , an old picture , having breakfast with lee harvey oswald .
now , nothing -- i 'm not saying anything .
they said -- and here 's how the press takes that story .
so this had nothing to do with me , except i might have pointed it out , but it had nothing to do with me .
i have no control over anything .
i might have pointed it out .
but they never denied .
did anybody ever deny that it was the father ?
they 're not saying , " oh , that was n't really my father . "
it 's a little hard to do , because it looks like him .
so , here 's the story .
the press takes that , and they say , " donald trump and his conspiracy theories ; he went out and said his father was with lee harvey oswald , and he assassinated the president . "
what did i do ?
so two things .
those were the two points .
so in those two points , he said about the endorsement -- and i just had it cleared up .
i think i 'm doing the right thing in doing it , but i have to do it .
number one , the heidi thing you understand now .
number two , i know nothing about his father .
i know nothing about lee harvey oswald .
but there was a picture on the front page of the national inquirer , which does have credibility , and they 're not going to do pictures like that because they get sued for a lot of money if things are wrong , ok , a lot of money .
and there was a picture .
and that 's the only thing i know .
so now , they use the two things as the reason he wo n't support .
let me tell you something .
we , if for no other reason , if people really dislike me , and i do n't think they do any more after the four days .
hey look , if i have kids that like me that much , how bad can i be , right , right ?
and they love their daddy .
i was a good father .
but i have smart children and good children .
and i 'm getting a lot of credit .
i think they were the star of the convention .
mike , i think they saved us .
i think they saved us , mike .
but no , my children were really -- and they 're saying , people are saying that , they were the star -- the real stars of the convention .
everyone of them -- they were -- i was so proud of them .
i mean , it was such a great thing .
but to finish , this was an amazing period of time .
this was an amazing convention .
i just heard a number -- is dan scavino there ?
come up , dan , for a second .
i just -- dan scavino .
you might have seen him on twitter and facebook .
you know what he is ?
he 's a facebook , twitter junky .
this guy -- that was the first time i 've seen him look up in seven months .
he 's always looking down .
nobody knows facebook and twitter and that stuff better than dan .
why do n't you give just a quick report because i hear the numbers are astronomical .
where do you hear these -- you know , we 're dealing in a modern age .
i hate to do this .
a lot of people saying what 's facebook , what 's -- unfortunately , we 're dealing in a modern age .
how about giving a quick -- you want to hear this ?
wait until you hear the numbers .
you wo n't even believe them .
go ahead .
ten million .
so one of my really good choices in life , although i 'll confirm that in about three and a half months from now , but i believe truly it will be one of my really great decisions is picking mike pence to run along with me and to run for you .
and so i 'd like to ask governor pence from the great state of indiana , and we love indiana and bobby knight , who i love and lou holtz and you 're wonderful -- you know , gene from purdue -- we have them all -- and digger .
we 've got a lot of coaches out there .
but these guys are great people and they love mike and maybe mike can say a few words .
thank you .
thank you .
just one thing i wanted to leave you with : supreme court justices .
no matter how much you like or dislike , no matter what your feelings , whether you 're the governor of ohio , whether you 're a senator from texas or any of the other people that i beat so easily and so badly , you have no choice , you 've got to go for trump .
supreme court justices .
if hillary clinton gets it , she is going to replace -- and last night i called him our beloved justice scalia , he was great .
and we 're going to get somebody as close to him and his views and philosophy as possible .
conservative , all the things you want , the things we stand for as a party .
and i promise you that , and that 's why i issued 11 names because being an outsider , they said oh , well we do n't know , supposing you put up liberal judges .
i say i have an idea , it 's never been done before , you know we have a lot of ideas that people do n't normally have , right ?
i said i have an idea .
in order to -- because i really just have no problem .
they did n't know if they believed me , well we do n't know what happens if we elect him and then he puts up liberal judges .
by the way , our conservative republican presidents have n't done so well with the judges , have they ?
ok .
i mean , we have obamacare , should have been knocked out twice because of an appointment .
so we 'll do better , we 'll do much better .
that 's why i put out a list of 11 judges .
but no matter what you think of donald trump , as a republican , if that 's what your philosophy is , if you 're a great , great believer in the constitution , you have no choice .
hate to say it .
whether you 're a hater or a lover , and by the way , last night i do n't think there was one hater in that room .
and that was packed .
that was packed .
there were no seats and those seats were selling for a lot of money on ebay .
they were going for big numbers .
in fact , i was thinking about taking 10 or 12 tickets and saying , " let 's go . "
but they were selling for a lot of money .
and it was amazing .
so , just remember , supreme court justices .
i want to finish by this -- we 've had some incredible support , because when i started everyone said , you know , some of these pundits that now say , " oh , well , you ca n't do that , you ca n't " -- these were the same people that say , " well , if he runs -- but he wo n't run . "
i ran .
then they said , " oh , " then they go , " but he wo n't win . "
then i started off at 6 percent , which is pretty high because i was only there about two days .
people forgot .
so that was only two days , i did n't get the full backing .
then it went to like 12 , and then to 18 .
and every week they said , " well , that 's his ceiling .
and he ca n't do more than that . "
so we go from six -- right ?
these -- i saw them in the audience , those two .
so we go from six , to 12 to 18 and every week they go , " well , that 's the ceiling . "
charles krauthammer , " they will not run , he will not run .
and if he runs , he will just be doing it for fun . "
this is not fun .
this is a lot of work .
ok .
this is a lot of work , folks .
i did n't need this .
this was n't in exactly the schedule .
but i saw how badly our country is doing and how easy it will be to bring back .
trade deals alone will make an impact like you wo n't believe .
money will come in .
jobs will come in .
and then you look at the military where it 's so depleted , but we 're taking care of other nations .
and i want to continue to take care of other nations , there are a lot of good things about that , but they have to pay us .
they have to pay us .
you know , i remember years ago , and i 've always said , " wow , i never quite understood it , " because they said , " the united states spends ten times the money on its military than anybody else in the world . "
i said -- i said , " well , china has a big military , all these places .
that 's surprising . "
but , you know , i was building buildings and things , i never really gave it too much thought .
and then i realized , i remember -- i always remember , we spend so much more than anybody else .
i said , how can that be ?
we 're protecting everybody in the world .
i mean , we 're protecting all these nations , and these are rich nations and they 're great nations .
japan , they send their cars , they make a fortune , and then they do n't pay us the amount that it costs .
i do n't want to make a profit .
i want costs , pay us what it costs .
maybe we ca n't get it .
and if we ca n't -- see , you have to be prepared to walk .
you have to .
if you 're not prepared to walk .
hillary clinton came out when she heard what i said about japan .
japan is a very rich nation .
those cars are flowing in .
they 're rich because of us , if you think about it .
ok .
those cars -- you go to los angeles , you see these massive ships .
it looks like nascar .
by the way , thank you brian france , owner of nascar .
he endorsed donald trump .
i love nascar !
richard petty endorsed me .
all -- a lot of the great drivers endorsed me .
king richard .
but they -- it 's like -- it 's like these guys driving -- it 's like richard petty driving -- they 're coming out of the boats , these massive ships .
and they do n't pay us .
and then the general gets up and the general says , " mr. trump is wrong , does n't he understand that japan pays us 50 percent of the cost of defending them ? "
oh , great .
they say , " mr. trump , could we have a comment ? "
i said , " yeah , why are n't they paying 100 percent , " right ?
and germany and south korea , we have 28,000 soldiers .
and think of this one , saudi arabia .
saudi arabia would n't be there for one week if we pulled out .
they have nothing but money .
nothing but money .
they have so much money , they -- they do n't know what to do with it , ok .
they do n't know what to do with it .
who 's -- who is making our deals for us ?
one deal like that has a massive impact on our budgets , on our economics as a country .
we 're up to $ 19 trillion .
we 're very soon going to be $ 21 trillion .
trillion .
nobody even knows what -- if i could take -- i could take the great harold hamm , i could say , " tell me what a trillion dollars is ? "
although , he 's worth almost a trillion , so he may know .
he may know .
but , you know , honestly , most people do n't even know what the hell it -- it 's so much .
they even know .
they would n't know how to define it .
so here 's the story .
we are going to do something really special , and our message caught on .
when i started this , we had all these pundits saying , it wo n't happen .
and i had a little staff -- corey lewandowski was great .
i have to tell you .
and he 's been very loyal and he 's been on cnn , and he 's really been fighting for me , which is very nice .
and i -- i respect that a lot .
hope hicks .
where 's hope ?
come here , hope .
come here , hope .
get up here , hope .
hope hicks , the legendary hope hicks .
come on up here , hope .
come .
come .
come .
she 's shy .
get her up here .
come on , hope .
come on , hope .
we had a very small , but tough team .
we had a small -- here 's hope hicks .
they 're not going to lift you over that barricade probably .
look at her .
she 's very shy .
she 's actually -- she 's a very shy person , but she 's a great person .
she 's done an amazing job .
and we had a staff of between george -- where 's our george ?
come on over here .
come on .
fellows , get over here .
just stand over here someplace .
get up .
get up on the dais .
come on .
i 'd get hope up , but she ca n't get through the secret service people there .
and what happened -- so we had a small staff .
and i got criticized for it .
they 'd say , " so and so " -- i wo n't use names because i do n't want to embarrass anybody -- " so and so has spent many times what trump has spent and has a much bigger staff , " and then we win .
i do n't get any credit .
you 're supposed to get credit if you have smaller staff , less payroll , and you win .
but in politics , you do n't get credit .
so anyway , so i want to thank my entire group .
then we beefed it up because we 're really now in the final stretch -- three - and - a - half months .
and paul manafort has done an amazing job .
he 's here someplace .
where 's paul ?
paul manafort -- oh , good .
you made it .
paul manafort has done a fantastic .
and all of paul 's people paul brought on the staff .
and we really do .
we have a great staff of talented people , a great staff .
and most of them are right here .
and john and everybody -- my man right here ; and michael .
you have to be -- michael , come on up , michael .
get up here , michael .
come on .
get a little tv time .
look at him .
i do n't know   hired for hollywood .
i tend to doubt it , but you never know .
come on up , rick .
so we have a great group of people .
and we have a group of people that really wants to win , and i think knows how to win .
and we 've all sort of been winning all our lives .
this group of people in front of me , i know so many of you , we 've been winning all our lives .
we 've got exactly three months and three weeks .
i am going to be working so hard .
i 'm not going to , like last time where they disappeared for the last month - and - a - half .
what happened ?
where is everybody ?
what happened ?
and give obama credit .
he was on every television show .
he was all over the place .
we 're not going to disappear .
so we have a really great chance of taking our country back , of change , and of getting great supreme court justices .
so , i want to thank everybody .
i love you folks .
this has been such an incredible movement .
i love you .
i know so many of you .
we 're going to go all the way .
and i 'll tell you what , when we get there , we will indeed make america great again .
i love you .
thank you , everybody .
thank you .
wow .
what a crowd .
beautiful .
beautiful .
what a crowd .
thank you , everybody .
i am thrilled to be with you today in tampa .
we love tampa .
as you know , florida is my second home , place i love .
it 's an amazing state and it 's filled with so many incredible people .
that 's why i like it , the people .
for the next 75 days , we are going to have to work very hard together to win the white house on november 8th .
we 're going to win .
and we just had a great poll come out from florida university just about a half an hour ago that we 're leading by two points in the state of florida .
our victory on november 8th will be a victory for the people .
for the people .
it wo n't be a victory for the pundits .
it wo n't be for the special interests that put up all of that hillary money .
and it wo n't be for the failed politicians .
it will be a victory for you .
and maybe most importantly , for your family , for your country .
it will be a victory for jobs , jobs , jobs .
we 're going to bring our companies back .
we 're going to have jobs back in this country again .
we 're bringing out jobs back .
manufacturing is down 40 percent .
we 're bringing our jobs back .
and companies are n't going to leave our country so easily .
there will be consequences when they do .
it wo n't be so easy for them .
but it 'll be a victory also for security , for prosperity and it will be a victory for american independence .
so important .
we will reject the failures of the past and create a new american future where every child -- african - american , hispanic -- all children can live out their dreams together in peace and in safety .
we will bring back our jobs .
we will rebuild our depleted military .
we love our military .
it 's been so badly depleted , folks , at a time when we need it just about the most ever .
we are going to rebuild our depleted military and no better people than are in our military .
but we 're going to rebuild it .
we 're going to take care of our great veterans .
they have been left behind .
we 're going to take care of our great veterans .
we 're going to unleash american energy .
restore law and order .
and we will make government honest once again , which it is not now , believe me .
the stakes in this election could not be higher .
hillary clinton wants to raise taxes very substantially and send jobs to other countries .
that 's what she wants to do .
we are going to cut taxes dramatically and bring thousands of new companies and millions of new jobs to our shores .
and that is something i look so forward to doing .
no one can do jobs like trump .
if you look at florida , whether it 's doral or whether it 's so many of the jobs we have on the beach .
we have so many jobs in the state of florida .
and i 'll tell you what .
those people love what we 've done for them ; high wages , great jobs , health care , education .
we take care of our people .
we have to take care of the people of our country .
believe me , we are not doing that .
hillary clinton wants to pass more terrible trade deals like the trans - pacific partnership .
she wants to pass it .
we are going to stop the tpp , totally renegotiate nafta , one of the worst trade deals ever made by mankind , and protect every last american job .
we 're going to protect your jobs .
they 're not going to be disappearing from you anymore .
people in this room 18 years ago were making more money in wages than they 're making today .
and today , they 're working harder and in many cases to a certain extent because of this horrible obamacare , they 're working two jobs .
so they 're getting older , they 're working harder and they are making less .
not going to happen that way , folks .
not going to happen .
of course , i 'm working harder also and getting old .
that 's for sure .
hillary clinton wants to expand the job killing regulations destroying small businesses in america .
regulations , by the way , are out of control in this country .
we 're going to cancel every needless job - killing regulation and put a moratorium on new regulations until our economy gets back on its feet .
and even then , they 're not going to be brought back .
they 're not going to be brought back .
they 're not going to be brought back .
you know , we need safety .
we need a little environmental protection .
we want clean air , we want clean water .
but what they 've done on top of that has been insane .
it 's killing our businesses and it does n't allow our businesses to compete with other countries , and you 're losing your jobs .
we will create great numbers of american jobs beyond anything you 've ever witnessed .
i will be the greatest jobs president that god ever created .
the greatest .
and speaking of jobs and speaking of the fact that we 're going to do a great job on jobs , evangelicals , people of religion , christians , jews , catholics , muslims , everybody , you 've got to get out and vote on november 8th .
and there 's only one person you can vote for , donald trump .
we 're going to do it .
we 're going to do it .
we 're going to do it .
hillary clinton wants to put the miners and the steelworkers out of work .
you 've heard her .
you 've heard her .
we are going to lift restrictions on all american energy and we are going to stand up to foreign cheating -- which is what they 're doing , they 're cheating -- that threatens steel production in america .
they 're dumping all over this country because they want our steel to go out of business so they can make this deal for us and charge us plenty .
not going to happen , folks .
not going to happen .
hillary clinton wants to expand job - killing obamacare and put government in charge of your health care .
you know where that leads .
they tried that in venezuela .
you see what 's happening ?
not working .
and many other places , it does n't work .
we are going to repeal -- and this is so important .
are you ready ?
we are going to repeal and replace obamacare and create ...   and by the way , i have to tell you -- always gets one of the most incredible applause -- people are dying with obamacare .
it 's a disaster .
your premiums are going up by 40 percent , 50 percent .
the number on november 1st -- and they 're trying to move the date because it 's an election changing number -- is going to be close to 50 percent .
it could even be more than that .
they want to make it in december .
they do n't want to reveal the numbers .
obamacare is a disaster .
in the great state of texas , they had almost a 50 percent increase going through blue cross blue shield -- almost a 50 percent increase , and the people are furious .
you 're going to have more than that .
and folks , it 's not going to work .
it 's dying of its own weight .
regardless of who becomes president , it is dead .
she 's going to try and save it by raising everybody 's taxes .
believe me , we can come up with a plan that will be so much less expensive and so much better .
and we will do that .
we will create choice and competition , and that 's going to really make it swing .
it 's going to be an amazing thing to watch .
all right .
hillary clinton wants to trap children in failing schools , 100 percent .
i want school choice .
choice .
choice .
so you have competition .
i want charter schools and i want merit pay for our great teachers .
we should have merit pay .
nobody more important than a teacher .
we should have merit pay for those teachers that are outstanding .
we are going to put our kids onto the ladder of success , and that is a good education and then a great job .
that 's what we need .
this is so important for our inner cities .
our inner cities are suffering like never before .
they have been run by democrats for so many years .
in some cases , over 100 years .
almost every inner city is run by the democrats .
nearly four in 10 african - american children live in poverty .
think of it .
fifty - eight percent of african- american youth are not employed , 58 percent .
more than 2,700 people have been shot in chicago since the beginning of the year .
not a long time .
homicides are up nearly 50 percent in washington , d.c. and more than 60 percent in baltimore .
the democratic party has run , as i 've said , nearly every inner city in this country for 50 or 60 or in some cases over 100 years .
over 100 years .
they 've produced only more poverty , only more crime , only more joblessness and broken homes all over the place at record levels .
to those suffering and hurting and the people left behind , i say vote for donald trump .
vote for donald trump .
what do you have to lose ?
what do you have to lose ?
it can not get any worse .
and believe me , i 'm going to fix it .
i 'm going to make it so good .
so to the african - american voter -- great people .
to the hispanic voter who have been absolutely treated terribly , i say , what do you have to lose ?
what ?
i will fix it .
i 'll be able to make sure that when you walk down the street in your inner city or wherever you are , you 're not going to be shot .
your child is n't going to be shot .
last night , i brought some incredible families up on stage with me , people that lost their child to illegal immigration , people whose child has been killed , people who have lost children -- devastated , can never be the same -- to people that came into the country illegally .
we 're going to fix that problem .
and we 're going to fix our inner cities .
and i say to the african - american parents , you have a right to walk down the street of your city without having your child or yourself shot .
and that 's what 's happening right now .
that 's what 's happening .
to the hispanic parents , you have a right to walk outside without being shot .
you have a right to good education for your child .
you have a right to own your home .
you have a right to have a good job .
the democrats and hillary clinton policies , once she gets -- if she gets your vote -- and i think we 're going to do great with african - americans and with the hispanics .
but once she gets your votes , you know what she does ?
bye - bye , folks .
see you in four years .
that 's what it is .
she 's going to do nothing .
she 's going to do nothing .
and you know what the truth -- she does n't have the stamina to do it even if she wanted to , believe me .
i 'm asking for the honor of your vote so that i can fight for you .
that 's african - american , that 's hispanics and that 's all americans .
we 're going to make it better .
much , much better .
because hispanic citizens have been suffering under this president , too .
since president obama came into office , another two million hispanics have joined the ranks of those in poverty .
two million have joined the ranks of poverty , not of wealth .
i want you to join the -- the ranks of people that are making phenomenal livings .
that 's what you want to join .
the number of hispanic children living in poverty increased by 15 percent in that short period of time .
so i 'm going to fight to give every hispanic citizen in this country a much better future , a much better life .
and they know it .
and they know it .
and i do n't know if you 've seen what 's happening , but over the last three weeks , the polls with african - american folks and spanish- speaking folks , the hispanics , latinos , have gone way up .
way up .
they 've gone way up .
because you know what ?
african americans are tired of being used by these phony politicians .
hispanics are tired of being used by these phony politicians .
and everybody else in our country is tired of being used by these phony politicians .
believe me .
and part of that better future means securing our border to protect the jobs of all of the people living here today .
and that includes african - americans , hispanic americans and all americans .
we 're going to protect your jobs .
we 're going to also bring safety , but we 're going to protect your jobs because your jobs are not being protected .
hillary clinton wants to have a totally open border where people can just pour in and take your job and lots of other things happen .
we are going to enforce our laws , remove people who overstay their visas , dismantle the gangs and cartels and protect jobs and benefits for hard - working american citizens .
and many of them are african - american , by the way , and many of them are hispanic .
we 're going to protect your jobs .
that includes protecting the jobs and wages of the hispanic citizens that and living right here in florida .
so many living right here in florida .
and this is their number one complaint because they do n't know if the next day they 're going to have a job because of people flowing in illegally into the state and into the country .
they deserve to have their jobs protected from illegal immigration and broken visa programs .
and they are broken .
all americans from all backgrounds have a right to have their jobs protected in their own country .
hillary clinton would rather give a job to an illegal immigrant than to an unemployed hispanic citizen , an unemployed african - american citizen or even to a veteran .
believe me .
it 's going to be america first from now on .
america first .
thank you .
at the core of our america first agenda are three words , so important .
these are so important .
they solve so many problems .
are you ready ?
jobs , jobs , jobs .
that 's why at the center of my economic plan is a tax cut for small businesses down to 15 percent from 35 percent .
business will flourish .
jobs will pour into our country and new ones will be created .
and i mean created all across the land .
we 're going to create jobs .
thirty - five percent -- we 're one of the highest taxed nations in the world , if not the highest .
and we 're going to be one of the lower taxed nations in the world .
there are over 600,000 hispanic - owned businesses here in florida .
hillary clinton 's plan would smother them with new regulations , drive up their electricity bills and then raise their taxes to as much as almost 50 percent higher than they 're paying now .
family - owned businesses would take a second hit with a 45 percent death tax so that you have a business , you want to leave that business to your children , you 've been paying taxes all your life on that business and now the children have to pay so much that normally they have to either sell the business or close it up .
it 's not a fair tax .
more in florida than anywhere else because you have so many family businesses that can not afford to pay a death tax .
a trump administration will be a true friend to small businesses and to all working americans , that i can tell you .
that means bringing down taxes , bringing down the price of energy and bringing down job - killing regulations that cost our economy as much as $ 2 trillion a year -- $ 2 trillion a year , remember , $ 2 trillion .
does anyone know what a trillion dollars is ?
we 've got two of them .
we 're also going to dramatically simplify our very , very complex tax code .
h&amp;r block will be voting against donald trump , that i can tell you .
our current -- and you understand that .
our current tax code is so burdensome and complex that we waste nine billion hours he year in tax code compliance .
that will end under a trump administration .
hillary clinton wants to make taxes even more complicated and will raise taxes by $ 1.3 trillion on you and everybody else .
her anti - energy regulations will be a tax hike on the poor .
your energy bills are going to go through the roof , folks .
according to heritage foundation , by 2030 , the obama - clinton energy restrictions will eliminate another half a million manufacturing jobs , reduce economic output by $ 2.5 trillion and reduce incomes by $ 7,000 a person per year .
that means you 're making less money in 2030 than you 're making right now .
we 've already done that 18 years ago .
right now as a country , we have no growth .
we have no growth .
you saw that .
a trump administration will end this war on the american worker and unleash an energy revolution that will bring vast new wealth and power to our country .
according to the institute for energy research , lifting the restrictions on all sources of american energy will very simply increase gdp by more than $ 100 billion dollars annually .
we need that so badly .
add over 500,000 new jobs annually and increase annual wages by more than $ 30 billion over the next seven years .
it will increase federal , state and local tax revenue by almost $ 6 trillion over four decades , increase total economic activity by more than $ 20 trillion over the next 40 years .
my energy plan will help put trillions of dollars back into our economy .
we 'll be able to fix up our military , we 'll be able to take care of our vets , we 'll be able to help you with your social security , which everybody else wants to cut to shreds .
now , with all of that being said , my all - time favorite subject : trade .
how stupid are we to allow this to happen to us ?
florida has lost one in four manufacturing jobs since bill clinton signed nafta , a hillary clinton - backed deal , one of the worst transactions ever signed in the history of our country .
probably not as bad as will be proven in the future as this horrible , incompetent iran deal , but we 'll get that -- we 'll get to that a little bit later .
that 's another beauty .
honestly , these people do n't know what they 're doing .
they do n't know what they 're doing .
they do n't know what they are doing .
florida lost one in five of its manufacturing jobs since bill clinton and china -- and he put china into the world trade organization , which was also backed by hillary .
our trade deficit with the world is now nearly $ 800 billion a year .
so we work hard , we work so hard , but if you do n't have the right leadership at the top , you 're sort of wasting your time because you 're not going to get it done .
think of it .
we have a trade deficit -- trade deficit with the world of almost $ 800 billion dollars .
like bernie sanders said , she has terrible , terrible judgment .
got no judgment .
look at what she 's got , folks .
take a look at the e - mails .
she 's got no judgment .
the good news is if we win on november 8th , these jobs are coming back .
they 're all coming back .
here are seven steps to bring back our jobs and create millions of new jobs .
number one ; i 'm going to withdraw the united states from the trans - pacific partnership talks which have yet to be ratified .
so important .
number two ; i 'm going to appoint the toughest and smartest trade negotiators to fight on behalf of american workers so that we make great trade deals with other countries instead of incompetent and bad trade deals .
we 'll bring our jobs back here instead of having -- it 's like a one - way -- it 's like a one - way bridge , it all goes out of this country .
the only thing that comes into our country is drugs .
they pour into the country , the cash pours out .
we do n't do anything right .
we have such bad leadership .
i 'm going to direct the secretary of commerce to identify every violation of trade agreements that a foreign country is currently using to harm american workers , of which there are many .
because they rightfully think we 're run by incompetent people .
so i do n't blame china , i do n't blame japan and mexico and these other countries .
they 're getting away with murder , but if i were them , i 'd be trying to do the same thing .
i blame our leaders .
i want us to be on the winning side .
we will be on the winning side if you elect me on november 8th .
i promise .
i will then direct all appropriate agencies to use every tool under american and international law to end these abuses .
we 're being abused .
now , the worst abuser is china .
i like china .
i 've made a lot of money with china .
i 've done very well with china .
they 're tenants of mine -- their biggest bank in the world is a tenant -- condos , deals , office buildings , bank of america buildings , so much .
i 've done great with china .
we can do great with china , too .
they have no respect for our country .
they have no respect for our leadership .
and we do n't blame them , we do n't blame them .
we want to put ourselves in that position very soon .
you watch .
and they 'll like us better than they do now .
they do n't like us .
they 're building a massive military fortress in the middle of the south china sea that they 're not allowed to do .
they 're doing that , and yet , they 're ripping us economically .
we have tremendous power over china -- economic power -- tremendous .
we do n't do anything .
they build and build and build , and they did n't get environmental impact statements when they decided to rip up the sea .
they said -- sunday night , let 's build .
monday morning , they were digging .
a little different than our country , would n't you say ?
a little different .
a little bit different .
number four ; i 'm going to tell our nafta partners that i intend to immediately renegotiate the terms of that horrible agreement signed by bill clinton to get a better deal for our workers .
and if we do n't get the deal that we want , which has to be good and has to make up for all of these years of abuse and lost time , then we will walk away , which is fine .
i 'm going to instruct my treasury secretary to label china a currency manipulator , the greatest in the world .
any country that devalues their currency in order to take unfair advantage of the united states and all of its companies who ca n't compete will face tariffs and taxes to stop the cheating .
and when they see that , they will stop the cheating .
i do n't think our politicians even know what 's going on .
and they will stop or we 're going to take in one hell of a lot of money , i 'll tell you that .
i 'm going to instruct the united states trade representative to bring trade cases against china , both in this country and at the wto , world trade organization .
china 's unfair subsidy and its behavior is prohibited by the terms of its entrance into the wto , and i intend to enforce our rules .
that 's all .
very simple .
and they know it 's coming .
they 've called a lot of friends of mine .
they know it 's coming .
they say , " what do we do ?
what do we do ? "
if china does not stop its illegal activities -- remember this .
our trade deficit with china is approximately $ 505 billion a year .
think of that , $ 505 billion .
somebody said , " oh , but you 'll stop trading with china . "
i said , " is that good or bad ?
you tell me . "
we have to straighten it out , folks .
we ca n't have deficits of $ 500 billion .
we ca n't have deficits and we can start making things right here again , and it 'll be very nice .
and i 'm going to use every lawful presidential power to remedy the trade disputes , including the application of tariffs .
and i 'll tell you , we 're going to probably have to at least use them in some cases because they have to understand , we 're not playing games any longer , folks .
we 're not playing games .
if we take these steps , jobs and factories will come roaring back into our country .
we can use the new money to rebuild our roads , bridges and airports .
manufacturing is also a matter of national security .
it 's national security .
our manufacturing is being decimated .
decimated .
we 're not going to have manufacturing .
i am so tired of seeing manufacturing buildings that employed thousands and thousands of people being turned into nursing homes .
it 's fine , but you know what , that 's not -- we have to -- we have to -- we have to build .
we have to build , we have to manufacture .
we need to build , produce and create right here in america .
right here in america .
let me tell you a few more things that we 're going to do .
we 're going to end government corruption .
hillary clinton ran the state department like a failed leader in a third - world country .
that 's what it 's run -- it 's run like a third- world country .
she sold favors and access in exchange for cash .
she sold it .
she sold favors , she sold access , and wait until you see when it 's revealed all of those people .
now , it looks like it 's 50 percent of the people that saw her had to make contributions to the clinton foundation .
wait until you see ultimately what she did for all of those people .
wait until you see .
these are not people that go in , as i said , and talk about , how are you feeling .
the people she met with outside of government ... 

  the people she met with outside government as secretary of state , so many of these people made contributions .
she even deleted 33,000 e - mails to hide evidence of her crimes .
it 's impossible to tell where the clinton foundation ends and the state department begins .
she then lied about her crime to congress over and over again .
she lied to congress .
i do n't know if congress is going to do anything about it , folks .
i 'm so sick of looking and seeing and i hear reports , they do n't do anything .
congress ought to act .
she lied to congress 100 percent .
everybody agrees , and it takes so long for them to act .
by the time they act , you 're going to say , " what was it ? "
you wo n't even remembered what happened .
let congress act today .
let congress act immediately .
the fbi did not act .
i have such respect for the fbi .
i am so disappointed .
i am so disappointed .
i love the fbi .
i have such high regard -- high respect for the fbi .
how did they let that happen ?
she was so guilty .
she was so guilty .
the world is laughing at us , folks .
and then you have bill clinton meeting with the attorney general in the back of an airplane for 39 minutes .
and he said they were talking about golf and their grandkids .
give me a break .
and very importantly , bill clinton , after all of that and after the beautiful gift he was given , bill clinton essentially called the fbi director , james comey , a liar when he said the fbi director was spouting bull .
can you imagine ?
man , they do n't realize that they owe the fbi director their political lives for refusing to recommend prosecution for hillary clinton 's many , many crimes .
and then he calls the director a liar .
he saved hillary clinton from facing justice for her illegal and corrupt actions .
they were illegal and they were corrupt , and the fbi saved her .
and i would imagine many people within the fbi are extremely embarrassed .
extremely .
remember , bill clinton was impeached for lying and obstructing justice and also had to give up his law license -- people forget .
hillary clinton created an illegal private e - mail server , deliberately , willfully and with total premedication -- premeditation .
it could the first way was right , actually .
you know , i might like the first way better .
premedication , that 's a very .
premedication -- i think i like it .
all right , premeditation .
i love that .
she did so to cover up a vast pay for play scheme .
her actions made our enemies vulnerable to foreign hacking and we are vulnerable .
that 's what 's happened .
we 've become so vulnerable to foreign hacking and betrayed the security and safety of the united states , our military and all of our people .
her actions are criminal .
they 're purposeful and they 're totally calculated .
she knew what she was doing .
that 's why i call for a special prosecutor to look into this .
the problem is , with the administration rigging the system -- it 's a rigged system , folks -- to protect her vast criminal behavior , the real jury is going to be the american voter on november 8th .
hillary clinton thinks she is above the law .
she 's got -- and honestly folks , she 's got nothing going .
she 's got nothing going .
there 's nothing there .
there 's nothing going .
there 's nothing for you .
that 's going to be four more years of obama , four more years of isis knocking the hell out of us all over the place and everyone else .
got nothing going .
come november , the american people are going to prove that she is not -- she is not a person worthy of becoming the president of the united states .
we do n't want four more years of obama , and i think she would be worse than obama .
i 've been watching so carefully over the past month .
hillary clinton does n't do speeches , she does n't do press conferences .
it 's been almost 300 days .
she does n't do rallies of any consequence .
she does n't do this kind of stuff .
we have all these .
she 's failed at filling the arenas .
if you look at her events , they should show those arenas .
they never show our arena is packed , but they should show her arenas that are empty .
people do n't know where she is .
her supports have really -- her supporters have very little enthusiasm .
the only people enthusiastic about her campaign are hollywood celebrities , in many cases , celebrities that are n't very hot anymore and wall street donors , special interests , lobbyists , et cetera that want to control government , not to the benefit of our country , but to the benefit of their wallet .
even her protesters do n't have the spirit that bernie protesters had .
we had some protesters last night .
we had a massive rally last night and we had some protesters .
it 's like they raised their hand and people -- they 're so nice .
the cameras do n't even cover her protesters , which is bad .
i like it when the camera covers the protesters because then they finally show how many people we have at these things .
her protesters have so little enthusiasm for her and they 're so boring that the cameras do n't follow them .
so it 's sad when you think about it .
i like the bernie protesters better .
they had enthusiasm .
by the way , a reminder to everyone here , register to vote .
you 've got to register to vote .
we have a movement going on , folks .
this is a movement .
this is a movement .
i 'm going to mississippi in a little while .
we have tens of thousands of people .
we 're only confined by the size -- look at this -- back to the corners .
we 're only -- we 're only confined -- we set a record here today .
we always set records .
we always do .
in four , instances for some reason , we have beaten elton john 's record , who 's a great guy .
we 've beaten elton john -- and he has pianos , right , i do n't have a piano .
no piano , but we have beaten four times elton john 's record at arenas .
together , we 're going to restore ethics and honesty to our government .
we 're also going to restore safety to our country .
hillary clinton -- and maybe this bothers me almost more than anything else because i know bad things are going to happen .
hillary clinton wants to increase by 550 percent over obama -- thousands and thousands of syrian refugees coming into our country .
overall , her plan would bring in 620,000 refugees from all refugee - sending countries in her first term .
this is at the same time we and europe and everywhere else is experiencing tremendous problems not only with attacks but with lone wolf attacks .
that 's sickos that by themselves do tremendous destruction .
you look at san bernardino .
you look at wherever .
you look at orlando .
you can look anywhere you want .
the lone wolf attacker , the sicko -- the sicko -- and we 're allowing them in by the tens of thousands .
how stupid are we ?
how stupid are we ?
and you mark my words , i 've been very good at predicting things .
been very , very good .
people are writing me letters saying you predicted -- i predict a lot of things .
bad , bad things are going to be happening with these people pouring into our country .
bad things are going to be happening .
bad , bad things .
you watch .
we 're going to build a wall , do n't you worry about it .
we 're going to build a wall .
we 're going to build the wall and mexico is going to pay for the wall 100 percent .
and it 's going to be a big wall .
it 's going to be a real wall .
it 's going to be as beautiful as a wall can be , but it 's going to be a wall .
and we 're going to have protection for tunnels so that people ca n't tunnel under .
we can easily have protection .
but we 're going to have protection for tunnels .
we 're going to have a real border .
we 're going to have a real wall .
mexico is going to pay for it .
mexico , right now -- we have a trade deficit with mexico of approximately $ 60 billion a year .
believe me , the wall is peanuts compared to the kind of money they 're making with the united states .
and speaking of that , and i 've said this , we are losing so many jobs to mexico and other places .
there have to be -- there have to be repercussions from this .
we can not allow this to happen .
we can not allow these countries because their leaders are smarter than our leaders , because their negotiators are better , because we have frankly , very , very stupid people representing us .
we can not allow this to continue to happen , whether it 's carrier air conditioning or ford or any other -- i could name hundreds -- hundreds and hundreds of companies , millions and millions of jobs .
millions and millions .
we can not allow this to continue to happen .
we wo n't have a country any longer .
i 'm going to suspend immigration wherever effective screening can not take place and i am going to institute a new ideological screening program to keep out people who do n't share our values of love and respect .
moving forward , we are going to start promoting american values once again .
it 's time to put the era of division behind us and to embrace a new american future based on our common values and our principles , our principles .
and if people do n't like our values and if people do n't like our principles , tell them do n't come in .
i understand that the wall street donors and the washington insiders do n't want change .
we know why , they 're making a fortune .
they want things to keep going on exactly as they are .
that 's why they 're throwing so much money to hillary clinton .
it 's the powerful protecting the powerful .
i used to do that also , folks .
i hate to tell you , it 's very easy .
i know the business better than anybody .
i know this subject better than anybody who 's ever run for any office , ok ?
sixteen months ago , i was the fair - haired way , and all the sudden , i 'm an outsider .
it took just a few words -- " i 'm going to run for president . "
i became an outsider .
it 's insiders fighting for insiders , but i 'm fighting for you .
that 's why i 'm doing this .
i built a great company -- believe me , i did n't need to do this .
this is a lot of work , a lot of energy and i 'm spending my money , by the way -- a lot of energy .
we are -- we are doing well .
it 's a movement .
it 's a movement .
a real movement .
we 're going to get it turned around .
we 're going to stop crime .
we 're going to bring back our jobs .
we 're going to straighten out our inner cities .
we 're going to do a lot of things .
and by the way , we are going to save our second amendment which is under siege .
if in san bernardino or orlando or paris -- where by the way , they have the toughest gun laws in the world .
if you had this gentleman right there or this woman right here , right , or that gentleman right there standing there with a gun strapped to his or her side when these animals came in and they started shooting people that had absolutely no protection , it would have been a whole different story , folks .
would 've been a whole different story .
and if they had even an inkling , if they thought that guns were in the room , they probably would n't have even gone there in the first place , ok ?
very simple .
so we 're going to protect our second amendment .
so i 'm an agent of change , i am .
and hillary clinton is a total defender of the status quo .
i do n't think you can be too happy with the status quo .
i 'm asking for your vote so we can create the new american future .
this includes millions of new jobs through lower taxes , less regulation and trade deals that put america first .
it includes the appointment of justices to the united states supreme court ...   ... who are going to protect our freedom , and that includes they 'll be protecting the second amendment .
so important , folks .
justices of the supreme court .
remember , justice scalia , great man .
we 're going to try and get people of that thought process , that thinking , that intellect .
but we already have one , and if she chooses four or five -- it could be as many as five , could be a record in the history of this country of new judicial appointments .
if she puts people in that are radical left , you have got yourselves a whole different country .
we 're going to have a new foreign policy that focuses on defeating isis , not nation - building .
we 've tried the nation building , does n't work , not going to work , never going to work .
hillary clinton 's reckless policies unleashed isis onto the world in the first place .
she will never have the judgment or the stamina to fix the problems that she created .
she created so many problems .
it was just announced in a new poll that people feel the country is less safe today than it was before 9/11 .
pretty bad poll , that 's pretty bad .
with all the money we spent , all the trillions and trillions of dollars that we spent , people feel less safe today than they did then .
in the meantime , our country is dying , our infrastructure is sick , our roads are terrible , our bridges are falling .
our schools , you take a look at what 's happening there .
our tunnels .
everything is bad .
and all of that money was spent .
it was spent and wasted by people that did n't have a clue .
we 're going to change it around , folks .
we 're going to defeat terrorism and keep the terrorists the hell out of our country .
and finally , we 're going to create a more inclusive society where no american is left behind .
we 're going to bring back jobs , opportunity and hope to every community in our nation , every community .
once again , we 're going to have a government of , by and for the american people .
this is going to be your country , your government and your really great future .
it 's going to be a great future .
the rule of special interests is over , it 's gone if i win .
if i do n't win , it will be worse than ever before , you will see .
you will see .
but hopefully , you will not get a chance to see because we 're going to turn it around .
we 're going to turn it around and it 'll be a beautiful thing .
thank you .
we will bring america together as one country again .
we are so divided .
we are so terribly divided so many ways .
president obama is a great divider .
he does n't know how to put things together .
he does n't have a clue .
we will bring it together as one country , united as americans in common purpose and common dreams .
and that 's what it is , it 's dreams .
we dream of having it right .
it will be right .
it will be right .
we 're going to have a driving economy .
we 're going to have a strong , strong , strong border that people are going to respect .
and the drugs are not going to be flowing across like gravy .
we 're going to have a powerful military , not a depleted military like we have now .
and our vets are part of our military .
our vets are going to be treated incredibly well , as they have to be .
they 're our great people .
we 're going to have a peaceful nation , a rising standard of living .
this is what i promise you .
let 's get out there and win on november 8th .
and if we do , if we do , we will make america wealthy again .
we have to be wealthy .
we have almost $ 20 trillion in debt .
we have to make our country wealthy again .
and we will make america wealthy again .
we will make america proud again -- proud .
you wo n't be embarrassed like you are now , with the iran deal or when you see $ 400 million being sent on airplanes to terrorists .
who , by the way , wo n't use that money for terror ; they 're gon na put that money in swiss bank accounts .
they 've got plenty other money to use for terror .
think of these people .
they have a plane arrive with $ 400 million in cash .
all different denominations .
they 've got it right .
$ 400 million in cash .
nobody could believe it .
and it turned out that it was actually for the hostages , despite the lies of obama .
it was for the hostages .
he could n't have been happy when his representatives said it was for the hostages .
could n't have been happy .
you know , it 's like obamacare , if you remember , 28 times , " keep your doctor , keep your plan . "
remember ?
over and over and over again .
and then some democrats , they actually voted because of that .
over and over he lied and he lied and he lied .
well , he lied about the hostages too .
$ 400 million in cash ; he lied about that .
we will make america safe again .
and we will make america great again for each and every american .
you will be so proud of your president .
and more importantly , you will be so proud of your country .
thank you .
thank you and god bless you .
thank you .
thank you , everybody .
god bless you .
thank you .
boy , oh boy , oh boy .
and we have a lot of other women for trump right here , i 'll tell you .
thank you .
thank you , everybody .
the incredible spirit of the people of this state will power its recovery and the same spirit that will rebuild our nation .
you know , that 's happening right now .
there 's a movement going on the likes of which nobody has seen ever in this country .
and we 're going to bring it forth and we 're going to be very happy and very proud of our country again .
i will tell you that .
we 're going to renegotiate our very disastrous trade deals , end illegal immigration , stop the massive inflow of refugees .
take care of our incredible veterans who are not being taken care of properly .
we 're going to repeal and replace job - killing obamacare quickly .
your jobs will come back under a trump administration .
so many have left .
your incomes will go up under a trump administration .
your taxes will go way down .
and crooked hillary is giving you a big tax increase .
your taxes will go way down under a trump administration .
your companies wo n't be leaving our country under a trump administration .
there will be consequences .
they 're not going to be leaving so easy folks , not like the old days .
the hillary clinton documents released by wikileaks make more clear than ever just how much is at stake come november 8th .
such an important day .
such an important day .
get out and vote , everybody .
get out and vote .
in an e - mail sent to john podesta on august 17 , 2014 , hillary wrote that the governments of qatar and saudi arabia are quote , " providing clandestine , financial and logistical support to isil " .
yet , in that same year , bill and hillary accepted a check from saudi arabia .
so hillary thinks that they are funding isis , but still takes their money .
and you know their views on gays and you know their views on women .
takes a lot of money .
i think she should give back the $ 25 million to $ 35 million she 's taken from saudi arabia .
and she should give it back fast .
there 's a lot of people in here .
you 're a big group .
this is a big group .
you know , i own an big development right down the road , trump national , right on lake norman .
lake norman .
and we have an amazing -- it 's an amazing success .
we have amazing people there .
both the employees and the people living there and we love it .
thank you .
thank you .
this is just the tip of the iceberg when it comes to clinton corruption .
hillary bleached and deleted 33,000 e - mails after receiving , after .
remember the word after receiving , a congressional subpoena and then made 13 phones disappear .
it 's amazing what she 's getting away with , right ?
it 's amazing .
but maybe that wo n't happen .
she made 13 phones disappear .
some by beating them , beating them , beating with a hammer .
has anybody , when you got rid of your iphone , knocked the hell out of it with a hammer ?
there 's a person way , way in the back .
we will find out what business that person 's in .
she did it to cover up her crimes .
it 's one more reason why we need a special prosecutor to look into hillary clinton .
and we have to investigate the investigation .
the investigation , nobody in this country has seen anything like it .
this is our last chance to save our country and reclaim it for we the people .
this is it .
you do n't have another chance .
i really believe this is it .
as you have seen , i am a victim of one of the great political smear campaigns in the history of our country .
they are coming after me to try and destroy , what is considered by even them , the greatest movement in the history of our country .
there 's never been anything like this .
bill o'reilly and others have said it 's the single greatest political phenomena in his lifetime and others have said the same thing .
the political establishment is trying to stop us because they know we are a threat to their totally corrupt control .
it 's true .
no one is more corrupt than crooked hillary clinton .
nobody .
in fact , she 's the most corrupt person ever to seek the presidency of the united states of america .
and her specialty , if you look over the years , has been character assassination and really personally just going after people .
that 's her specialty .
she 's been doing it her whole career .
the only force strong enough to smash clinton 's corrupt criminal syndicate is you , the american voter .
november 8th .
november 8th .
after many , many years , even many decades , without complaint , the media and the clinton campaign have brought forward false allegations less than a month before the most important election in modern times .
these allegations are 100 percent false .
as everybody -- i think you know .
i think you get it .
i think you get it .
they 're made up .
they never happened .
when have you met tens of thousands of people , as i have .
and i 've met thousands and thousands and thousands of people , know them , know them well .
it 's not hard to find a small handful of people willing to make false smears for personal fame .
who knows ?
maybe for financial reasons , political purposes or for the simple reason they want to stop our movement .
they want to stop our campaign .
very simple .
these claims defy reason , truth , logic , common sense .
they 're made without supporting witnesses .
no witnesses .
hey , you know , 28 years ago , 10 years ago , 14 years ago , 12 years ago , not me .
believe me .
not me .
not me .
you would be very impressed actually with my life in so many regards , including that regard .
no .
not a single shred of evidence .
eyewitnesses have already debunked the wild and ludicrous allegations of a magazine article that appeared .
and i 'll tell you what , it was just incredible .
it was people magazine and the article appeared .
and a statement was made .
but if it were true , they would have put it in the article .
they would have had to put it into the article .
but they did n't do that , and they did n't do that for a simple reason ; because it never happened , 12 years ago .
never complained , never talked to the bosses , never , all of a sudden two nights ago we get a call .
and the call is from people magazine .
they did n't even want a quote .
i think maybe what we should do , boycott that issue of people magazine .
so , that 's the way it is .
but i just want to tell you folks that it is a campaign that 's amazing .
and i 'm not going to be talking about it much , because we want to talk about other things and we have to talk about other things .
but if it affects five percent or two percent or 10 percent or it 's all false stuff .
it 's all a concerted effort .
and i think it 's the only way they 're going to stop us , the only way .
and i do n't think that 's going to happen .
yes , you can get him   out of here .
get them out .
get them out .
hey look , the great thing , the cameras turned .
look .
the cameras turned .
the cameras turned .
oh , that 's wonderful .
that 's so good .
it 's the only way we get the cameras to turn .
so folks , here 's the story .
we are going to bring jobs back to north carolina .
we are going to bring borders back to our country .
and yes , we will build a wall .
and mexico will be paying for that wall .
great crowd , i 'll tell you .
this is a great crowd .
but i want to talk about jobs because i know this part of the world , i told you i have property here .
a lot of great employees , a lot of great people , a lot of friends .
and your jobs are being taken pretty much like nobody else 's jobs have been taken .
and it 's only going to get worse .
and as you stand here tonight , some of your companies , your leaders in your companies , are negotiating with mexico and other places .
you know that .
to move that company to mexico .
and during the primary system , i had a very , very interesting period of time because i got to know this country so well .
we had 17 people running .
i was given a small chance because they said he 's not an experienced politician .
and then week after week , one by one , right ?
right ?
boom .
boom .
boom .
but i got to know the country and i got to see what 's happening with our manufacturing .
we do n't make much anymore by comparison to what we used to do .
we used to be amazing .
we do n't do what we used to do .
and i had won new york state and i had gotten up to places in new york state , which i had n't seen for a long time .
hillary clinton represented new york state and she was a disaster .
she was a disaster .
she said she was going to bring jobs back , 200,000 jobs .
well , it was just the opposite ; jobs fled .
she lied to the people of new york state .
it was a total catastrophe .
and if you look at what 's happened to new york now , you just take a look at what 's happened to new york in terms of upstate and manufacturing , you go to the different places , albany and syracuse and rome .
i always say that 's the real rome .
but unfortunately , they 're having a lot of problems .
and you 'll see what happens .
but i went -- i went , oh that 's an oops .
somebody 's hurt .
is there a doctor in the house please ?
doctor in the house ?
we have to take care of our people , right ?
these are great people .
have to take care of our people .
and we have to take care of our country because we do n't want to be a divided country anymore .
we 're very divided and we 're going to take care of our country .
some of these people got here nine hours and 10 hours ago , right ?
right ?
some of these people .
so we can understand how there can be some problems .
are you doing ok over there ?
look ok ?
we have tough people in this room , let me tell you .
it 's hot .
it 's hot .
the other night , they said , donald trump was sweating .
i was in a room that was 110 degrees .
we had 17,000 people .
and i 'll tell you what , was n't sweating too much for what we had .
good .
we 'll make sure everything 's perfect here , all right ?
we 'll make sure everything 's perfect .
you take your time .
our great police have just arrived .
do we love our police .
everything good ?
all right , i 'm getting the hi   sign .
good .
good , give that person a hand .
you know , when they go down at a trump rally , they leave and they always come back .
it 's an amazing thing .
it 's an amazing thing .
all right ?
so we 'll keep going .
you let us know if there 's any problem and i 'll come down and help you myself .
all right ?
so we went to indiana , and in going to indiana , i got to know the great bobby knight .
that was a great endorsement , coach knight .
you know that story he called , he said , " mr. trump this coach knight , i want you to run for president . "
i said , coach , i have n't made up my mind .
this was a couple of years ago .
he said , " well , if you do i 'd like to endorse you .
you just let me know . "
and we were winning state after state , after state .
and all of a sudden , we hit indiana .
and that 's where we were going to maybe not do as well .
remember that ?
they called it our watershed .
and i said , you know bobby knight called , and a friend of mine said , you know , have you ever had any access to bobby knight , that would be great .
i said , i just happened to .
and i lifted up this huge pile of papers and i wrote his number down .
i put it right there .
and it was right there .
it was like a miracle .
it was from god , right ?
it was from god .
and that says jesus for trump .
you 're right .
and ...   and i said , you know what , let me do that .
i called bobby knight .
he said , " i 'd love to be there . "
i want to tell you , that was a very , very strong performance that he put in and we put in .
and then we went and run .
but i really got to know our country , and i got to know it well .
and i 'm so proud of the people of this country .
and one of the things i saw , and i say   -- you take care of that person .
good .
thank you .
thank you , darling .
she 'll be back .
you watch .
she 'll right back .
but one of the things that happened is i saw what was going on so closely and so vividly with respect to jobs and how our jobs are being drained because of nafta .
nafta is a disaster .
it 's a disaster signed by bill clinton .
you 're not going to believe the number ; 70,000 -- 70,000 factories , manufacturing plants have closed since the signing of nafta .
who would believe this ?
who would believe it ?
seventy -- i thought they made a mistake .
i thought it would be 700 .
i said , it ca n't be 70,000 .
millions of jobs wasted , lost .
many people in this room are making less money now than they made 20 years ago , 18 years ago , 25 years ago in real wages .
and they 're working harder .
so am i , so i do n't feel so guilty about that .
this is work .
but not bad work .
this is good work because we 're getting to a position where if we can win north carolina -- and we 're leading in ohio , you saw that .
and we 're doing great in florida .
doing great .
we are doing so good in florida .
by the way , these teleprompters have n't been working for the last 20 minutes .
and i actually like my speech better without teleprompters .
and this way , what i like about it , wait a minute .
let me see how these things ...   you know what , i like it better without the teleprompters .
and i notice , every time i look up , they 're trying , it 's trying , it 's straining .
it 's straining .
hey , get this thing out of here , will you ?
get it out .
i like it much better without the teleprompter .
you know , it 's very funny .
i went through 17 professional politicians , top people , and i went without any teleprompters .
then all of a sudden they said , well now you 're running in the election .
you need teleprompters .
and i like teleprompters .
they 're fine , but it 's sort of cooler without it right ?
do n't you think ?
i like it better without .
it 's a little strange when you see this .
i watch hillary .
she 's got the biggest pieces of glass and sometimes they 're painted black on the other side because you see better .
and she always just reads off the teleprompter .
and it 's short and then she goes home and she goes to sleep .
now she 's not -- look , look .
she 's not -- she 's not going to campaign anymore until after because she 's prepping for the debate .
now , the last time she prepped for a week also .
and let 's face it , you have to say , i really beat her easily .
that was an easy ... 

  so here 's the story .
here 's the way i work , here 's the way government works .
so the teleprompter 's a bummer .
it does n't work .
that means the company doing the teleprompter is in the back .
that means they did n't do a good job .
so , i wo n't pay them .
right ?
i wo n't pay them .
and tomorrow , i 'll have a story in the newspaper , donald trump did not pay a contractor who put up the teleprompters .
well , why should i ?
they do n't work .
and -- oh , it 's true .
it 's true .
and they 'll make me like a bad guy , like i 'm a bad person .
right ?
you know , i do n't pay -- i pay contractors on time .
i am so good .
we just built a hotel on pennsylvania avenue , the old post office .
on time , under budget , i paid -- we had great contractors .
right ?
but when you have a bum contractor -- now , here 's the thing .
you have a bad contractor , do n't pay or cut the price .
you have a good contractor , get that money out fast .
but the -- the country should do the same thing .
they build roads .
they build roads that cost much more than they 're supposed to cost , right ?
they build roads that are crazy , where they 're double and triple .
they build buildings where they every see a 1,000 percent .
there 's a hospital being built in one of my favorites states .
it 's so out of control .
it 's like 1,000 percent .
it 's a v.a. hospital .
a thousand percent cost overrun .
i looked at it .
i figured it was this massive -- it 's not even a big deal .
it 's not even a big deal .
our country has to be able to do things on time , on budget .
has to be able to build on time , on budget .
has to be able to purchase its military equipment not for political reasons because some political guy owns the company , but because that 's the equipment that our generals , our admirals and our soldiers and sailors want .
have to do it .
and we 're going to change our whole purchasing procedure .
for instance , the purchase of drugs .
the drug companies have a tremendously powerful lobby .
we do n't negotiate properly .
we would save so much money with proper negotiation .
and it is true about the military .
if you are somebody that has less good stuff that they do n't want as much as another company but you are a political power , you contribute to the senators and to the congressmen and to the people that make the decisions and you work with the admirals and you work with everybody , all of a sudden they 're buying equipment that 's not as good and they 're spending more money doing it .
we 're not going to be doing that stuff anymore .
remember this , i 'll have spent over $ 100 million of my money running for office .
and some of these people said -- and they say it all the time .
they said -- one in particular said , you do n't realize what you 've done .
never been done before .
you do n't realize .
it does n't matter whether or not you win or lose .
it makes no difference , what you 've done for political history .
i said , let me tell you a little secret .
if we do n't win on november 8th , it will be the greatest waste of time , energy -- energy .
you ever heard that word before energy ?
you ever heard the word low energy ?
he did n't sign -- you know , he signed that pledge .
but a couple of those guys that signed the pledge , you know they signed the pledge because they wanted me to sign the pledge .
and then when they lost , they never got beaten so badly in their lives , folks .
but when they lost , they did n't honor the pledge that they signed .
i was actually surprised .
only a few of them , only a few of them , most of them did .
many of them , ben carson and a lot of great people .
a lot of great people .
mike huckabee 's been great .
chris christie .
we 've had a lot of great support .
we 've had a lot of great -- especially from the real world .
a couple of our leaders are n't -- you know , it 's not working out for them so well .
but i will tell you this , we are going to have -- we are going to have an amazing victory on november 8th .
we 're going to come back here and celebrate .
but we 're going to have an amazing victory because this is all about the people .
this is now about the people .
so , let me just tell you , i was talking about jobs .
and when you get ...   i feel the same way .
when you get --- when you get to the different places within our country and you see how our companies are being sucked out into mexico and other places , here 's what 's going to happen .
i go to indiana and i see carrier air conditioning ; 1,400 people that followed me all over indiana , so many of them .
so much support .
they were fired .
they were there for some of them 25 years longer , they were fired .
carrier announced that they 're moving to mexico .
they 're going to build a brand new plant .
and they 're going to make air conditioners ...   and they 're going to sell the air conditioners into our country and other places .
and we are fools , so we 're just going to say , oh go ahead .
you fire all these people in indianapolis .
and you 're going to do this .
not if i 'm president .
all right ?
ford -- ford announced two weeks ago that they 're moving the production of their smaller cars -- that 's a big production -- to mexico from our country .
and by the way , the reason we 're doing well in michigan and in ohio is because they know that i 've been talking about automobile production and i 've been pointing out what 's happening to automobile production and where 's it 's moving and i 've been talking about it for five years .
crooked hillary just started talking about it .
and let me tell you , just like she failed in new york state with jobs , she 's never bringing your businesses back , folks .
she 's never bringing your businesses back .
and she 's going to give you massive tax increases .
massive .
and i 'm cutting taxes massively .
so , here 's the story .
for years and years , you 've been hearing that companies are moving out .
who better than north carolina to know exactly what happened , right ?
you people have lost a lot of businesses .
not going to happen anymore .
so , whether it 's ford , whether it 's carrier , whether it 's somebody else , we hear somebody 's leaving , we 're going to say , we hope you stay .
and let 's stay and let 's talk .
nobody talks to these companies , by the way .
do you think anybody talked from the federal government to carrier or to ford ?
or -- they just do whatever they want to do .
but nobody talks .
you 've got to go see them .
you 've got , you 've got to be nice .
and if it does n't work out , you 'll tax the hell out of their product coming back here .
true .
so -- so what happened -- what happens is for years -- for years and years -- that 's right .
for years and years they 've been talking about how do we keep our companies in north carolina ?
how do we keep our countries in these different states ?
and they give interest - free loans and they give all sorts of goodies .
that 's -- they did n't need the money .
they want to leave , they did n't need the money .
so i 've been talking for the last six months , i said , it 's very simple .
i mean , i do it before even -- before i said a sentence .
what you do is you say the following .
carrier are you staying or are you leaving ?
well , we 're leaving .
by the way , nobody 's going to leave once you tell them what 's happening .
nobody 's leaving .
so they 're leaving because they 're a little early .
and you say to them though , assuming -- as an example , if i were made by a president , secretary of keeping businesses in the united states , ok ?
i 'll be -- instead of secretary of state , secretary of keeping businesses -- not a very glamorous title , but boy would i be good at that .
because i would call up the head of carrier , as an example , and i would say congratulations on your new plant in mexico .
yes , i agree it 's warm , but i hear it 's going to be a lovely place .
and if you move , and we do n't want you to move , there are consequences .
they 'll say , what are the consequences ?
i 'll say , every single time you make an air conditioning unit in mexico and you think after firing all of these people in indianapolis you 're going to take that unit , have it come across the border with no tariffs , no taxes , you 're 100 percent wrong .
we 're going to charge you ...   we 're going to charge you -- very importantly , we 're going to charge you a 35 percent tax for any unit that you .
now , here 's what 's going to happen .
number one , very strongly , nobody 's going to leave .
but if they do leave , you know , one percent , two percent , believe me nobody 's leaving .
if i 'm that secretary , nobody 's leaving .
but if they do leave , we 're going to make a fortune .
so it 's ok either way .
right ?
ladies ?
right ?
because we can not afford to continue to lose our companies .
we 're losing our companies .
we 're losing our jobs .
we can not afford to lose our jobs .
we can not afford to lose our manufacturing .
so it 's going to all come to an end .
it 's going to all come to an end .
we are going to keep our companies .
we are going to expand our companies .
we are reducing taxes , the biggest tax decrease since ronald reagan and could even be bigger than that .
our companies are going to stay .
our companies are going to expand .
and our companies are going to thrive .
in addition , new companies will be started and new jobs will happen .
and we will produce 25 million jobs over a period of 10 years as sure as you 're standing there .
and i 'd give you seats , but there were too many people .
sorry .
so , whether it 's carrier -- yes .
oh , is that carrier air conditioning ?
what 's he talking about ?
oh you do n't have the speaker ?
i 'll tell you , whoever runs this place is not doing very well .
you do n't have the speaker .
they said -- do you hear me over there ?
great job , fellows .
so now we do n't have to pay for this and now we do n't have to pay for that .
man .
who the hell runs this place ?
they say the speakers do n't work .
and i was having so much fun without these damn teleprompters , right ?
but an you hear me ok ?
can you hear me over there ?
all right .
you 're good enough .
see there , i would n't deduct full , but i 'll take 30 percent off the cost for the country .
so we 'll keep our jobs .
we 'll thrive .
we 're going to thrive .
we 're not going to give iran -- we 're not going to give them $ 400 million in cash that turned out to be $ 1.7 billion .
do you believe that ?
do you believe that ?
$ 1.7 billion in cash .
we 're giving them $ 150 billion and now look at what 's going on .
we 've embolden them .
instead of making them our friends , this incompetent president .
he 's incompetent .
we 've emboldened -- i mean , this guy , all i , all he does is campaign for crooked hillary .
look , he does n't want trump because trump is going to be much different .
first of all , one of my first acts is to get rid of his ridiculous healthcare that does n't work .
i wonder who pays for that big plane when he flies into campaign for hillary ?
i know the answer .
you know what happens ?
the campaign pays for a tiny little fraction , a tiny little fraction .
is that good or bad ?
oh , they just got it working .
all right , we 'll give them 20 percent off .
good .
sounds much better right ?
good voice .
right ?
all right .
thank you , fellows .
that 's great .
so , we are going to -- well , we have no choice -- repeal and replace obamacare .
now , you saw what happened .
the governor of minnesota came out , he said the affordable care act is not affordable .
it 's a disaster .
hey folks , it is a disaster .
hillary clinton wants to save it .
she wants to spend a fortune .
your premiums are going to go up next year over 100 percent .
this year , you look at texas , you look at your area , you look at everywhere , they 're going up 50 , 60 , 70 , 80 percent .
it is -- it 's gone .
it 's busted .
it 's broken .
it does n't work .
and i told you it did n't work before it was signed , right ?
because i know this stuff .
i 'm pretty good at this stuff .
it is a disaster .
we 're going to have a new healthcare plan that 's going to cost much less money , both for you and for the country .
and it 's going to be a much higher quality healthcare .
remember you can have your doctor , you can have your plan , 28 times .
right ?
twenty - eight times he said it , 28 times .
hillary clinton , when she was at the state department , $ 6 billion was found to be missing .
you saw that .
right ?
this is what we 're going to have for our president .
so here 's the story .
we are going to have a great , great vibrant country again .
we 're going to have jobs .
we 're going to have jobs .
we 're going to bring back in new jobs .
but we 're going to take care of things that have never been taken care of .
you know what that is ?
the inner cities .
we have ....   inner cities , where the crime rate is beyond belief .
the levels of poverty are hard to believe we 're in this country .
the education is virtually non - existent it 's so bad .
the -- common core , we 're going to get rid of common core , believe me .
common core is out .
we 're going to bring education .
but you take a look at the african - american folks living in the inner cities , where the crime is so bad you go with your child to get a loaf of bread and you get shot .
it 's so bad .
the crime is out of control .
everything 's out of control .
you look at chicago ; 300 -- no 3,000 shootings -- 3,000 shootings since january 1st .
the crime rate is incredible .
murders in the united states , nobody tells you this .
these people do n't tell you this .
murders in the united states -- murders in the united states are up 45 , did you see the numbers ?
the highest -- the highest they 've been -- the highest they 've been in 45 years .
murder .
so murder 's the highest it 's been in 45 years .
we are going to make our country so much stronger , so much safer .
and for the african - american community living in the hell of these inner cities , we 're going to solve the crime problem .
we 're going to help with education .
we 're going to bring our jobs back for everybody .
we 're going to make the communities safe .
and you know , i 've been saying this .
what the hell do you have to lose ?
they 're a disaster .
the inner cities are a disaster .
all over ; washington , d.c. , baltimore .
you look at the crime statistics .
i really say it , what do you have to lose ?
i will fix the inner cities .
it 's like a passion of mine .
i 'm good at fixing things , especially real estate .
and importantly , we 're going to help big league with education .
we 're going to bring in choice , which is so important .
and so important is we 're going to bring jobs back to our country so the people actually have jobs .
so , i say i hope you 're going to vote for donald trump .
same things ...   same thing ....   same thing with the hispanic - americans , is that a correct statement ?
how many hispanic - americans do we have here ?
one , we have at least one .
we have a lot .
wow , that 's good .
we 're going to bring jobs back .
we 're going to bring education back .
we 're going to bring safety back .
vote for trump , we 're going to fix it .
that i can tell you .
vote for trump .
vote for trump .
so , here 's a list of things .
we 're going to fix our depleted military .
our depleted military -- you look at where we are compared to where we used to be ; number of ships , the kind of weaponry we have .
you look at what 's going on with the people we just made rich .
look at what 's going on tonight .
just take a look at what 's going on .
we want to have peace through strength .
we have to be stronger .
we have to have better equipment .
our people in the military are the best .
but they have old equipment .
they have old fighter jets .
they have fighter jets that are so old that they have to go to museums where they 're on display .
they have to go to plane graveyards because they do n't make the parts anymore .
these are our fighter jets that we 're currently using .
so we 're going to fix our very , very depleted military so that our people in the military can have the kind of depth and the kind of equipment that they deserve .
we 're going to work with our veterans .
because our veterans , in many cases , are treated far worse than illegal immigrants coming in to the country .
we 're going to help our veterans .
big veteran state .
we 're going to help our veterans .
and help them big league , and they know my plan .
it 's been posted .
and i have tremendous veteran support .
there 's not going to be waiting online for nine days and seven days and six days .
and people dying , people dying because they ca n't see a doctor quickly enough for a simple procedure or for a simple prescription .
so we 're going to fix that and you all know what we 're doing .
if you have that kind of a wait , you 're going outside to a private doctor across the street or you 're going to a private or public hospital .
we 'll pay the bill .
but you 're not going to be dying in our country , not our veterans .
you 're not going to be dying , waiting online for seven days , nine days and 10 days .
it 's very important .
we are going to stop drugs from pouring into our country .
ice endorsed us just last week .
the border patrol agents , 2,000 -- 16,500 and ice .
so we have ice .
we have border patrol .
first time either one has ever endorsed an presidential candidate .
we are going to stop -- and i promised this to the people of new hampshire because new hampshire has a tremendous heroin problem .
we are going to stop drugs from pouring in to our country and poisoning our youth .
we 're going to stop it .
we 're going to stop it .
and we 're going to stop people from coming into our country illegally .
but we are going to have a big beautiful door in our wall .
and that door is going to let lots of people in , but they 're coming into our country legally .
coming in legally .
we 're going to protect your second amendment , which is under siege .
the national rifle association endorsed donald trump , and it 's the earliest endorsement they 've ever given to a candidate .
so i 'm proud of -- these are great people .
these are great americans and they are doing the right thing .
so your second amendment under siege .
if hillary gets in , forget it .
forget it .
we will protect your second amendment .
importantly -- importantly -- so importantly , i told you about obamacare , forget it , it 's gone .
but so importantly , we are going to appoint justices to the united states supreme court that you will be proud of .
constitution -- we 're going to be upholding and respecting our constitution .
so , i just want to say this .
when you look back , and we all had a good time , even though your speakers were no good , your teleprompters were no good .
as long as trump was good , that 's all that matters .
right ?
we had a good time .
but you 're going to look back at this evening .
you 're going to say , hey i had a good time .
but you 're going to go home and in 15 years and in 25 years , hopefully in longer than that , you 're going to look back at this evening and say this was a very important evening in your life .
more importantly , i love those signs , women for trump because i actually think i 'm doing well with women .
woah .
see , they may have the worst seats , but they 're going to be the most famous people because look at those cameras .
so , more importantly , you 're going to view your vote on november 8th to be the most important vote that you 've ever cast because we 're going to take back the white house .
we 're going to ...   ... have a country that you 're going to be so proud of again .
we 're going to have a country that works .
do you notice we do n't win anymore folks .
when was the last time we won ?
we have iran nipping at us .
you look at what 's going on .
we ca n't beat isis .
i always say , george patton , i was a fan .
today , he could n't make it because he was n't politically correct .
he was a little on the rough side .
right ?
he was boom , boom , boom .
but george patton , general douglas macarthur , these people are spinning in their graves right now .
and for the military people , right ?
for the military people , the element of surprise , do n't we like that ?
the element of surprise .
so , i hear , who knows , but we hear in mosul that a lot of the leaders of isis are in mosul .
right ?
i 've been hearing that for a while .
and they think they 're largely in mosul .
about three weeks ago , i started hearing that we , through iraq , but we are going to attack mosul .
we 're going to attack them sometime within the next few months .
we 're going to hit them hard .
left , right , back , forward .
yes , sir , we 're going to attack them .
there 's only one problem , by the time we attack them all the guys that we want are going to be gone .
they 're very smart .
how stupid are the people that run our country ?
why could n't they keep it quiet ?
why could n't they keep it quiet , knock the hell out of them , grab them all and then announce a week later to the american people that we 've gotten the bad ones .
the bad ones are gone , folks .
they 're someplace else .
we -- that 's for the military people .
they understand that better than anybody .
am i right ?
do you think general george patton , if he were in charge -- and by the way , i have over 200 admirals and generals supporting donald trump and endorsing donald trump .
i have 21 recipients of the medal of honor that have endorsed donald trump .
so they like my attitude .
they like actually my knowledge .
people were surprised the other night when we -- by the way , totally , totally annihilated in the debate .
totally .
remember when she came in front of me .
she walked right in front of me .
i said , huh , hi hillary .
but remember she walked in front of me , answered the question , which is fine , i have no problem with it .
and then the next day , they put out something .
i invaded her space while on the stage .
i invaded .
did you see that , right ?
i 'm standing , here 's my lectern .
no , no .
here 's my lectern , and i 'm standing there .
and we 're answering and this and that .
and i was three to one .
you know , i had anderson cooper and i had martha raddatz .
i do n't think she likes me too much .
i do n't think she likes me too much .
no , but i had three to one .
in fact , i said , what is this three to one ?
and hillary came and she walked right in front of me .
i was at my chair .
i was at my lectern .
i was standing there .
the reason is , i did n't want to be scolded for that .
and sure as hell , the next day , he violated hillary 's space or to put it another way , he violated the space of crooked hillary .
so anyway , but she 's home now .
she 's prepping .
so we 'll see what happens .
but when i saw this whole thing on mosul .
day after day we 're attacking mosul .
in two weeks , three weeks , there are   not exactly , all they know is that it 's happening .
what the hell are we doing ?
what are we doing ?
so , we 're going to have a country run smart .
we wo n't be giving $ 150 billion to a terrorist state .
we 'll be looking at the deal so close , inside out and backwards .
and if it 's not , if they are not living up -- i mean , the hardest part for me is we 've given them so much money already .
i would have liked it much more before we gave them all that money .
but they do n't honor that deal to every single little line , every single little word , we 're going to rip the sucker up so fast your head will spin .
their head will spin .
it 's one of the most incompetent deals i 've ever seen in my life .
i 'm not talking about nation - to - nation .
secretary kerry never stood up and said we 're walking .
and if he did he could have made a much better deal .
and i do n't mind making deals for nuclear , i do n't mind making great deals .
do n't forget obama thinks that global warming is our biggest threat .
i happen to think it 's nuclear warming .
our biggest threat is nuclear and it 's not global warming .
it 's nuclear warming .
and i 'll tell you what , we 're going to work very hard on that situation because that situation is getting more and more and more out of control .
and hillary talks tough about russia and she talks tough about a lot of things .
she has no clue .
she talked tough about libya , looked what happened there .
she has no clue .
she is unfit to be president because she has such bad judgment .
bernie sanders said she has bad judgment .
i said , thank you bernie , i 'm going to be using that for about six months after they take .
look what happened with wikileaks .
they took the election away from the guy .
how could he be supporting her ?
they took that election away .
it was a rigged system .
the whole system is rigged .
and that 's why when the media does what they 're doing now , that 's rigging the system , folks .
it 's rigging the system .
the election is rigged .
it 's rigged like you 've never seen before .
they 're rigging the system .
these are very dishonest people .
so folks , i love the people of north carolina .
going to be back here a lot over the next 25 days , can you believe it ?
twenty - five .
but you 've got to get out and you 've got to vote .
got to get out and vote .
you 've got to get out and vote because we are going to make our country strong again .
we 're going to make our country rich again .
we 're going to make our country smart again .
we 're going to be a smart country again .
and what else are we going to do ?
we 're going to make our country great again .
thank you very much .
god bless , you everybody .
thank you .
thank you very much .
absolutely it is .
and we 're not taking it , uh , we 're not taking it to them and we have to take it to them .
you know , i did n't want to go into iraq , i said , now he 's a civilian , so i would say not too many people cared what i wanted to do .
but that was a terrible mistake .
our terrible mistake number two was getting out the way we got out .
president obama , hillary clinton , the way they got out was absolutely insane .
it will be talked about for many , many years and it really led to the formation of isis .
uh , we have problems in this country .
we 're letting thousands and thousands of people come into our country .
we have no idea who they are , where they come from .
there 's no paperwork .
nobody knows what they 're doing .
and they 're coming in by the thousands .
and hillary clinton , it was announced recently that she wants to allow 550 percent more coming into our country from syria , from the migration than obama is allowing to come in .
so it 's got ... 

  well , he actually had a speech .
and it 's -- it 's so ... 
  it 's actually ... 
  -- it 's not only true , it 's sad because , i mean , how obvious can it be ?
you look at what 's going on , world trade center , you look at san bernardino , you look at so many different things .
you look at nice just recently .
i have friends , they wo n't go to france anymore .
they love france .
they love the -- the city of lights , paris .
they love -- they love paris .
and i say to them , how was france this summer ?
oh , we do n't go there anymore .
france is no longer france .
and we 're going to do the same thing to our country , sean .
so we ca n't allow it to happen and i have as big a heart as anybody .
we take care of people .
we 'll build safe zones over in syria .
we 'll do something .
we have to have the gulf states pay for it , because the gulf states they make nothing but money ... 

  a hundred percent .
oh , 100 percent .
a hundred percent .
a hundred percent .
and we have to ... 





  right .
well , look -- look , i said one thing right from the beginning , i wanted to get out .
we should have never been there and i wanted to get out and i 've been -- i 've been against it ever since .
i mean you can look back to 2004 , 2003 , uh , in fact , on neil cavuto 's show , before the war started , i said , let 's not do it .
we have other things we have to do , including fix our economy , which was a mess , ok , to put it mildly .
but the way we got out was ridiculous .
but i 've been saying something ever since i 've known you , keep the oil .
have i said that ?
keep the oil .
keep the oil .
and ... 
  we went through -- and i said , when we went in , you know , in the old days , to the victor belonged the spoils .
we -- if we -- i do n't call it a victory , it 's no victory .
but certainly militarily , we wiped them out .
but i said keep the oil and take the money and some of it give to the families of the soldiers who died .
give it to the wounded warriors .
give to the people that have been hurt so badly in that war .
and -- and it ... 
  -- it -- it would be -- by the way , that would be such a small part of the money and the rest we used to pay ourselves ... 

  right .
so ... 

  -- it 's -- what i 'm saying is keep the oil .
now , if they would have done that , there would be no isis .
i said keep the oil .
and i -- i think most of the audience has heard me say 200 times , i mean every time practically somebody or so .
so i wanted to get out , but i wanted to keep the oil .
so by nature , that means you 're staying in because you 're going to have to guard the oil , etc .
etc .
but that oil is very prized oil , believe me .
we have the same problem in libya right now .
we did the stupid attacks on libya and we got nothing out of it and isis has taken over the oil and it 's some of the finest oil in the world .
so when i was young and went to school , i had always heard we never lost , this country , we never lost a war , you know , world war i , world war ii , we -- we just did n't lose wars .
and since then , i mean when you think of it , you look at vietnam , you look at this mess that we 're in right now , all of the money spent on this .
i mean it 's so sad .
trillions of dollars .
i used to say $ 2 trillion in iraq .
but that was years ago .
i mean i 've been saying that for so long .
nobody even knows what it is .
in the meantime , our country is going to hell .
our infrastructure is terrible .
our roads , our bridges , our tunnels , our schools , our hospitals , they 're -- we 're like a third world -- we 're becoming like a third world country .
we 're spending our money over there .
with all of that being said , you have an enemy that wants to do serious harm to us , ok , beyond what anyone has ever seen .
this is like medieval times .
i -- i chose not to , but , you know , i -- we all understood what took place and these were great young people .
and not only our people , they 're doing it to their own people .
they 're doing it to christians .
if you 're a christian in the middle east and they have you , it 's very likely that 's going to happen .
the point is , they want to do serious harm .
we have to take them out .
we have to take them out very , very swiftly and viciously if necessary .
generals have ... 

  right .
general flynn and other of the generals , these are great people .
and i ask them all the time , if you were given your head , because right now , they 're fighting a politically correct war .
if you were given your head , just you go and you 've got to get them out , how long would it take ?
i 'll tell you what , they are ... 
  -- they are telling me they could do the job very , very rapidly .
now , very rapidly is longer than you would like , but they could get the job done and get it done with precision and get it done .
uh , we have no choice , sean .
we have no choice .
we have to take them out .
well , we 're just allowing people into our country that some are going to be a problem .
and we have enough problems in our country right now and you people are really proof positive .
what you 've gone through , it 's unimaginable .
i watched the boston bombing so many times on television , how somebody can do that , how they got them on tape .
it was genius police work , how they got them to start off with , but , you know , how they caught him .
but when you walk -- you see them walking along like they have n't got a problem in the world .
and they 're looking to do mass destruction .
and when i see that , i want to do something about it .
i want to do something about it .
sure .
sure .
true .
true .
wow !
wow !
right .
and there will be more .
look , we can be nice about it .
we can say it 's never going to happen again .
there will be more .
and what we 're doing by allowing thousands and thousands , tens of thousands of people in here that we just do n't know anything about , it 's going to happen again , because there 's something wrong .
and until we figure it out , we have to stop it .
and that was really a large part of the speech that i just -- i just ... 



  right .
well , you do n't want to do that and ... 

  -- and if they knew about it , that would be one thing .
and i assume they knew about it big league .
but certainly they know about it now , so maybe they can give the money back .
i 've -- i 've actually called ... 
  -- i 've actually called ... 

  and you know what ?
let 's give them the benefit of the doubt .
they certainly knew about ... 

  and but do you know what -- you know what ... 

  they should give the money back .
and i 've been saying this for a long time .
they should give the money back .
well , you know , look , uh , there 's a whole big phony deal going on .
and i have to say , when we were talking about benghazi , uh , the end , i do n't know if everybody remembers it .
i remember it .
at 3:00 in the morning , essentially , who do you want to be at that phone at 3:00 in the morning ?
we have some people ... 
  -- we have some people ... 
  -- oh , i 'll be -- hey , i 'll be up , i will tell you that .
she was ... 
  -- not too effective .
-- you know , the amazing thing , because that was a big ad and everybody made a big deal and she said she 'd be there at 3:00 .
she was n't there .
but ... 

  but -- but she had a certain friend ... 
  -- that was contacting her routinely all day and all week and all the time , routinely , and you had 600 messages trying to get through , different forms of message , and not one of those messages got through .
well , look ... 

  right .
well , let me just you , you get very smart people .
and there are those people .
and they 're very good at understanding what 's going on .
but beyond that , you use social media , because a lot of these people -- i mean they 're better at social media than we are .
isis , if you look at what isis is doing with social , they 're recruiting over the internet .
and i also said we have to end that .
we have to knock it out .
we have to -- you know , some people would say oh , that 's a terrible thing .
we have to end that .
but -- but , sean , when you look at what 's going on with the internet and how isis is using the internet and what they 're doing and what they 're doing to us and then you have people in our country that say oh , you ca n't do that , that 's doing something so bad to us , here we are , people -- they want to blow us up .
we have to be very careful .
we have to take them out very swiftly , because weapons are getting stronger and stronger , meaner and meaner , and believe me , they want to come over here .
now , again , i was one that did n't want to go over there .
but now you have no chance -- really , you have no choice .
now , one thing , when obama announced when he 's going out and we 're going to -- all they did is they sat back .
i could n't believe it , when i was watching , i was watching this conference and he was talking about getting out and when they were getting out .
i -- i 'm sitting there , i ca n't believe that he would say it .
and even hillary clinton , when she talks about the different things , she wants to -- why ca n't we just be quiet and do the job ?
why ca n't we be quiet ... 

  -- and do the job ?
i do n't want to telegraph now ... 

  no , i do n't want to tell them .
ok .
so when you look at , uh , san bernardino , right , which was a horror show .
she came in .
she probably radicalized the husband .
what a -- what a couple that was .
that was a real beauty .
so if they would have looked at social media , they would have seen that this woman was trouble .
we did n't look at social media .
they just came in .
uh , they actually killed people that gave them a baby , uh , a baby shower -- a baby party .
they had a child .
they -- the 14 people that were killed , they were at the party honoring the birth of their baby and then they went in and they shot them all , killed them all .
look , there 's something going on .
it 's a sick deal .
it 's beyond just normal ... 

  sean ... 

  -- this is a sick , sick deal .
i 'd throw him out .
if you look at him , i 'd throw him out .
you know , i looked at him .
and you look , he 's smiling .
he had the red cap on .
i thought it was one of my caps .
i said no , no .
make america great again , i do n't think so .
but he has the red cap .
he 's got a big smile on his face during the whole thing .
he obviously liked what he heard , ok , from her .
look , we have to be so tough and so smart and so vigilant .
and frankly , the muslims have to help us , because they see what 's going on in their community .
we do n't see it .
they have to help us .
and if they 're not going to help us , they 're to blame , also .
but in -- in san bernardino , they saw bombs laying around the apartment ... 

  -- in the apartment .
and people saw it .
and they wanted to be -- they called it racial profiling .
we did n't want to call in because of racial profiling .
in other words , a lawyer got to them and said you 've got a problem here , you knew this was there , say racial profiling .
but look , we have -- whether it 's racial profiling or politically correct , we 'd better get smart .
we are letting tens of thousands of people into our country .
we do n't know what the hell we 're doing .
that 's -- by the way , that 's a little bit of a different subject , but it 's all ... 

  it 's related .
a little different , but it 's related .
ok .
right .
paid for by somebody else .
doubled it .
doubled it .
right .
you 'd take it ... 


  in syria .
they have plenty of land , that i can tell you .
but in syria , there 's plenty of money , because you look at the gulf states , you like at the kind of money they have , there 's nobody seen money like that .
and they 're not doing anything .
they 're not doing anything .
paid for by somebody else .
doubled it , he doubled it .
... in syria .
they have plenty of land , that i can tell you .
but in syria , and there 's plenty of money , because you look at the gulf states , you look at the kind of money they have .
there 's -- nobody has seen money like that .
and they 're not doing anything .
they 're not doing anything .
everybody .
everybody , right , everybody .
i really do , mostly .
but , you know , a lot of times the mainstream media , they put it on like , if i 'm talking about anything else , they 'll put that on .
she is so protected .
they are so protecting her .
she has n't had a news conference in like 250 days .
well , she is being protected by the government , definitely .
i mean , how she got away with the emails is beyond anything i 've ever seen in justice .
but i have to say , she 's being protected , and she 's being protected by the media .
when i say something about her , for instance , if i speak for an hour , and i talk about her for a half an hour , 45 minutes , nothing gets on television .
they 'll put something else on , but they wo n't ... 

  other things get on television ... 

  look , let me just say , she 's totally protected .
i 've never seen anything like it .
and she does n't really do that much .
she 'll give a speech on teleprompter , and then she 'll disappear .
i do n't know if she goes home -- she goes home and goes to sleep .
i think she sleeps .
i guess she takes a lot of weekends off .
she takes a lot of time off .
and you know that 's , frankly -- frankly , it 's really not fair .
yes , right .
you never say 100 percent , but i 'm telling you pretty close 100 percent the wall gets built .
we need it .
you know , the border patrol ... 
  the border patrol agents have endorsed me , along with sheriff joe and everyone else .
it gets built .
we have to rebuild , it 's all depleted .
the military is depleted .
one hundred percent .
it could be done faster than that .
we have regulations that are absolutely destroying our energy companies .
yes , i 've already announced who the 11 could be .
i have 11 people from which to pick .
and i want to get as close to scalia as i can .
you know , obamacare is dying of its own volition , if you look at the   of obamacare .
you saw what happened with aetna today .
it 's really ... 

  one hundred percent , i 'm telling you too .

thank you very much , everybody .
wow .
thank you .
thank you very much .
what a privilege to be here with the incredible -- and i mean incredible -- men and women of the veterans of foreign wars .
and we set today , an all - time registration record .
that 's pretty good , right ?
congratulations to you .
spending time with our veterans has been the greatest honor of this campaign .
i want to thank commander - in - chief , big john , and really , for the welcome .
he has been so fantastic .
from the time we walked in , he has been so fantastic .
also , many thanks to bob wallace , auxiliary president francisca guilford , and for your incoming leadership .
you have brian duffy and colette bishop , two terrific people .
two terrific people .
before going any further today , i 'd like to bring up on to this stage my good friend , governor mike pence .
and by the way , mike is the son of a soldier and the father of a marine .
mike ?
thank you , mike .
and thanks again to everyone for inviting me to address you today .
the veterans -- i love you , too .
the veterans of foreign wars represent the very , very best of america .
when i 'm president , i pledge to work closely with your organization and your members to accomplish our shared goals .
our veterans are the bravest and the finest people on earth .
the members of your organization have fought for the american flag , and boy have you fought , on distant battlefields all across the world .
your members have shed their blood and poured out their hearts for this nation like nobody else .
our debt to you is eternal .
yet our politicians have totally failed you .
our most basic commitment to provide health and medical care to those who fought for us so bravely has been violated completely .
the v.a. scandals that have occurred are widespread and totally inexcusable .
as we know , many have died waiting for care that never came , a permanent stain on our government .
can you imagine the waste and corruption -- and i tell you we will find it and we will find it big league   when i become president in january 2017 .
i 've recently released a detailed 10-step veterans reform plan and we 've worked on the plan with the chairman of the veterans affairs committee in the house and a really good guy who loves the vets , jeff miller .
he is a good man .
we 're going to take care of our veterans like they 've never been taken care of before .
the other candidate in this race , you know , her name , crooked hillary clinton -- and believe me , folks , she is crooked -- has a much different view .
she recently said of the v.a. scandal that it 's not as widespread as it 's been purported to be .
it 's like she 's trying to sweep it under the rug , which by the way , politicians have done for years and years and years .
it 's going to be four more years of the same if she ever got in .
but that 's not going to happen .
make america great again , you 're right .
thank you .
we know how she takes cares of the veterans .
just look at her invasion of libya and her handling of benghazi .
a disaster .
or look at her e - mails , which put america 's entire national security at risk .
and to think , she was here yesterday .
i guess she did n't do very well .
we 're going to bring honesty back to government , and that starts with fixing the veterans administration .
we will fix it .
here is my 10 step plan for veterans reform .
one , i will appoint a secretary of veterans affairs who will make it their personal mission to clean up the v.a. , and this person , man or woman , will be outstanding with an outstanding track record .
in other words , a person that can get it done .
number two , i 'm going to use every lawful authority to remove and discipline federal employees or managers who breach their public trust .
three ...   i will ask congress to pass a bill giving the v.a. secretary full authority to remove or discipline any employee who risks the health , safety or wellbeing of a veteran .
i will appoint a commission to investigate all of the wrongdoing at the v.a. , of which there is plenty , and then present those findings to congress as the basis for reforming the entire system .
five , i 'm going to make sure that the honest and dedicated people of the v.a. , of which we have many , have their jobs protected and are put in line for promotion .
when they do a good job , we are going to get them promoted , like they deserve .
i will create a private white house hotline .
this could keep me very busy at night , folks .
this will take the place of twitter .
lot of truth to that .
that is answered by a real person 24 hours a day to make sure that no valid complaint about the v.a. ever falls through the cracks .
now , this is the tough part .
this is the tough part .
i will instruct my staff that if a valid complaint is not acted upon , then the issuer who brought it   directly to me , and i want to have it , will bring it directly to me and i will pick up the phone personally and get it completed and get it taken care of .
that 's a lot of work .
we better do a good job because that 's a lot of work .
but i want to have somebody , a real person and a really competent person in the white house with that hotline going .
and if that person 's not doing the job , i 'm going to find out about it , and that 's the best way to find out about it .
that 's called real life .
that 's called business .
instead of giving bonuses to employees for wasting money , we are going to create a new incentive program that rewards employees for saving money and improving the quality of care .
our vsa   programs will be reformed to ensure that veterans are put in the front of the line for jobs in this country .
they fought and they protect us , now we 're going to fight   them ; they 're going to put right in the front of the line and these are our great people .
and by the way , governor pence is right at the top of the nation in employment for vets .
when he took over , he was number 32 or 38 .
now he 's right at the top .
he has done an incredible job with respect to employment for vets .
so mike , good going and keep it going .
we 're going to increase the number of mental health care professionals and increase mental health outreach to veterans outside of the system .
so important .
we 're going to ensure every veteran in america gets timely access to top quality care including the best care in the world for our female veterans .
the veterans health system will remain a public system , because it is a public trust .
but never again will we allow any veteran to suffer or die waiting for care .
that means veterans will have the right to go to a v.a. facility or the right to see a private doctor or clinic of their choice , whatever is fastest and best for the veteran .
there will be no more five - day waits in line .
if you 're waiting in line , you 're going to go to a private doctor across the street , a private or public hospital across the street or nearby , and you 're going to be taken care of quickly and efficiently .
people are waiting in line five days , six days , seven days .
and many are dying .
with a simple procedure , they would live .
and they 're dying because they ca n't even get to see their doctor .
so there 's not going to be any more of that .
and we will pick up the bill .
it will cost us less money and the care will be amazing .
ok ?
you have my word on that .
come january 20 , if i 'm elected president , you 're going to notice a change in the v.a. and in the whole entire government system , which is a mess .
all you have to do is try to get on an airplane and you 'll see what a mess it is .
a change in attitude and a change in results will absolutely take place so fast , right at the beginning .
government is going to start working for the people again .
the special interests opposing our reform , and they do oppose it for their own reasons , and reform for america , the same people who have led us to one economic and foreign policy disaster after another .
the global corporations and the media executives who oppose our plans , and they are opposing them strongly -- we need plans for change .
and we want to keep the system in place , except for the section that 's rigged , and that 's a lot of it .
we 're getting rid of our rigged system .
i started using that term a year - and - a - half ago , and now everybody 's using it .
this morning , i was watching one of the democrats , who i 've been talking about as a rigged system .
he used the word " rigged system . "
i 'm going to have to come up now with another word .
it 's very sad .
but the system is rigged , so badly rigged .
and it 's rigged against the veterans , too .
that 's why their message is that things ca n't change , ca n't change .
with these people , they ca n't change .
these are the same special interests who have driven the economy into the ground and who have created one calamity after another overseas -- horrible , horrible thought process .
these washington interests are telling americans to stay the course .
they 're telling us that we ca n't fix our trade deals or we ca n't fix our v.a. or we ca n't fix our broken tax system , or we ca n't fix immigration , because they 're benefiting from the status quo .
they benefit .
they do n't want to change .
we need change .
they do n't want to change .
my message is the opposite .
things have to change .
and they have to change right now .
here is just some of the change we need .
we need to change our tax , energy and regulatory policies to produce millions of new jobs and trillions in new wealth and invest in our country and in our infrastructure , which is falling apart all over this country -- our roads , our tunnels , our bridges , our airports .
our infrastructure is that of a third - world country .
not anymore .
and i 'm very good at building .
remember that .
and i build under - time and under - budget .
very important .
you do n't hear that from government very often .
those who seek to raise taxes and expand regulation will only weaken our country , hamstring our economy , and throw many millions more out of work .
and as you know , hillary clinton wants to institute a massive tax increase , massive tax increase .
and we 're already just about the highest - taxed nation in the world .
our immigration system must also be fixed , so it lifts people out of poverty instead of throwing them into poverty , which is what it 's doing right now .
our terrible trade deal must be renegotiated completely .
nafta is a disaster .
to keep jobs and wealth in america -- we 're sending our jobs away .
we 're going to keep our jobs in america .
and we 're going to bring new jobs back .
we need to change our foreign policy to focus in defeating and destroying isis , a word you did n't hear last night at the democrat convention .
you did n't hear it .
they do n't want to talk about it .
because in a very true way , they really established isis because of weakness .
the people in this room know better than anybody else or any other audience what i mean by weakness .
but because of weakness , isis has been established .
it 's also essential that we suspend the refugee flows from syria and other dangerous countries so we do n't bring into the united states the same terrorism that our american soldiers are fighting overseas .
we have to be smart .
thank you .
hillary clinton wants to bring in , if you can believe this , 550 percent more than president obama .
more .
and tim kaine wrote a letter very recently asking for more than even hillary wants .
what are we doing ?
what are we doing ?
we have to be the smart country again , or we 're in big , big trouble .
our depleted military must be completely rebuilt .
then from a position of strength and respect , america needs to extend our hand in friendship to foreign nations who want to be our friends , and we ca n't be taken advantage of by these countries that we work so closely with .
many of these countries are taking advantage of us , folks .
they 're taking advantage of us .
we want to be friends , but they also have to be friends with us .
remember that -- something you 've never heard from a politician .
we want a more peaceful future for our world .
but peace will require new approaches , not relying on the same failed voices of the past .
these are failed voices .
and now they want another four years .
and we need to fix the v.a. , so we never break our sacred commitment to our veterans , never ever again .
we can do all of these things .
we simply need to stop relying on the politicians who created these problems in the first place .
they are not going to do anything .
i call them all talk , no action .
that 's what they are .
they are politicians .
all talk , no action .
we ca n't fix a rigged system by electing the people who rigged it in the first place .
let 's reject the doubters and the cynics , and choose instead to believe in ourselves and in our country .
it 's time to follow the example of our amazing veterans who work together across racial lines , across income lines , across all lines in unity of mission and purpose .
nobody does it better than our veterans .
let them be our guide .
it 's time to believe in each other , and it 's time again to believe in america .
if we do this , we 'll truly , absolutely 100 percent make america great again , greater than ever , ever , ever before .
thank you very much .
god bless you .
thank you .
thank you .
wow .
this is incredible .
you know we have people wrapped all the way around the hangar as deep as this ?
i hope they can come over here .
should we let them over here ?
yes , right ?
right ?
these are people from the western slopes .
we better let them over , right ?
come on over , folks .
get on over here .
there are thousands of people back there .
well , it 's 21 days we are going to win the state of colorado , and we are going to win the white house .
we 're going to win the white house .
i 'll tell you what , we are going through some very interesting times .
but it 's going to be so exciting on november 8th , that 's the big day .
get out and vote , right ?
get out and vote .
and make sure to mail the ballots .
you have those ballots , those very beautiful ballots .
election day , early voting .
i think it starts , what , the 24th ?
is it the 24th ?
yes .
so , do the early voting if you can .
definitely november 8th we get out .
we 're going to win , we 're going to take back the white house , we 're going to put america first again .
we 're going to deliver real , real change .
it 's going to be a beautiful thing .
and we are going to end the government of corruption , which it has definitely been .
and we are going to drain the swamp in washington , d.c. , and that 's what it is .
we 're also going to renegotiate our terrible trade deals , end illegal immigration , stop the massive inflow of refugees , reduce surging crime all over our country , cut taxes and regulations .
she wants to build your taxes .
rebuild our military , which is in pretty sad shape right now , unfortunately .
it 's very depleted .
we have the greatest people in the world in our military , but it has really become depleted and we are going to fix it and make it better , and hopefully never have to use it .
but it 's going to be there .
we are going to take care of our vets and repeal and replace obamacare .
we 're also going to unleash american energy , including shale , oil , natural gas , clean coal .
that means getting rid of job - killing epa regulations that are unnecessary .
so many unnecessary .
we 're going to put the miners right here in colorado back to work .
we 're going to put them back to work .
who 's a miner ?
raise your hand .
you , you do n't look like a miner .
a lot of miners .
get ready to go to work .
get ready to go to work .
you want to go back to work ?
you 're going to go back to work .
your jobs will come back under a trump administration .
your incomes will go up under a trump administration .
your taxes will go way , way down under a trump administration .
your companies wo n't be leaving colorado under a trump administration .
we 're going to have a new government that serves the people .
has n't done that in a long time .
hillary clinton is the most corrupt person ever to run for president .
you heard about the newly released fbi documents ?
they reveal just how corrupt she is and it is .
undersecretary of state patrick kennedy illegally pressured -- who really illegally pressured the fbi to unclassify e - mails from hillary 's illegal server .
that server is a disaster .
you know , i just ripped out an article out of the paper just today , where a four - star general -- one of the most highly respected people in the military -- was charged with something , and he has agreed to a devastating sentence .
and it 's very sad to see , and i spoke to general kellogg and i spoke to general flynn , who you know .
they are here someplace .
where are they ?
come here , generals .
come here .
where is general kellogg ?
you guys are great .
great guys .
amazing .
i just spoke to the generals .
these are real generals too , these are real guys .
i love having them on my plane , but when i 'm on my plane with them i sort of feel like i 'm number three .
does that make sense ?
you know , they 're generals .
but i will tell you , i just cut out the article -- major article from the wall street journal -- and it talked about a certain general , a highly decorated man , a very respected man , and he just pled guilty to doing exactly what she did , except like two percent of what she did .
general , do you want to mention it ?
i mean honestly , it 's unbelievable .
thank you , fellas .
great guys , great guys .
great guys , but think of general cartwright for doing three percent of what she did , and life is destroyed .
the state department was trying to cover up hillary 's crimes of sending classified information on the server our enemies could easily access .
now , think of what we just said about a four - star general , just happened .
i just actually picked the article -- i said , is this something like what happened with her ?
they said , this is a tiny fraction of what she did .
it is so -- it is so disgraceful .
she should n't be allowed to run for the office of president .
the fbi documents show that patrick kennedy made the request for altering classification as part of a quid pro quo .
nothing 's going to happen .
do you think anything is going to happen ?
you know , we are wasting time .
do you think anything is going to be -- might as well -- in fact , today the story came out and they had it like a little story .
because almost as corrupt as crooked hillary clinton is the media right back there .
clinton and her cronies have sacrificed your security , your family 's safety and your country 's safety as though it meant nothing at all to her .
remember also that hillary lied under oath to congress , saying she had never sent or received classified information on her insecure server , and pretended not to know what the letter c meant , confidential information that was classified , right .
hillary then told the fbi she could n't remember 30 times , right ?
thirty - nine .
thirty - nine times , and then in written testimony last week under oath she could n't remember another 21 times .
bad memory .
she 's got a bad memory .
what can you do ?
take a look at the general cartwright story .
this elaborate criminal cover - up included hillary 's deleting and bleaching 33,000 e- mails .
the disappearance of 13 phones , some of which were hammered , boom , boom .
hammered .
who hammered their phone when they got rid of it ?
anybody here ?
this guy .
we 've got to watch him , check him .
two boxes of e - mail evidence is now missing as of two weeks ago .
missing .
add the destruction of laptops .
this is many times worse than watergate .
and we are going to put an end to it come november 8th .
now they say we are tied in colorado .
i do n't think so , i 'll be honest .
i mean , something is going on here , something .
you know , they say we are tied .
every place i go , we have thousands , and you ca n't honestly -- you do n't know what 's on the other side of this wall .
you wo n't even believe it .
but they say we are tied , i do n't think we are tied .
the other one says we are two up .
one says we are four up .
one said we were six or seven down .
that was the one that they show on television .
they do n't show the other ones .
these people , but they say -- let 's say we are tied , then how come we have thousands and thousands of people , thousands and thousands .
sort of an amazing thing .
oh , and these people here , they are getting $ 1,500 to do that , $ 1,500 .
you see how professional they are ?
look at the guy now , he 's just walking out .
so , yesterday there was a story that the dnc , democratic national committee , is sending protesters in here , paying them $ 1,500 .
look at that guy , he 's like a pro .
they got him out , now he 's just walking .
you know , is disgusting .
it just came out yesterday , and i thought so , but the way they got him , he walked out .
by the time he got to the door it was all over , puts everything , and now he 's off .
look at him .
and you know what ?
it 's all over the internet .
the mainstream media hardly wrote about it and they caught him yesterday .
not him .
they pay $ 1,500 and they give iphones to everybody if you go in and disrupt .
this is what we 're dealing with these people , these are bad people .
and the press does n't cover it .
and now look , they are covering him being taken out , and they will say a protester , like he 's this innocent little lamb .
and then you wonder why our country is in trouble .
then you wonder why our country is in trouble .
take a look at what 's happening now in mosul .
they give them four months warning .
they were to get isis , they want to get the leaders .
they announced four months ago , we are going in to get the leaders .
the leaders are smart , they say , hey , they 're coming in to get us , let 's get the hell out of here .
they 're gone .
and they are meeting resistance , on top of everything else .
boy , whatever happened .
do you remember the expression , the element of surprise ?
you get them and then you tell the public and they will be very happy to hear it a week later .
these people are so just sad .
another series of leaked e - mails show top officials in the clinton campaign scheming to take massive sums of money from registered foreign lobbyists .
but do n't hear the media talking about it .
we all talk about it -- wikileaks proved .
and by the way , they are not being covered , they want to cover fictitious stories about me , it 's fiction .
they want to cover -- they just want to cover fictitious stories on me .
wikileaks has provided things that are unbelievable .
the media , you have to remember , is an extension of the hillary clinton campaign .
and without that she would be nowhere .
the press has created a rigged system and poisoned the minds of the voters , many of the voters .
of course a lot of voters , their minds are just fine .
they know exactly what 's going on .
they have rigged it from the beginning by telling totally false stories , most recently about phony allegations where i 've been under attack constantly .
instead of covering wikileaks and all of those things , they attack business , they attacked my family .
they even attacked my temperament .
it 's always been my best thing .
i built an incredible company ...   i have built an incredible company .
i 'm fortunate to have a beautiful and great family -- loving family .
and my temperament , it 's -- hey , we have a winning temperament .
we know how to win .
we do n't win any more , right ?
our country , our country does n't win anymore , folks .
look , when do we win ?
we ca n't win with our great military because our leaders wo n't let us , by the way .
just so you know .
it 's not the military .
our leaders wo n't let us .
we do n't win in the economy .
look at our jobs report from last week , it was a disaster .
our jobs report last week was catastrophic .
and that 's the last one before the election so maybe that should help .
this is an election about the truth .
it 's going to be about the truth .
i did n't need to do this , that i can tell you .
a lot of people can not handle the truth , but no matter what people may think of me , the one thing they know is that i am always going to tell you what 's happening , what 's happening with our country .
i 'm telling you the good and the bad , but it 's going to start being the good .
i mean , you ca n't believe anything you see .
i do n't even believe the polls .
i see these polls , and they 're not terrible .
they 're sort of good .
and actually , if the people come out and vote -- they are very nervous .
i have a feeling this is another brexit .
this is going to be interesting .
they do n't want to show you the good .
if they take five polls of the same group , they will always show the bad one .
but the bad ones fine , it 's fine .
you 've got to get out and vote .
i 'll tell you what , we are going to have one of the greatest victories in political history if we get out and vote .
and when hillary develops the energy to go to events -- she 's got very small crowd .
if she came up here , as an example , if she came here , she would have , let 's say , maybe the little group on the right- hand , but it would n't be them .
i think the media is trying to discourage our people from getting out and voting , i do .
it 's a very crooked group of people .
without the media and all the other corrupt entities that have helped her along the way , honestly she 'd be nothing , folks , she 'd be nothing .
tomorrow night 's going to be interesting .
now she 's home sleeping and i 'm working , so that 's the way .
the way it 's going to be in the white house , too .
she 'd be sleeping , i 'd be working .
even my worst critics agree the media has come after us like they have never , ever , ever come after anyone before , never .
i mean , i 'm like -- there 's never been a hit or a pile - on , and even they admit it .
they even say it .
the failing new york times -- and it is failing , it wo n't be in business , in my opinion , more than three or four more years .
they said in an article -- in a major article -- let 's face it , balance has been on vacation since mr. trump onto his golden trump tower escalator to announce his candidacy , so true .
they admit it .
and then they go on to say , we do n't care .
we do n't care .
we 'll do whatever is necessary to defeat him and to defeat those people .
that 's what they want to do .
they want to stop our agenda for change , but we wo n't let them .
history is watching us now , waiting to see if we will rise to the moment .
the moment is going to be november 8th , it 's very simple .
and we will .
we 've just begun to fight .
they even want to try and rig the election at the polling booths , where so many cities are corrupt and voter fraud is all too common .
and then they say , there 's no voter fraud in our country .
there 's no voter fraud .
no , no , there 's no voter fraud .
take a look at st. louis , take a look at philadelphia , take a look at chicago .
and then i have even the republicans saying , this is a wonderful -- look , look , if nothing else , people are going to be watching on november 8th .
watch philadelphia , watch st. louis , watch chicago .
watch so many other places .
but then do you ever notice they say there is no voter fraud .
now there 's a voter fraud also with the media because they so poisoned the minds of the people by writing false stories .
they are -- i have , actually , they are more crooked than crooked hillary , i really do .
that 's a lot .
in 2014 , the washington post -- that 's another beauty -- published an article entitled " could non - citizens decide the november election ? "
guys , that 's the washington post .
the article found that 14 percent ... they are having a good time .
were they friend or foe ?
the article found that 14 percent of non - citizens were registered to vote , and it also found non - citizen voting may have given democrats the pivotal 60th vote needed to pass horrible obamacare .
now , just think of that for a second .
and then you heard like 1.8 million people are dead or should n't be on the lists , right ?
you 've got dead people voting .
how did that happen ?
i do n't know .
and i listen to all of these politicians saying the system is wonderful .
got ta fix the system .
the system is also rigged by the donors giving hundreds of millions of dollars to hillary clinton 's campaign .
the reason crooked hillary pushes for nafta or the transpacific partnership and for completely open borders is because her international donors control her every single move .
if we let the clinton cartel run this government , history will record that 2017 was a year america lost its independence .
that 's true , that 's true .
it will not happen on our watch , ok ?
it 's like when they look back at us at this time , you know , in history , we will not be the ones that they talk about the replacement of the great trojan horse , right ?
you understand that .
we 're not going to be the fools that allow that to happen .
and i say it again , when it comes to washington , d.c. , it is time to drain the damn swamp .
that 's why i 'm proposing a package of ethics reforms to make our government honest once again .
first , i 'm going to institute a five- year ban on all executive branch officials lobbying the government after they leave government service .
they become rich , they become rich .
second , i going to ask congress to institute its own five - year ban on lobbying by former members of congress and their staffs .
they become rich .
i mean , these staffs become rich .
third , i 'm going to expand the definition of lobbyist , so we close all loopholes that former government officials use by labeling themselves consultants and advisers , when we all know they are just lobbyists , right ?
lobbyists .
fourth , i 'm going to issue a lifetime ban against senior executive branch officials lobbying on behalf of a foreign government , right ?
and fifth , i 'm going to ask congress to pass a campaign - finance reform that stops registered foreign lobbyists from raising money in american elections , right ?
there 's another major announcement i 'm making today as part of our pledge to drain the swamp .
if i 'm elected president , i will push for a constitutional amendment to impose term limits on all members of congress .
i am proposing a term limit of six years for members of the house and 12 years for members of the senate .
decades of political failure and special interest collusion must and will finally come to an end .
it 's time to sweep the corruption out of washington .
that is why i will also ask for a ban on both white house and congressional officials fund - raising during working hours .
they are always fund - raising .
and i 've been on the other side , i 've been on the other side .
i 've given a lot of money over the years and they always come up during the day .
i say , when you people have time to work ?
i do n't have time to work .
after 6 o'clock .
when you 're working for the taxpayer , you should be doing just that .
not only will we end government corruption but we will also end the crippling economic stagnation that we are in .
my plans for the economy can be summed up in three very beautiful words .
you know what they are ?
jobs , jobs , jobs .
at the center of my historic jobs plan will be fixing our terrible trade deals , the worst deals that anybody has ever made economically in trade .
forty - seven million americans are in poverty , and 45 million americans are right now in this country on food stamps .
are they getting $ 1,500 ?
can you believe it ?
no can you believe it ?
and the press does n't want to write the story .
they get paid to do this .
can you believe they get paid for doing this by the democratic national committee ?
maybe i will do it a couple of times .
it 's good money , i 'll get a nice new phone .
unbelievable .
i 'm sure their parents are very proud of them .
two people .
so , we have nearly an $ 800 billion annual trade deficit in goods with the world .
that 's in trade .
we lost $ 800 billion , we have a trade deficit .
and the worst so - called recovery since the great depression , and you people know it better than anybody right here .
the worst since the great depression .
economic growth is at a total standstill and workers are earning less today than they were almost 20 years ago .
colorado has lost one in seven manufacturing jobs since bill clinton 's nafta , a deal supported very strongly by hillary clinton , who , by the way , has been doing this stuff for 30 years .
she 's done a pretty rotten job , would n't you think .
we lost -- listen to this -- 70,000 factories since china 's entry into the world trade organization .
china is gaining a lot of factories , probably a lot more than that .
another bill and hillary- backed deal .
we are also living through the greatest jobs theft in american history , probably in the history of the world .
they say actually probably in the history of the world .
it 's a jobs theft because our politicians are stupid .
they are stupid people .
and if they are not stupid , they are under the control of the special interests and donors .
so , whether it is stupid or corrupt , it does n't matter .
the result is the same .
a trump administration is going to renegotiate nafta , stand up to foreign cheating .
and you know what they are doing with money supply , you know what they are doing with devaluation .
and stop the jobs from leaving our country .
as part of our plan to bring back our jobs , we are going to lower our business taxes from 35 percent to 15 percent , we 're the highest tax in the nation -- we are the highest taxed in the world , and we are going to be among the lower taxed in the world .
we are the highest taxed nation in the world .
we are going to be among the lower taxed .
not quite the lowest , but we 're getting there .
we 're also going to fix our inner cities , which have been failed and it 's disgraceful what democrats have done to destroy our inner cities .
forty - five percent of african - american children , under the age of six , are living in poverty .
fifty - eight percent of african american youth are not working .
almost 3,500 people have been shot in the city of chicago -- listen to this -- since january 1st .
it 's like a war zone .
people are getting shot walking to the store .
the education is terrible and there are no jobs .
the national murder rate has experienced the largest single - year increase in 45 years .
to those african - americans suffering , and to those latinos suffering , i say , what do you have to lose ?
vote for donald trump .
i 'm going to fix it .
i 'm gon na fix it .
i will fight harder for you than anyone has ever fought for you before .
we will be a rich nation again .
we will be able to do things that we want to do .
right now we owe $ 20 trillion , doubled since obama came to office .
and he should stop campaigning for crooked hillary , and he ought to get out and work on jobs and work on the border .
boy , oh boy , he 's got a lot of work .
fortunately , he does n't have much time left .
but to be a rich country we must also be a safe country .
national security begins at the border .
speaking in secret to a foreign bank , crooked hillary clinton said her dream is for open trade -- there go your jobs -- and open borders -- there goes your country .
that 's what it is .
your jobs , your country .
by open trade she means letting foreign countries cheat us out of millions of jobs and trillions in wealth .
by open borders she means totally unlimited immigration .
come on in , folks .
come on in .
hillary 's plan includes an open border with the middle east , meaning generations of radicalism and terrorism spreading and growing within our shores and in your own community .
just today an iraqi refugee approved for entry by hillary clinton 's state department pled guilty to joining isis .
he entered as a refugee in november 2009 , then was approved for a green card in 2011 .
it 's one of hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of examples of the united states voluntarily , right , voluntarily admitting people from the world 's most dangerous places , who turn out to be terrorists .
and by the way , we wo n't go over the stats and we wo n't go over individual cases , but the crime is unbelievable , vicious and violent .
so , let me say this as clearly as i can .
if i am elected president , i am going to keep radical islamic terrorists the hell out of our country .
that 's the trojan horse , folks .
that 's the trojan horse .
we will also stop the crisis of illegal immigration .
a trump administration will secure our borders and protect our jobs , including jobs for millions of african - american and latino workers .
and yes , we will build a wall .
we 're going to build the wall , do n't worry , and mexico is going to pay for the wall .
they just do n't know it yet .
we have the first - ever endorsement from our ice and border patrol officers , great people .
ice just two weeks ago .
as secretary of state , hillary clinton allowed thousands of criminal aliens to be released because their home countries refused to take them .
they were too violent .
they were too violent , so we took them back .
who would do this ?
who would do this ?
you know who would do this ?
a weak and pathetic politician would do this .
the ice officer described hillary 's proposal as the most radical immigration proposal in united states history .
here is a summary of what she wants to do , support sanctuary cities .
social security , medicare and lifetime welfare for all illegal immigrants by making them citizens .
obamacare , which will die anyway , for illegal immigrants .
no -- and this is crazy , no deportation of visa overstays .
expanding catch and release on the border .
expanding president obama 's unconstitutional executive amnesty , including instant work permits for millions of illegal workers .
there go your jobs .
freeing even more criminal aliens by expanding obama 's non- enforcement directive .
and here is the topper of all , as you know , president obama has let thousands and thousands of people come in from syria .
she wants to have a 550 percent increase in syrian refugees coming into this country .
either we win this election or we lose the country .
this is the last time we 've got a shot , folks .
it 's not going to happen after that .
the numbers are n't there , the numbers are n't there .
this is the last time .
i hope you get up on november 8th or you send in those early ballots , but i hope you get up on november 8th and get out and get every person you know out to vote .
under a trump administration , it 's going to be again america first , remember that .
finally , here are some of the amazing things we are going to do for our country , starting in 2017 .
we 're going to have the biggest tax cut since ronald reagan , a big one .
we will eliminate every unnecessary job - killing regulation where you folks are being killed up here .
we are going to unleash job - creating american energy , which is a big factor here .
we are going to defend religious liberty .
we 're going to provide school choice to every low income child in america and we are going to end common core education .
we are going to rebuild our depleted military , and we are going to take care of our great , great veterans , it 's time .
we are going to support the men and women of law enforcement .
we will save our second amendment , which is totally under siege .
and we will appoint justices to the united states supreme court who will uphold and defend the constitution of the united states .
you have 21 days to make every dream you ever dreamed for your country , for your family , for yourselves come true .
our campaign is powered by our love for this country and our love for our fellow citizens .
we 're going to have a unified country .
it 's a campaign about rejecting the cynicism and elitism of our failed political establishment .
on november 8th we are going to win .
i 'm going to fight for every citizen , of every background , from every stretch of this nation .
i 'm going to fight for every child living in poverty .
i 'm going to fight for every mom and for every dad who 's lost a child to illegal immigration and drugs and gang violence is deplorable -- to use her horrible term in referring to certain friends of mine .
and irredeemable .
that 's even worse .
that means you have no chance .
i 'm going to fight for every community whose jobs and dreams have been ripped out and shipped to other countries , lot of jobs .
i 'm going to fight for every person in this country who believes government should serve the people , not the donors and the special interests .
and i am going to fight to bring americans together for the first time in a long time .
imagine what our country could accomplish if we started working together as one people under one god , saluting one american flag , right ?
in 10 years , 20 years , 30 years , 40 years , you 're going to look back at this rally for the rest of your life and you 're going to be very , very proud .
this is a movement that we have going like they have never seen before .
they 're trying everything they can to stop it .
they 're doing everything they can to stop it .
they are fighting , the press is fighting , crooked hillary is fighting .
they 're doing everything they can .
they 're lying , they 're cheating , they 're stealing .
they 're doing everything -- these people right back here -- everything they can to stop it .
but i do n't think they 're going to stop it .
i do n't think they 're going to stop it .
you 're going to look back at this election and say this is by far the most important vote that you 've ever cast , for anyone , at any time .
we 're going to have a real government , of , by and for the people for the first time in a long time .
you are going to be once again so proud of your country , and hopefully you will be very , very proud of your president .
i promise you that we will make america wealthy again .
we will make america strong again .
we will make america safe again .
and we will make america great again .
thank you , everybody .
god bless you .
thank you .
thank you very much .
wow .
wow .
thank you very much , folks .
now , we have a little difficulty because we have about 3,000 people , maybe 4,000 outside .
should we wait for them to come in ?
i agree .
let 's get going .
you people were here from , like , 2:00 in the morning , they tell me .
but we 're going to get going .
thank you very much .
and we do n't need jay - z to fill up arenas , you know .
we do it the old - fashioned way .
we do it the old - fashioned way , folks , we fill them up because you love what we 're saying and you want to make america great again .
that 's about it .
and i actually like jay - z , but , you know , the language last night , oh , ooh .
i was thinking , " maybe i 'll just try it . "
should i use that language if i want to ... 

  can you imagine if i said that ?
so -- he used every word in the book .
i wo n't even use the initials because i 'll get in trouble .
they 'll get me in trouble .
he used every word in the book last night .
and by the way , in hershey , pennsylvania , last night , we had an arena .
we had 27,000 people show up , maybe they could n't get in .
far more -- far more than jay - z had with their free tickets .
free tickets .
far more .
and beyonce .
and i like them both .
but he used language last night that was so bad , and then hillary said , " i did not like donald trump 's lewd language . "
my lewd language .
i tell you what -- i 've never said what he said in my life .
but that shows you the phoniness of politicians and the phoniness of the whole system , folks .
in three days , we are going to win the great state of florida .
and we are going to win back the white house .
real change begins with immediately repealing and replacing obamacare .
it 's just been announced that the residents of florida -- i 'm sorry to tell you this -- are going to experience a massive double - digit premium hike .
and i know what it is .
i say this to everybody .
i know -- i just do n't want to destroy the spirit in the room .
it 's going to be a massive hike .
so , congratulations .
it 's not going to matter , because if we win , i 'm throwing it out anyway .
so it does n't make any difference .
but get ready .
you 're going to have a big , big , big hike .
hopefully , it wo n't make a damn bit of difference .
in the great state of arizona , where i was just a couple of days ago and where i 'm going , premiums are going up by more than 116 percent .
going to go higher than that .
over 90 percent of the counties in florida are losing obamacare insure .
and think of it .
they 're losing their insurers .
over 90 percent of the counties .
and remember -- and most of you were there -- almost all of you felt this whole movement right from the beginning when we came down for the primaries , right ?
we won 66 out of 67 counties , 66 out of -- florida is just a place i love .
my second home .
i 'm here all the time .
i might know florida better than you do .
but my second home .
but we won 66 out of 67 counties .
that 's never happened before .
we almost -- we almost won that last one , too .
and i see maybe even more enthusiasm right now than i did then .
i think there 's more enthusiasm .
you see the tremendous lines of people , and they have trump hats on , make america great again .
but they have trump hats on and they have buttons and they have shirts , and they 're on line , and you see nbc , and you see these people ...   total phonies .
the most dishonest people .
and they 'll say , it looks like it 's going -- there was one line where it was like 100 percent with trump regalia .
now , maybe they 're in disguise , maybe they 're wearing buttons , shirts , and trump hats , but they 're actually going to vote for crooked hillary .
do you think that 's possible ?
but you see these lines , and the woman says , " yes , i 'd say it 's very evenly based . "
so the great state of texas , you heard -- you heard -- can you believe all these people at 10 o'clock in the morning -- great .
they got here at 2 o'clock in the morning , many of them .
so the great state of texas , an incredible place .
i go there .
we have these massive crowds .
and about two weeks ago , i was hearing the phonies in the media , and they 're going , very , very strongly , " texas is in play . "
oh , we have a hillary clinton person .
are they paying that person $ 1,500 ?
get 'em out , please .
get 'em out .
i must tell you , the bernie sanders protesters had much more enthusiasm and spirit than this one .
the problem with these hillary protesters is my people make all the noise .
they 're always going there , there .
you ca n't even hear the person .
by the way , did you see -- before i get to texas , did you see yesterday obama screaming and screaming ...   ... and screaming ?
just like the way he runs the country .
nobody listens to him .
screaming , ok ?
and i wanted to see the protesters , because these lying , thieving people back there , the media , they do n't ever show -- they do n't ever show my crowds .
i was saying to them the other night , hershey , i was saying , " you 've got to show -- you 've got to turn the camera . "
they just -- every one of them right up my face , right ?
the only time they 'll turn the cameras is if there 's a protester , because that 's a bad thing , right ?
so last night , obama had a protestor , and they would n't turn the camera to the protester .
it 's the first time i 've ever seen that .
they kept it on him , but it was bad , because he kept screaming the same thing over and over again .
and nobody would listen to him .
but they had the great state of texas , so -- about three weeks ago , they 'd say -- you know , they do these phony polls , right ?
some of the polls are great .
i only really acknowledge them if i 'm winning , so -- and by the way , we 're winning in a lot of polls !
a lot of polls .
we do n't have enough time to talk about it now .
there 's too many of them .
oh , i love those signs , " blacks for trump . "
ho - ho - ho , oh .
that seems to be -- that seems to be the big surprise so far of this election , " blacks for trump . "
thank you , fellas .
that 's so great .
thank you so -- that is great .
thank you .
thank you very much .
that 's a great honor .
believe me , that 's a great honor .
so they kept saying , " the great state of texas is in play . "
now , you know , it 's supposed to be sort of a republican stronghold .
not supposed to be in play .
i said , oh , man , i call my people .
what 's going on with texas ?
because i was just there , we had a crowd , 20,000 , 22,000 , 15,000 , every time i went .
we had these massive crowds .
they had a line that went so long that local media is much more honest than these dishonest guys , you know .
the local media -- and they were showing the line went all the way -- it went -- literally , it went miles .
so then i get back , and three weeks ago , " texas is in play .
it 's even . "
and i say , that 's bad news .
bad , i do n't want to lose texas .
that 's bad news .
one little problem .
one little problem .
we 're killing them in texas .
we 're killing them .
a guy gets on two days ago , a man named sid miller .
do n't really know him .
wearing a big , beautiful , white cowboy hat .
in fact , i want to find out where he got it .
it 's pretty nice .
and he said , " you know , you folks are getting it all wrong .
these lines are four , five , six blocks long .
we 've never had anything like this in texas .
and let me tell you , all those folks , they 're all voting for trump .
they 're not voting for anyone else . "
so , texas , we 're just absolutely -- we 're doing great in texas .
but we 're doing great in new hampshire .
we 're doing great in iowa .
we 're doing great in ohio .
ohio .
just left , going back again soon .
doing phenomenally well in north carolina .
i think we 're going to win pennsylvania .
i think we 're going to win pennsylvania .
we 're right there .
i saw they had -- you know , and even is not , like , my thing .
you know , we 're even .
but they had me way down in pennsylvania , then last night , i 'm looking , two or three polls came out . "
jim , trump is -- he 's even now in pennsylvania , too . "
this is not -- you know , you can see the -- because they protect hillary .
i do n't understand it .
i do n't understand why .
when this is all over with , i 'm going to sit down with the dishonest media , i 'm going to have an honest talk .
why ?
what is she going to do ?
she 's -- she 's a dishonest person .
she has no energy .
you know , you need energy to help this country .
like , for instance , i 'm going to be doing five or six of these every day .
you need energy here , folks .
she goes home and she goes to sleep .
you need a lot of energy , so we 're going to be doing at least five of these today .
the arenas are all packed all over the country .
and we 're going into different locations .
we 're going into what they used to call democrat strongholds where we 're now either tied or leading .
we 're going to minnesota .
we 're going up to minnesota , which traditionally has not been republican at all , and we 're doing phenomenally .
we just saw a poll .
we 're going to colorado , where we 're doing phenomenally well .
we 're doing well everywhere .
we 're doing well in places that they do n't believe .
they 're saying , " what 's going on ? "
anyway , with obamacare , getting back to the boring subject -- it 's almost a waste of time talking about it , because when we terminate it , all we 'll do is say it was a bad experience for the american people .
you know .
premiums are surging because of obamacare .
companies are leaving .
insurers are fleeing .
doctors are quitting .
and deductibles are going through the roof , some as high as $ 15,000 , some higher than that .
yet hillary clinton wants to double down on obamacare , making it even much more expensive .
going to make it much more expensive .
you know what they 're going to do , her and obama ?
they 're going to show you -- and they do n't care what it takes -- they 're going to show you that it works .
they 're going to listen to trump , never give up .
ok ?
they 're going to show you .
ok , we do n't want to be shown .
i 'll tell you what , it is catastrophic .
i 'm asking for your vote so we can repeal and replace obamacare and have health care for every family in florida and great health care .
real change also means restoring honesty to our government .
as you know , the fbi -- and i give them a lot of credit , because they 're fighting forces that they 're not supposed to be fighting -- has reopened its criminal investigation into hillary clinton .
they 're also conducting a second criminal investigation into hillary clinton 's pay - for - play corruption at the state department .
you see what 's happening there .
it has been confirmed that the 650,000 e - mails they discovered -- by accident -- can you believe it , 650,000 e - mails , oh , that 's a treasure trove .
that is going to be a lot of bad e - mails in there .
they discovered it on anthony weiner 's -- think of that -- can you imagine ?
anthony weiner has probably every classified e - mail ever sent .
and knowing this guy , he probably studied every single one , in between using his machine for other purposes .
including brand - new e - mails not previously turned over to authorities , likely including some very , very classified information .
however , the reports also show that the political leadership at the department of justice is trying very hard and as hard as they can to protect their angel , hillary .
remember , bill clinton just happened when he was in phoenix , arizona -just happened to see her plane , the attorney general 's plane .
oh , there 's the attorney general .
oh , what a -- what an unbelievable -- he was going to play golf .
it was about 110 degrees .
he was going to play golf .
oh , i was going to play golf .
let me say hello .
hey , let 's get together .
boom .
i thought it was 39 minutes .
turned out to be 45 minutes .
so went onto the plane on the tarmac , and right on the tarmac , and they had a meeting for 45 minutes , right before she was supposed to issue her judgment on hillary and maybe bill .
bill could be a target , who knows ?
because of what 's going on .
so she met with him for 45 minutes .
they discussed golf .
that 's about two minutes .
they discussed grandchildren .
give them five .
the rest of the time , what do you think they discussed ?
i would say , like , " i hope you 're going to be a part of our administration . "
what do you think ?
what a disgrace .
i 'll tell you what , our country has never been in a situation like it 's in right now .
never been .
so dishonest .
it 's a rigged system , folks .
i 've been saying it .
it 's a rigged system , and it begins with the media , because the media rigs it .
the media rigs it .
did you see all those reports where the new york times is sending them things , and they 're saying , listen , we 've got this reporter essentially , 100 percent , this is friendly stuff , where other reporters are sending them stories to check ?
do you have any change ?
it 's never happened to me .
man .
i used to -- actually , i used to get good publicity until i decided to run .
now , i think i have -- and they even say -- actually , the times said , one of the writers at the times , said we do n't care , we do n't care if it 's fair or not .
it 's so out of control , we do n't care .
it 's the greatest pile - on in the history of politics , and that 's ok .
i used to be on the other side , do n't forget .
i did very well .
but i also love our country , and it was time .
it was time we had to do something .
it was time .
but that 's a big part , right there .
a big part of the rigged system .
remember , john podesta said hillary clinton has bad instincts , right ?
and i say to people , i 'd fire him .
if he was saying bad -- he says so many bad things about her , and he 's her top person .
he knows her well .
and i do n't want a president with bad instincts , and she does .
all you have to do is look at her record .
bernie sanders says that she 's got bad judgment .
hillary created an illegal server to shield her criminal activity .
that 's why .
there 's no other reason .
and then she -- and she figured she was above it , because she figured the department of justice will never do anything to get in her way , ok ?
it 's a rigged system .
the department of justice , if that happened to anybody else , they would have been in jail two years ago , folks , ok ?
what she did .
then she illegally destroyed -- and this is -- this is -- forget about what happened last friday .
i 'm talking about the past .
forget about that -- that 's all gravy , whatever happened .
what she did in the past is so bad .
she destroyed 30,000 -- remember this -- 33,000 e - mails after receiving a congressional subpoena -- the key word being " after " -- and made 13 phones disappear , some with a hammer .
if she were to win , it would create an unprecedented constitutional crisis .
remember , if she ever got into the oval office , hillary and her special interests and her donors would rob this country blind .
i have no doubt about it .
my contract with the american voter begins with a plan to end government corruption and to take back our country from the special interests .
i want the entire , corrupt washington establishment to hear the words we -- we are about to say .
when we win on november 8th , we are going to drain the swamp .
going to do it .
they 're not happy , folks .
they 're not happy .
there are a lot of unhappy people around .
at the core of my contract is my plan to bring back your jobs that have been stolen , stolen by either very stupid politicians or corrupt politicians , meaning special interests get them to do whatever they want them to do .
florida has lost one in four of its manufacturing jobs since nafta , a deal signed by bill clinton and supported by hillary .
america has lost 70,000 factories -- that 's such a hard number to believe , 70,000 -- since china entered the world trade organization , another bill- and hillary - backed disaster .
we are living through the greatest jobs theft in the history of the world .
there 's never been a country that 's lost jobs like we do , so stupidly , so easy to solve , so stupidly .
goodrich lighting systems -- we will , i promise .
i promise .
goodrich lighting systems laid off 255 workers and moved their jobs to india .
baxter health care corporation laid off 199 workers and moved their jobs to singapore .
essilor laboratories laid off 181 workers and moved their jobs , surprise , to mexico .
tremendous , tremendous jobs , and it 's worse -- it 's getting worse and worse and worse .
i mean , we have with some of these countries -- mexico , in particular -- i have a great relationship with mexico .
i met with the mexican president three months ago .
believe me .
oh , we 'll build a wall .
do n't even think about it .
we 'll build a wall .
do n't worry about it .
and you know what ?
the harder they fight us , the higher it goes , ok ?
i promise .
no , but i met with the president of mexico .
look -- and he 's a good guy , good guy .
good meeting , all of that .
but -- look , we have a one - lane highway , goes right into mexico .
it takes our jobs , takes our money , takes our wealth , takes everything .
we get unemployment and we get drugs .
not going to happen anymore , folks .
a trump administration will stop the jobs from leaving america and will stop the jobs from leaving the great state of florida , that i can tell you .
the theft of american prosperity will end quickly and effectively .
if a company wants to fire their workers , leave florida , move to another country , and then shift their product back into the united states , we will make them pay a tax of 35 percent .
ok ?
that it .
problem solved .
problem solved .
ninety - nine percent -- and you never heard this talk before .
you know , they give them loans . "
oh , we want you to stay . "
they do n't even talk to most of them .
you know , most of them just leave .
nobody talks to them .
we 'll talk to them .
and at first -- at first , we 'll be very nice , right ?
first , we 'll be very nice and respectful , and when they tell us , no , no , no , then we 'll say , ok , here 's the story , folks .
let 's not be nice anymore .
and you know what 's going to happen with that tax ?
they 're never going to leave this country .
they 're never leaving .
he knows .
they 're never going to leave this country .
a trump administration will renegotiate nafta .
and if we do n't get the deal we want , we will terminate nafta and get a much better deal for our workers .
we will immediately stop the job - killing trans - pacific partnership , another disaster in the making that hillary clinton said is the gold standard .
yeah , it 's the gold standard for other countries , not for us .
the gold standard for the countries that want to be part of that deal .
as part of our plan to bring back jobs , we 're going to lower taxes on american business from 35 percent to 15 percent .
we 're the highest taxed nation in the world , one of the main reasons that they 're leaving .
we will massively cut taxes for the middle class , also .
and by the way , do n't hear it from me .
just look at it .
hillary clinton is going to raise taxes substantially .
highest taxed nation , she wants to raise taxes substantially .
that 's not going to happen .
we will also cancel billions in global warming payments to the united nations and use that money to invest in america .
that includes repairing so many of florida 's problems .
thank you .
thank you .
we 're going to repair so many of florida 's problems , and everyone 's problems , including the herbert hoover dike , which is big problem , and the florida aquifer .
and we 're going to protect the everglades .
we 're going to do all of the things -- but we 're going to have so much money left over , folks .
you know what we want ?
you know what we want ?
we want really beautiful , clean air , right ?
we want really crystal , crystal clean water .
and we want safety .
we do n't need to give hundreds of billions of dollars away -- we have no idea who 's getting this money -- giving it to the united nations .
you know what that 's called ?
giving it to an open pit .
you know how political the united -- can you imagine , as these guys are doling out that money , no , no , we 're going to keep our money here and we 're going to take care of our infrastructure , and we 're going to take care of our environment , and we 're going to lower taxes .
we will also rebuild our inner cities .
the african - american community has been treated terribly , terribly .
that 's why i 'm so honored to see those signs .
and i 'm telling you , that 's turning out to be the story of this election , the african - american vote .
watch .
you watch .
they 've been treated very unfairly .
african - american and hispanic people living in the inner cities -- there 's no -- oh , you like that , hispanics , huh ?
how many hispanics do we have here ?
and , by the way , that 's a big story .
you know , as you know , the cubans just endorsed me .
they gave me the bay of pigs association award .
we 'll be making a much different deal than they made with castro .
believe me , folks .
they 're very happy .
but that 's another story that 's turning out to be very big .
the hispanic vote is turning out to be much different than people thought .
but the african - american community , the hispanic community , folks living in the inner cities , crime - ridden -- you ca n't walk to the store and buy a loaf of bread , you get shot .
the education is the worst .
and there 's no jobs .
we 're going to fix the education , we 're going to bring back jobs , and we 're going to bring back safety .
and i say to the hispanic community , living in the inner - city , to the african - american community , i say : what the hell do you have to lose ?
i 'm going to fix it .
i 'm going to fix it .
i am going to fix it .
you know , the democrats have been running that whole thing for up to 100 years unbroken , and they come in , they say , " we want your vote , we you 're your vote . "
and then you give them the vote -- you know this , fellas , right ?
you know that .
they know .
you give them their vote and they disappear for four years .
they say , " see ya , folks .
see ya in four years . "
and then they come back again and again .
we have to show them it does n't work that way anymore .
and they 'll never be able to do -- they 'll never be able to do what i do .
look , i 'm here -- i 'm doing five or six of these a day .
and hillary goes home , she goes to sleep .
if she wanted to do it , which she does n't .
she does n't have the energy to do it , believe me .
we will become a rich nation again , but to be a rich nation , we must also be a safe nation .
hillary clinton wants a 550 percent increase in syrian refugees pouring into this country ...   ... over and above the thousands and thousands and thousands that are already coming in .
do you want to see a problem ?
this will be the great trojan horse modern day version .
her plan will import generations of terrorism , extremism , and radicalism into your schools and throughout your communities .
when i 'm elected president , we will suspend immediately the syrian refugee program ...   ... and we will keep radical islamic terrorists the hell out of our country .
you look at what 's happened in france .
you look at what 's happened in germany .
no .
and we all have big hearts .
we 'll build safe havens .
we 'll get the gulf states to put up the money .
we owe -- you know , we owe -- what do we owe , $ 20 trillion ?
we owe $ 20 trillion .
think of it .
but i 'll get the gulf states -- they have plenty of money .
they have so much money they do n't know what to do with it .
they just have to be told nicely , right ?
they 're going to put up the money .
we 'll build safe havens in syria , but we ca n't have this , folks .
we have enough problems .
we do n't need these kind of problems .
a trump administration will also secure and defend the borders of the united states .
and as we said , yes , we will build a great wall .
we received the first - ever endorsement issued by america 's ice and border patrol officers .
it 's just been reported that , as a result of our open borders , violent cartels have spread into all 50 states .
more than 90 percent of those arrested are here illegally .
are n't you shocked ?
ninety percent -- think of that -- 90 percent are here illegally .
thank you , darling .
i love you , too .
it 's so nice .
oh , look , a future construction worker .
look .
look at that baby .
he 's so cute .
oh , give me that baby .
future construction worker .
they did a great job .
wow .
that is a great , beautiful baby .
congratulations .
that 's an early trump fan , right ?
that 's an early united states fan .
anyway , back to the basics .
after going through that , i hate to say this , but these terrorists are killing innocent americans , threatening schools , and destroying our communities .
a government that will not protect its people is a government that is unworthy to lead .
that 's all .
as secretary of state , hillary clinton allowed thousands of the most dangerous and violent criminals to come into the country , go free , and would n't send them back to their home countries , and when they did , their home -- their home countries very , very intelligently said , " we do n't want them .
take them back , and we would never force them in . "
i promise you , when we take these killers and gang members and drug lords back to their countries , they will be accepted gladly by their country , ok ?
thank you so much for bringing this killer back , mr. trump .
we totally appreciate it .
they 'll say , " president trump , thank you , sir .
we very much like it .
we 're so , so happy .
mr. president , we are so , so happy to have our drug lords back , to have our killers back , to have our gang members back .
thank you , mr. president , on behalf of " -- i wo n't use the name of the country .
hillary supports total , open borders -- that means the end of your country -- and strongly supports sanctuary cities like san francisco where kate steinle was murdered by an illegal immigrant and deported .
this was a man deported probably more than five times .
thousands of americans would be alive today if not for the open border policies of barack obama and hillary clinton .
and by the way -- and i 've said it -- this guy is campaigning full - time .
she ca n't campaign for herself .
nobody shows up to her meetings .
the only way she gets them to show up is when she has a star come .
that 's the only way .
otherwise , she gets 500 people , 400 people , and by the way , the cameras never show that .
can you imagine if i had a small crowd ?
there would be headlines all over the world , " trump is not -- you know , is not doing it , " right ?
but she has these little crowds show up .
it 's a big problem .
look , she ca n't do more than one or two a day because she has no energy , but she ca n't do it because they ca n't get any people .
but obama goes and campaigns for her .
he ought to spend time in the oval office getting jobs , defeating isis , strengthening up our border .
among those killed , americans like josh wilkerson , whose mother i 've gotten to know during this campaign .
josh was a student in a high school , great student .
he was murdered at the age of 17 .
he was tortured , strangled , and beaten to death by an illegal immigrant who should have never been in our country , and then his body was set on fire .
you ought to look at the remembrance project .
these people are amazing people .
these are people that suffered so much .
last year , right here in florida , 17-year - old starlette pitts , her boyfriend and her mother were viciously stabbed to death in their lehigh acres home by an illegal immigrant .
the killer had been convicted of assaulting a police officer and was wanted for double murder and robbery , but he was released from custody , enabling him to commit these and other horrible crimes .
and the people that knew him begged that he be incarcerated or begged that he be thrown the hell out of our country .
and the obama administration with their weak policies refused to listen .
death .
a trump administration will end this nightmare of violence .
we will protect american lives .
we will cancel all federal funding of sanctuary cities .
very quickly .
we will stop illegal immigration , deport every last criminal alien , and dismantle every criminal gang and cartel threatening our great citizens .
when we win this election , you will finally have a government on your side fighting for your community and protecting your family .
we will also repeal the obama - clinton defense sequester and rebuild our badly depleted military .
greatest people on earth .
that means brand - new modern aircraft from macdill and -- we have to do this .
anybody -- macdill ?
we 're going to have beautiful , beautiful new -- you know , right now our fighter jets , some are so old they ca n't get parts , they do n't make them anymore , 18 , 19 years old .
they did a big documentary about it .
we 're going to take care of those brand - new beautiful jets out of macdill , ok ?
i 'm honored to have the endorsement of more than 200 top admirals and generals and 22 medal of honor recipients .
i actually heard we picked up about five today .
and i want to thank the coach from getting up here and talking to you people .
what a great coach .
and joe and your attorney general .
you have so many great people .
all the people that got up and spoke , i want to thank them .
they 're speaking all over the country .
they 're speaking all over the country .
hillary brought death and disaster to iraq , syria , libya , and she empowered iran .
they 've been empowered .
they 've been emboldened .
we gave them $ 150 billion .
and they hate us .
but now they 're strong .
we 've created them .
we 've -- they were ready to die .
they were ready to come back and make any deal we wanted .
and we took them out of the ashes and we made them perhaps a world power , not just a regional power .
all hillary clinton 's thinking , bad judgment , bad instincts .
and she unleashed isis all across the world .
during the debates , did i win the debates ?
did i win the debates ?
you know , i was a little worried about the debate , because for a week and a half , i 'd hear , " she 's not going out of her house .
she 's doing debate prep . "
i said , wait a minute , how can you work that -- i mean , you 're supposed to know this stuff , right ?
you know , i mean , she has a lot of experience .
that 's the one thing she has .
she 's got a lot of experience , but it 's all bad experience .
it 's experience of losing .
but she kept doing debate prep , right ?
and i felt guilty .
i said , gee , i do n't want to sit -- and what am i going to do in debate -- you mean 10 hours a day for a week - and - a - half ?
i ca n't do that .
we 're supposed to know the subject , are n't we ?
we 're supposed to know the subject .
anyway , she did debate prep .
i do n't think it helped her very much .
hillary and her failed establishment have spent $ 6 trillion on wars in the middle east that we never win .
by the way , we fight , we keep fighting .
we fight , fight , fight .
and i always say general douglas macarthur , general george patton , what are they doing ?
they 're spinning in their graves .
they ca n't believe it .
mosul , we go into mosul .
ladies and gentlemen , we will be attacking mosul in four months from now .
oh .
now , the people of mosul -- you know , these guys are tough and they 're smart , in all fairness .
so the isis -- one of the reasons we 're going to mosul is we want to get the isis leaders .
we think they 're staying in mosul and we want to get them .
well , before the announcement is over , they 've gone .
whatever happened to the element of surprise ?
the element of surprise ?
what a group of losers we have .
and now it 's a very tough battle .
they 're dug in .
it 's a very -- much tougher than they thought .
much tougher than they thought .
no , we need different thinking in this country , folks .
they should have kept their mouths shut , quietly , quickly , and viciously go in , and then have a news conference when it 's over a week later .
right ?
and i 'm convinced they only did that for political reasons .
they thought it was going to be a great , quick victory .
it was n't .
it 's a disaster .
they thought it was going to be a quick victory .
and you know , hillary is running and then she 'll get credit .
oh , she 's -- she 's -- except for one problem .
we already had mosul .
so we gave it up because of the way they got out , and then isis was formed .
isis is now in 32 countries .
but during the debate , i watched , and she 's saying , we 're going to fix our tax code .
well , why did n't you do it ?
because all of her people do the same thing .
we 're all doing the same thing .
and we 're going to fix our tax code .
we 're going to do this .
we 're going to do that .
we 're going to fix this .
and i kept saying , you 've been there for 30 years .
why did n't you do it ?
it will never happen .
they 've dragged us into foreign wars that have made us less safe , shipped our goods and our wealth and our companies to other countries .
and they 've left our borders wide open .
so we have no borders .
and yet we 're over fighting for countries that a lot of people in this room have never heard of .
and we want a border .
we 're fighting so they have a border , but we do n't protect our own border .
that will change on november 8th .
a trump administration will never , ever put the interests of a foreign country before the interest of our country .
from now on , it 's going to be america first .
to all americans , i say , it is time for change .
it is time for new leadership .
and in closing , i want you to think about ... 

  thank you , folks .
i just see a sign that i love .
let me see that .
let me see that .
let me see that .
yeah , let me have that .
let me have that .
let me have it .
i love that sign .
it 's true .
i love that sign .
i love all the signs .
women for trump , blacks for trump , hispanics for trump .
thank you .
i just found a second mike .
i 'm probably being wired or tapped here .
that 's got to be the justice department doing that .
saying , where does this mike -- i 'm saying to myself , where the hell did the second mike come from ?
just think about what we can accomplish in the first 100 days of a trump administration .
we 're going to have the biggest tax cut since ronald reagan , even bigger .
she 's going to raise your taxes .
we will eliminate every unnecessary job - killing regulation .
such a big thing .
such a big thing .
cancel every illegal obama executive order .
we are going to protect religious liberty .
we will rebuild our military and take care of our great veterans like they 've never been taken care of before .
they 've been badly treated .
it wo n't happen .
we already have a plan for the veterans , and they love it , and we have overwhelming support from the veterans , our great people .
we do n't take care of them .
we will provide school choice and put an end to common core .
we 'll bring our education local .
we will support the men and women of law enforcement .
we are going to save our second amendment , which is under siege .
we have the endorsement of the nra , national rifle association .
and i have to tell you , these are great people -- wayne and chris and all of them -- they love this country .
they love this country .
they gave me the earliest endorsement they 've ever given to a presidential candidate .
we 're going to save our second amendment .
great people .
and we will appoint justices to the united states supreme court who will uphold and defend the constitution of the united states .
and it 's time to cut our ties with the failed politicians -- like hillary -- of the past .
hillary clinton is the candidate of yesterday .
we are the movement of the future .
and they 've never seen a movement like this , folks .
they 've never , ever seen a movement like this .
there has never been anything like this in this country 's history .
and we have to close it out on november 8th or sooner .
by the way , who 's voted ?
all right , that 's about 80 percent .
twenty percent , leave right now .
vote .
ok .
just before the 8th .
the numbers are looking good , that i can tell you .
did you guys vote ?
did you vote ?
blacks for trump , you voted , right ?
good .
good .
thank you .
we are fighting for every parent who lost their child to drugs and crime and gang violence .
we are fighting for every community whose jobs and dreams have been ripped out of our country and shipped to other faraway lands .
it 's happening all the time .
and we are fighting for every american who believes government should serve the people , not the donors and not the special interests .
i 'm asking you to dream big , because your vote -- think of this -- we are just three days away , do you believe it ?
three days away .
we 'll bring about the change you 've been waiting for your entire life .
this will be a very important day .
and i know that the vote that you cast will be the most important vote of your life , because our country does n't win anymore .
we will start winning .
we will knock out isis .
believe me , we have no choice .
we will knock them out .
we will knock out isis .
we will win at trade .
we will win at the borders .
we will start winning again .
we 'll win so much , you 're going to get sick and tired of winning .
is that possible ?
you 'll say , " please , mr. president , you 're winning too much .
let 's take it easy . "
we are going to win so much , you 're going to be so proud of your country , and hopefully you 're going to be proud of your president .
together , we will make america wealthy again .
we will make america strong again .
we will make america safe again .
and we will make america great again .
thank you very much , everybody .
thank you .
thank you .
get out and vote .
god bless you , everybody .
god bless you .
get out and vote .
thank you .
thank you .
i love that sign , " blacks for trump . "
i love that sign , thank you .
there are a lot of those signs .
thank you . "
women for trump . "
" hispanics for trump . "
there 's one " women and hispanics for trump . "
thank you very much .
in six days , we are going to win the great state of florida and we are going to win back the white house 100 percent .
we 're on the cusp of an incredible historic change that transfers power from a failed political establishment and returns that power to our families , communities and citizens , to you .
the system is rigged , remember that .
the system is rigged .
right now it 's rigged .
we 're going to change it .
there 's some breaking news about that subject that we 're going to discuss right now .
as i mentioned yesterday , on of the -- and you probably saw this and maybe some of you have just read it -- one of the top department of justice officials involved in the e - mail investigation , assistant attorney general peter kassig ... 
  ... is a close associate of john podesta .
the two met for dinner after clinton testified about benghazi and podesta , who by the way said hillary clinton has terrible instincts on wikileaks , described him as the man who kept him , podesta , out of jail .
kadzik is also the one who helped lead the effort to confirm attorney general loretta lynch .
now , today , in a newly released e- mail -- through wikileaks again -- we learned that kadzik was feeding information about the investigation into the clinton campaign and that ...   ... right ?
and that kadzik said quote " it will be a while before the state department posts the e - mails . "
remember they were waiting for the e - mails .
podesta forwarded the e - mails to clinton 's top staff and said , additional chances for mischief .
these are the people that want to run our country , folks .
the spread of political agendas into the justice department -- there 's never been a thing like this that has happened in our country 's history -- is one of the saddest things that has happened to our country .
but with your vote you can beat the system , the rigged system , and deliver justice .
so , show up early and vote .
show up early .
you know , the lines are incredible .
the polls are all saying we 're going to win florida .
do n't believe it .
do n't believe it .
get out there and vote .
pretend we 're slightly behind .
you got to get -- we do n't want to blow this .
this is the one chance we have , it 'll never happen again .
it 's not going to happen .
in four years , it 's not going to happen -- it ca n't happen again .
this is a movement like we have never seen in this country before .
these crowds , the enthusiasm , the love .
got to get out and vote .
real change begins with immediately repealing and replacing obamacare .
and hillary is not going to be the answer because she wants to make it more expensive .
she 's doubling down .
it 's just been announced that the residents of florida -- sorry to tell you this , folks -- are going to experience a massive , massive double digit premium hike .
now , i know what that hike is , but i want you to leave here happy , i want you to be happy people .
i want you to think about the future after we take back the white house so i 'm not going to tell you what your hike is , but let me just say it 's going to be very substantial .
and obamacare does n't work on top of everything else .
as an example , in the great state of arizona -- which i just left -- premiums are going up more than 116 percent .
it 's out of control .
over 90 percent of the counties in florida are losing obamacare insurance next year .
lots of luck in your negotiation .
in minnesota where the premium increase will be close to 60 percent , the democratic governor said , the affordable care act is no longer affordable .
premiums are surging , companies are leaving , insurers are fleeing , doctors are quitting and deductibles are absolutely through the roof .
was n't supposed to be like this , but i said it was going to be like this before it was passed because i understand how business works .
obamacare never had a chance .
it 's a catastrophe .
yet hillary clinton wants to double down on obamacare making it even more expensive .
it 's going to go up a lot .
people are n't going to be able to afford it so i 'm not sure that it matters , they 're just not going to be able to pay .
i 'm asking for your vote so we can replace obamacare and save health care for every family in florida and the united states .
real change also means restoring honesty to our government .
as you know , the fbi has -- did you hear about this little event ?
the fbi re - opening the investigation .
they 're re - opening the investigation into crooked hillary clinton .
crooked hillary , she 's crooked .
she is a crooked one , there 's no question .
crooked hillary clinton , you know that term has really stuck , everyone 's calling her -- has anyone seen crooked hillary clinton today ?
that 's going to be a great term for a president , right ?
boy , oh boy , what a mess .
this is the biggest scandal since watergate .
and now it 's been reported that there are fbi inquiries probing virtually all of hillary clinton 's inner circle and many of the things she 's done over the years .
it 's about time .
remember , it 's a rigged system , remember it 's about time .
she wants to blame everyone else for her mounting legal troubles , but she really has no one to blame but herself .
hillary is the one who set up the illegal private e - mail server to shield her criminal activity .
the woman screaming exactly , exactly , it is exactly .
hillary is the one who engaged in a corrupt pay - for - play scheme at the state department and who ripped off the people of haiti , the people of haiti were ripped off .
and i met with the people of little haiti .
anybody here ?
these are great people , great , thank you .
hillary is the one who endangered national security by sending classified information on an insecure server .
hillary is the one who lied so many times to congress and the fbi .
hillary is the one who made 13 phones disappear , some with a hammer .
and she 's the one who destroyed 33,000 e - mails after receiving a congressional subpoena .
she also accepted debate questions given to her in advance by donna brazile ...   ... and then used those debate questions to cheat .
it 's cheating , the worst level .
instead of reporting this breach to an ethics committee or whoever would listen to the breach .
so she got the answers , cheating .
she got the questions , cheating .
and then she -- rather than reporting them , rather than saying this should n't be happening -- she used them against bernie sanders .
can you imagine -- she probably got them against me too except we won the debate so easy i do n't think it mattered .
we won those debates .
did you see her at the end of the debates ?
folks , she was exhausted .
you know what she did ?
she immediately went home and went to sleep .
hillary is not the victim , and the american people , frankly , are the victims of this rigged and corrupt system in every way .
but this is your chance finally to change it , november 8th .
now in florida 's case , earlier .
now , just so you understand , record turnout , unbelievable numbers , unbelievable .
we 're doing great with the african - american community .
we 're doing great with the hispanic community .
and the lines are four , five and six blocks long .
they 've never seen anything like it .
and the polls have just come up .
we 're way up in florida .
i should n't say that , because i want you to go vote .
ok , ready ?
we 're going to pretend we 're down .
we 're down .
pretend , right ?
we 'll pretend we 're down .
no , we got to win .
we got to win big .
we got to beat her .
got to beat her .
we 're up in ohio , we 're up in iowa , we 're up in north carolina .
i think we 're doing great in pennsylvania , from what i hear .
folks , you 're going to be so proud .
you 're going to be so proud .
we 're going to make america great again .
you 're going to be so happy and you 're going to be so proud of your country again .
if hillary clinton were to be elected , it would create an unprecedented and protracted constitutional crisis .
have n't we just been through a lot with the clintons , right ?
remember when he was impeached for lying ?
he ca n't practice law .
he does n't have the right to practice law .
did n't we just go through this ?
and the last thing we need is another four years of obama .
that 's the last thing .
and this will be worse .
that means isis , that means high taxes , that means bad health care , that means no border .
without a border , we do n't have a country .
the work of government would grind to a halt if she were ever elected .
she 'll be in court for her entire tenure and she 'll be convicted .
because look , the first time -- i mean , frankly , forget about this time .
the first time she gets a subpoena from the united states congress and she deletes everything ?
there should n't have been a second time .
but i have respect that the fbi has given it a second chance .
and this time , i have no doubt that in that 650,000 e - mails -- did you see where they said , oh , we 're not worried .
they 're duplicates .
how can there be duplicates if there are hundreds of thousands more than you started off with ?
so today , i guess wikileaks , it sounds like , is going to be dropping some more , and if we met tomorrow , i 'll tell you about it tomorrow , but one beauty that 's been caught was , and this was just recently , newly released , where they say having a dump .
we 're having a dump of all of those e - mails .
in another communication , bill clinton 's chief of staff says foreign government -- right , this should be another one .
just like swamp -- you know the swamp little statement   -- this one , this one .
do you remember what it is ?
right ?
all the money is in , right ?
they said all the money is in .
they 're talking about foreign money pouring into their pockets .
they said all the money is in .
this is what is running for office .
honestly , she should be ashamed of herself .
she should be ashamed of herself .
my contract with the american voter begins with a plan to restore honesty to our government .
that includes a ban on foreign lobbyists raising money for american elections .
makes sense .
i want the entire corrupt washington establishment to hear and to heed the words we all will be saying right now .
when we win on november 8th , we are going to washington , d.c. and we are going to drain the swamp .
gon na drain the swamp .
we 're gon na drain the swamp , folks .
we 're gon na drain that swamp .
another important issue for americans is integrity in journalism .
these people are among the most dishonest people i 've ever met , spoken to , done business with .
these are the most dishonest people .
there has never been dishonesty -- there has never been dishonesty like we 've seen in this election .
there 's never been anywhere near the media dishonesty like we 've seen in this election .
do n't worry , they wo n't spin the cameras and show the kind of massive crowds .
they wo n't do that .
the very talented michael goodwin of the new york post just wrote today that 2016 presidential race will mark the low - water mark of journalism that is worthy -- think of it -- of the first amendment .
never before have so many media organizations , old and new , abandoned all pretense of fairness to take sides and try to pick a president .
it 's unbelievable .
it 's unhonestly .
for instance , we have a great story .
we give it out to the media .
they 'll make it look as bad as possible -- as bad as possible .
parenthetically ... 

  so sad .
parenthetically and very sadly , earnings for the new york times are down 97 percent this year .
they just announced that .
so bad .
i feel so badly for them .
just announced -- 97 percent .
oh , they 're doing great .
and then they tell you who to vote for , you know ?
who to vote for .
they want crooked hillary .
this is n't about me ; it 's about all of you and our magnificent movement to make america great again all over this country .
and they 're talking about it all over the world .
at the core of my contract is my plan to bring back jobs .
right now , 70 million american women and children live in poverty or near the brink of poverty .
forty - three percent of african- american school - aged children live in poverty .
thirty - two percent of hispanic school - aged children live in poverty .
this is america , this is the united states , this is unacceptable .
as your president , i will go into the poorest communities and work on a national plan for revitalization .
we will replace decades of failure with generations of success .
florida has lost one in four of its manufacturing jobs since nafta , a deal signed by bill clinton and supported by hillary .
and here 's a number that you should remember because it 's not even a believable number , and it 's correct .
america has lost 70,000 factories since china entered the world trade organization .
another bill and hillary - backed disaster .
we are living through the greatest jobs left in the history of the world .
our jobs are going to mexico , our jobs are going to other countries .
china and others are making our product .
we do n't make it anymore .
a trump administration will stop the jobs from leaving america and we will stop the jobs from leaving florida .
my second home , you know that , i 'm here all the time .
my second home , great place .
the theft of american prosperity will end .
so they are stealing our prosperity , horribly stealing our prosperity .
a trump administration will renegotiate nafta and we 'll stand up to foreign product dumping all over the place .
currency manipulation by china and many other countries and all of the unfair subsidy behavior that 's going on all over the world against us .
we will also immediately stop the job - killing , trans- pacific partnership , a disaster .
and hillary wants it to happen , she called it the gold standard , then she rejected it .
but she 's going to approve it .
then she lied during the debate , right ?
she lied .
she lied during the debate .
she said she never called it the gold standard , she lied .
and she lied about the line in the sand , right ?
she lied .
as part of our plan to bring back jobs , we 're going to lower taxes on american business from 35 percent to 15 percent .
we will also cancel billions in global warming payments to the united nations ...   ... and use that money to support america 's vital environmental infrastructure and natural resources .
we 're spending hundreds of billions of dollars .
we do n't even know who 's doing what with the money .
we 're gon na spend the money here .
we 're gon na work on our own environment .
that includes repairing the herbert hoover dike at lake okeechobee and protecting the florida everglades .
we will become a rich nation again , but to be a rich nation , we must also be a safe nation .
a terrible tragedy today has occurred in iowa .
you read , you saw .
early this morning , two iowa police officers , outstanding , outstanding people , were murdered , ambushed , ambushed violently while sitting in their squad cars .
we send our thoughts and prayers to the family of the fallen .
i just left iowa , most beautiful place .
the treatment was so incredible , the crowds , the police officers were so incredible the job they did .
now two of them are dead .
an attack on our police is an attack on all of us .
law enforcement is the line separating civilization from total chaos , you have to remember that .
according to the national law enforcement officers , memorial fund , firearm related police   we 're up 48 percent this year , the highest they 've ever been .
and there have been 14 ambush style attacks this year alone , never had anything like this .
and what it is , is a lack of respect for our nation , it 's a lack of respect for our leadership .
to all the great men and women of law enforcement i want you to know , we 're with you , we support you and we will stand by you .
we will restore law order and justice in america -- justice .
thank you .
thank you , so good luck to the people of iowa .
we will also work with our federal and local law enforcements to keep america safe from terrorism .
hillary clinton wants a 550 percent increase in syrian refugees pouring into our countries .
her plan would mean generations of terrorism and extremism spreading in your schools and all throughout your communities .
when i 'm president , we will suspend the syrian refugee program ...   ... and we will keep radical islamic terrorist the hell out of your community .
now , we all have heart and we 're gon na build safe zones and we 're gon na have some of the gulf states that have nothing but money , they 'll put up the money , we 'll lead it , we 'll build safe zones .
but we have enough problems in our country .
she wants to increase the thousands and thousands that are pouring in right now .
she wants to increase that number by 550 percent .
and then , you wonder why podesta says , she has bad instincts and you wonder why bernie sanders says , she 's got bad judgment , they 're right .
she 's got bad judgment , personally i think she 's a very unstable person , if you wanna really know the truth .
and we 're gon na repeal and replace obamacare , but you wanna know something ?
honestly , i think for herself she 's got much bigger problems right now than obamacare .
she 's got bigger problems .
let 's see what 's on all those e - mails that they just found , see what 's on those e - mails .
thank you .
it 's too bad those cameras are n't turning around to see this incredible group of people with thousands more outside , is n't it too bad ?
they do n't do it .
but you know , if hillary speaks and there 's 30 people in the line they say , the crowd is massive .
she 's never had a crowd like this in her life .
president obama should n't be campaigning for any longer , it 's really a conflict , right ?
he oughta be working on jobs , on the border , on building up our military instead of campaigning for crooked hillary clinton , is what he oughta be doing .
he 's in north carolina , but we 're going to north carolina right after this , so .
but we have a few more today in florida , and we have massive crowds .
there 's something happening .
they 're not reporting it .
katie , you 're not reporting it , katie .
but there 's something happening , katie .
there 's something happening , katie .
a trump administration will also secure and defend the borders of the united states .
and yes , we will build the wall .
thank you .
we 've received the first ever endorsement from our ice and border patrol officers .
first time they 've ever endorsed a presidential candidate .
they tell us the border crisis taking place right now is the worst it 's ever been .
now , in all fairness , people probably figure that i 'm going to win .
so , they 're racing across the border .
i do n't know .
i 'm sorry to do this to you , folks .
hillary has pledged totally open borders , meaning you do n't have a country anymore .
and she strongly supports sanctuary cities like in san francisco where ...   right ?
where kate steinle was killed by a five time deported illegal immigrant .
the immigration officers warn that hillary 's plan is the most radical immigration proposal in u.s. history and that it will lead to the loss of thousands of lives .
and i believe that .
as secretary of state , hillary clinton allowed thousands of the most dangerous and violent criminal aliens to go free because their countries would not take them back .
countless innocent americans have been killed by illegal immigrants .
last year , as an example , 17-year - old starlett pitts , her boyfriend and her mother were stabbed to death in their lee high acres home by an illegal immigrant .
the killer had been convicted of assaulting a police officer and was wanted for double murder and robbery .
and the people that knew him were begging that he be incarcerated .
they were begging .
he was released from custody pending his court appearance , enabling him to commit murder .
a trump administration will stop illegal immigration , deport all criminal aliens and save american lives .
and i want to thank , by the way , i see all these signs -- " cubans for trump . "
cubans .
i love cubans .
so they gave me last week the bay of pigs association , right ?
you know .
they gave me their award last week and it was a great honor .
and we 're gon na fight very hard for the cubans and we 're gon na fight very , very hard for the hispanics because they have not been properly taken care of .
what 's happened with the hispanic population in our country is not right .
what 's happened with the inner cities of our country , the african - american community , the hispanic community , is very , very unfair .
thank you .
thank you .
we 're going to take care of it .
the crime is horrible , the education is terrible , and you ca n't get a job .
we 're going to fix the inner cities -- we 're going to fix the inner cities .
thank you , fellows , that 's so good .
blacks for trump .
that 's so nice .
we will also repeal the obama - clinton defense sequester and rebuild our badly depleted military .
that includes total support for homestead air reserve base .
a trump administration will stand in solidarity with the suffering people of cuba and venezuela all surrounding dural   -- all surrounding dural   against the oppression of the castro and maduro regimes , you know what i 'm talking about .
we will cancel obama 's one - sided cuban deal made by executive order .
if we do not get the deal we want , and the deal that people living in cuba and here deserve ...   ... including protecting religious and political freedom , right ?
i 'm honored to have the endorsement of over 200 top admirals and generals , and 22 medal of honor recipients .
you know it 's really called peace through strength .
peace through strength , that 's what we 're going to have , well , hopefully .
have to get rid of isis -- we 're going to get rid of isis , do n't worry , we 're getting rid of isis .
but we have to get to rebuild our country .
we 've spent six trillion dollars in the middle east -- six trillion dollars .
and it 's in far worse shape , by a factor of 10 , from when we started .
six trillion -- we lost lives , the most incredible , great people .
our new foreign policy will put america first .
hillary brought disaster to iraq and syria and libya .
and she empowered iran , remember , she 's got bad judgment .
and she unleashed isis , came right out of the vacuum .
now she wants to start a shooting war in syria in conflict with nuclear - armed russia .
frankly , it could lead to world war iii and she has no sense .
she 's got no instinct , but that 's decided .
hillary and our failed washington establishment , they 've spent that six trillion dollars .
i mean , i 'd love to have that money back , but i 'd much rather have all those lives back -- rather have all those lives .
love to have those lives back .
but the middle east is in bad shape folks , and it 's getting worse , totally getting worse .
they 've dragged us into foreign wars that have made us less safe .
they 've left our borders wide open at home and they 've shipped our jobs and wealth to other countries .
and these are foreign wars that we do n't win -- we do n't win .
we do n't win anymore , we do n't win with trade , we do n't win with wars , we do n't win anymore .
we 're going to start winning again , you watch .
we 're going to start .
to all americans i say it 's time for new leadership .
just think about what can be accomplished in the first 100 days of a trump administration .
we 're going to have the biggest tax cut since ronald reagan .
and she is going to raise your taxes very substantially , i think you know that .
we will eliminate every unnecessary job - killing regulation , cancel every illegal obama executive order , rebuild our military and take care of our great veterans .
provide school choice and put an end to common core ; we 're bringing our education local .
support the men and women of law enforcement .
we 're going to save our second amendment , which is under siege ...   ... and appoint justices to the united states supreme court who will uphold and defend the constitution of the united states .
clinton wants us to think small , wants us to believe things ca n't change and wants our lives to revolve around washington .
i wonder if she 's going to be there much longer .
what do you think ?
i do n't think so .
i do n't know .
i 'm not sure she 's going to be there .
but she wants -- she wants our lives to revolve around washington , d.c. i 'm asking you to dream big , to push for bold change and to believe in a movement powered by the people and by their love for this great country .
i 'm tired of politicians telling americans to defer their dreams to another day when they really mean another decade .
america is tired of waiting .
the moment is now .
all we have to do is stop believing in our failed politicians and start believing in each other and in our country .
there is no challenge too great , no dream outside of our reach .
do n't let anyone tell you it ca n't be done .
the future lies with the dreamers , not the cynics , not the critics , certainly not the media .
hillary has been there for 30 years and she has accomplished nothing .
she 's just made things worse .
look at her record .
she 's the candidate of yesterday ; we are the -- right ?
is that right ?
we are the movement of the future .
our movement represents all americans from all backgrounds and all walks of life .
we are asking for the votes of republicans and democrats and independents and first time voters .
and believe me , there are a lot of first time voters that are standing on line right now .
we 're asking for the vote of every american who believes truth and justice , not money and power , should rule the day .
and i understand the other side very well .
i 've been there for a long time , but i love our country and i understand what has to be done .
we are going in the wrong direction , and if we keep going in this direction , we wo n't have a country any longer .
we 're fighting for every citizen who believes that government should serve the people , not the donors and not the special interests .
we 're fighting to unlock the potential of every american community and every american family who hope and pray and yearn for a better future .
with your vote , we are just -- think of it -- six days away .
this started on june 16th of last year .
it 's a long time .
seems like a long time ago .
but we 're six days away from the change you 've been waiting for your entire life .
it 'll never happen again .
it 'll never , ever happen .
it 's not going to happen in four years .
when i see cubans for trump , it 'll never happen again .
i 'm telling you .
this whole thing will never happen again .
there 's never been a movement like this in the history of our country -- there 's never been a movement like this .
thank you .
thank you .
there has never been a movement like this in the history of our country -- it 's never happened .
even the pundits , even the ones that truly dislike donald trump have said , it 's the single greatest phenomena the have ever seen .
we have to close the deal .
we have to close -- get out and vote .
november 8th fine , better if you vote now .
maybe you do n't feel good november 8th , you do n't want to get outta bed , you got ta get up , you got ta vote .
together we will make america wealthy again , we will make america strong again , we will make america safe again , and we will make america great again .
thank you very much , everybody .
thank you .
thank you .
get out and vote .
god bless you , everybody .
thank you .
great crowd , thank you very much , thank you very much .
thank you .
in five days , we are going to win the great state of florida , and we are going to win back the white house .
just out a few minutes ago , the new rasmussen poll has up 3 up right now , 3 up nationwide .
we 're leading in florida , we 're leading in ohio , we 're leading in iowa , i think we 're leading in north carolina .
which is big .
doing well in pennsylvania right there , but we are leading all over .
i tell you what , we are going to have something that 's going to be very special , get out there on tuesday , do n't fail .
who has already voted by the way ?
that 's pretty good .
it 's about 82 percent .
got to vote .
we 're on the cusp of something that 's so amazing , it 's historic change , a transfer of power from a failed political establishment .
we 're going to return that power to you , the american people .
there is more breaking news that i 'd like to share with you right now .
it was reported last night that the fbi is conducting a criminal investigation into hillary clinton 's --   -- pay for play corruption during her tenure as secretary of state .
in other words , the fbi is investigating how hillary clinton put the office of secretary of state up for sale in violation of federal law .
the investigation is described as a high priority .
it 's far - reaching , and has been going on for more than one year .
it was reported that an avalanche of information is coming in .
the fbi agents say their investigation is likely to yield an indictment .
but just remember , the system is rigged , just remember that .
and reports also show the political leadership at the department of justice is trying to protect hillary clinton , and is interfering with the fbi 's criminal investigation .
by comparison , four - star general just last week , james cartwright , highly respected , is in very serious trouble for doing a tiny fraction of what clinton did , may go to jail for up to five years .
think of it , general cartwright , last week , four - star general , respected by everybody , a tiny , tiny fraction , may go to jail for now five years .
and general petraeus ' life and reputation has been destroyed for doing nothing , nothing by comparison to what hillary clinton did .
she should n't even be allowed to run for the office of president .
she should n't be allowed .
and that is where the system is rigged .
she should n't be allowed .
it was also reported that the laptops of clinton 's top aides , which had been slated for destruction , were not in fact destroyed .
good job by the fbi .
and that the fbi has been successfully using them to gather information for their criminal investigation .
further , they have found new e - mails as part of the 650,000 e- mails just recently found .
can you imagine 650,000 ?
see , what do these people do ?
no wonder nothing gets done in government , 650 .
i guess she 'll say those 650 , remember the 33 ?
well the 650,000 also , the wedding , and some yoga , right ?
finally it is believed that no less than five foreign intelligence agencies successfully hacked into clinton 's illegal insecure server , which contained classified information , creating an ongoing security threat to the united states .
think of what happened to so many people for doing so little by comparison , think of it .
hillary clinton has engaged in a massive , far - reaching criminal conduct , and equally far - reaching cover - up .
she created an illegal e - mail server to shield and guard her activity , so simple , so simple .
shoulda happened a long time ago , folks .
now we 're going through phase two , which sounds like it 's even worse than phase one .
shoulda happened in phase one .
but she was protected by the department of justice .
she illegally transmitted confidential information , and then lied about it to congress .
she illegally destroyed federal records , including 33,000 e - mails , after receiving a congressional subpoena .
and she made 13 phones disappear , some with a hammer .
who in this room has gotten rid of a phone , and then smashed the hell out of it with a hammer , anybody ?
raise your hand , please .
raise your hand .
i see one hand over there .
i see a hand there .
what business are you in ?
i want to know .
no , i do n't wanna know , i do n't wanna know .
i do n't wanna meet him .
she engaged in corrupt pay for play at the state department for personal enrichment , she lied to the fbi and she lied to the american people many , many times .
remember she lied 39 times , i do n't recall , i do n't recall .
well those are all lies , because she recalled every one of them .
these are sad events for our country , a high - ranking government official has been caught selling her public office , threatening national security , and engaging in a massive criminal cover - up .
if she were to win , it would create unprecedented constitutional crisis .
here we go again with clinton , you remember the impeachment , and the problems ?
she 's likely to be under investigation for many , many years , also likely to conclude in a criminal trial .
this is not what we need in this country , folks .
we need somebody that 's going to go to work to bring our jobs back , to take care of our military , to strengthen up our borders .
this is not what we need , it 's going to be a mess .
and they say it , they say it .
this is going to be a mess for many years to come before they figure it all out .
we do n't need that .
we need a president that 's gon na go in and do their job .
and i just left , by the way , miami .
and in leaving , i see air force one .
so i said to myself i wonder who that could be .
and it 's our president .
and he 's down here campaigning for crooked hillary .
now why , why is n't he back in the office , sometimes referred to as the oval office ?
why is n't he back in the white house bringing our jobs back ?
and helping our veterans ?
right ?
why , why is n't he back working ?
he 's campaigning every day , and i actually think considering that she is under criminal investigation , i think he 's actually got a conflict .
and one of the things it taught us , wikileaks , he knew she had a lot of wrong things going on , you know that .
that also came out , obama knew what was going on by the way , just in case you did n't know , he knew .
this guy oughta be back in the office working , he 's not gon na be there very long , thank goodness .
but he oughta be back in the office working .
we do n't win anymore as a country , we do n't win with our military , we do n't win on trade .
this guy oughta get back to the office and stop campaigning .
if we win on november 8th , we will once again have a government of , by , and for the people .
real change begins with immediately repealing and replacing obamacare .
it 's just been announced that the residents of florida are going to experience a massive , double - digit premium hike .
who 's got their number yet ?
does anybody know ?
should i tell you ?
do you want me to depress everybody ?
you just put your head down , start crying , and leave .
i wo n't tell you .
i do n't want to tell you .
you know why ?
because if i do , you 'll be so depressed , i do n't like people leaving a speech early , crying .
you 're not going to like it , folks .
in the great state of arizona though , as an example , premiums are going up more than 116 percent , and it does n't work .
obamacare does n't work .
i 'm repealing it , we 're gon na replace it with something so much better , and so much cheaper .
hillary 's going to double up .
over 90 percent of the counties in florida are losing obamacare insurance next year , think of it .
good luck in that negotiation .
in minnesota where the premium entries will be close to 60 percent , the democratic governor said the affordable care act is no longer affordable .
oh , did he take heat , him and bill clinton .
did bill clinton take heat ?
he said it 's crazy , obamacare , he said it 's crazy .
they lied to us .
the president lied to us 28 times .
he said you can keep your doctor , you can keep your plan , remember , he kept lying and lying and lying .
premiums are surging , companies are leaving , insurers are fleeing , doctors are leaving , and deductibles are through the roof , sometimes $ 15,000 .
in other words you have to spend $ 15,000 before you start using it .
obamacare is a total catastrophe , yet hillary clinton wants to double down on obamacare , she does n't want to terminate it , she does n't want to get rid of it .
she wants to double down , making it much more expensive than it is right now , and it 's right now ridiculous .
it 's your number one cost right now , bigger than your mortgage , it 's bigger than your rent .
first time that 's ever happened .
i 'm asking for your vote so we can replace obamacare , and save healthcare for every family in florida and our country .
so important .
real change also means restoring honesty to government .
hillary was given the debate questions in advance by donna brazile , by the way .
can you imagine if those questions , because the dishonest media -- among the world 's dishonest people by the way .
it 's not even a big story .
mainstream media hardly covers it .
they hardly talk .
think about it , she got the debate questions against bernie sanders , probably got the ones against me too , but we won that debate very easily , those debates .
we won those debates .
i do n't care if she got 'em .
except that it shows how dishonest .
but think of this .
supposing i got the debate questions , it would be front page of the washington post .
it would be front page of the new york times .
he must immediately withdraw from the race .
what he did is disgraceful .
i 'll tell you what , they do n't even write about it .
so donna brazile was fired from cnn .
that 's good .
but why was n't she fired from the dnc ?
because what she did was totally dishonest .
did you see her on television the other night ?
she could n't answer uh , well , where did he get 'em ?
where did he get 'em ?
where did you get 'em ?
she 's going , that 's the questioner was asking that .
where did you get those questions ?
where did you get 'em ?
well , uh , i got 'em , well , i got 'em -- i do n't know where i got 'em .
i tell you what , she should be fired , she should be fired , but much more importantly , hillary clinton should be fired .
hillary clinton .
because donna brazile could n't answer the questions , she looked like a fool on television , but she could n't answer the questions .
but you know what was worse ?
she took the questions , and gave 'em to crooked hillary .
that 's cheating , and crooked hillary instead of saying i 'm sorry , i ca n't accept them , we have to report this incident , she took the questions , went in , and had good answers for bernie .
at some point does n't bernie sanders get tired of it ?
they 're calling him all these names , they 're cheating on him .
does n't he tell his supporters to go vote for trump at some point , right ?
and i have n't seen one story where hillary clinton -- they blame donna brazile a little bit , very little .
but seriously , can you imagine if it was me that got those questions ?
you know what i 've been saying , they would re - institute the electric chair , right ?
front page news , front page news .
she 's a very dishonest person , probably the most dishonest person ever to run for the office of president , i really believe -- i believe that .
the clintons are the sordid past , and someday they 'll start writing about these dishonest people back there .
someday they will ask the question , and they will do a front page headline , why did n't hillary clinton report that she got the confidential guarded questions to a debate ?
and someday these dishonest people are going to write a story about it in mainstream media .
but we 're the bright future .
my contract with the american voter begins with a plan to end government corruption .
we understand that .
i want the entire corrupt washington establishment to hear and heed the words we all have to say , we , all of us .
it 's a lot of us .
there 's a lot of us .
this is a movement they 've never seen this before in this country .
that 's why we do n't want to blow it now , tell them , because you 're allowed to vote early .
but we do n't want to blow it on november 8th , because this is a movement like they 've never seen before , all of 'em , even the ones that dislike me , of which there are quite a few of those people , but all of 'em .
this is a movement like they 've never seen in the country .
but it will end quickly .
it will end quickly if we do n't go out to vote on november 8th .
so let 's not let it end , let 's keep it , because we 're going to make america great again , folks .
we 're going to make america great again .
when we win on november 8th , we are going to washington d.c. , and we are going to drain ?
the ?
swamp !
right .
at the core of my contract is my plan to bring back our jobs , they 've been stolen .
florida has lost one in four of its manufacturing jobs since nafta , a deal signed by bill clinton and supported by his lovely wife , hillary .
america has lost 70,000 , listen to that number , i thought it was a typo , for weeks i 've been saying it , 70,000 factories since china entered the world trade organization , another bill and hillary backed deal .
we 're going to get 'em back , folks , do n't worry .
we 're living through the greatest job theft in the history of the world , it 's what it is , greatest -- think of it , greatest job theft in the history of the world .
a trump administration will stop the jobs from leaving america , and we will stop the jobs from leaving the state of florida , i can tell you , quickly , very quickly .
the theft of american prosperity will end .
and we do n't mind that it 's 115 degrees in this room , right ?
do we mind ?
it is hot in this room , but you know what , that 's ok .
we lose a couple of pounds , not the worst thing in the world , right ?
from now on it 's going to be america first .
a trump administration will negotiate nafta , and we will stand up to foreign product dumping , currency manipulation , and all unfair subsidy behavior , which is a lot .
we will also immediately stop the job - killing trans - pacific partnership , a disaster , another disastrous potential deal .
as part of our plan to bring back jobs , we 're going to lower taxes on american business from 35 percent to 15 percent .
we will also cancel billions in global warming payments to the united nations , billions and billions of dollars .
and use that money to support america 's environmental and national infrastructure .
by the way , folks , we 're sending billions and billions of dollars , we 're making our companies non - competitive , other companies are -- throughout the world are killing us , and other countries do n't adhere to whatever they 're supposed to do .
but we 're sending all of this money .
here 's what we want .
we want crystal clean water .
we want immaculately clean air .
and we want great safety .
above that , folks , let 's go to town , and let 's employ a lot of people .
we 're going to spend a lot of money on our infrastructure , including the deepening which you need , of the harbor at jackport .
do we all know jackport ?
we will become a rich nation once again , but to be a rich nation , we must also be a safe nation .
in chicago , 3,715 people have been shot since january 1st .
think of that , think of that , almost 4,000 people .
4,000 people have been shot since january 1st .
nationwide murders have experienced their largest single- year increase in 45 years .
now the press does n't tell you that , because the press is guarding hillary clinton , and the press does n't want them , and does n't want you to know the real facts about your jobs , about all of the things -- about our military , which is now bogged down in mosul .
remember i said why ca n't we ever like go in there quietly , secretly , and do the job , right ?
remember i said the element of surprise , and they came , oh , what does trump know about -- i know plenty , believe me .
they 're bogged down , it 's a tough situation .
four months ago , we 're going into mosul .
i kept saying every time i turn the television off , i say oh , why do they have to say it ?
we 're going to get the leaders of isis .
we 're going -- and it 's four months .
we 're going in , because we believe the leaders of isis are in mosul .
four months -- three months ago .
we are going into mosul , we 're gon na get those leaders .
problem is , after we said it the first time , within about 12 minutes they were gone .
we are led by stupid people , remember that , stupid people .
stupid people .
would n't it be nice if we did n't talk ?
we did the job , and you had the news conference a week later , would n't that be nice ?
to announce good results ?
these are not good results .
a trump administration will work with local and federal law enforcement to end this growing crime wave , it 's very substantial .
every child in america has the right to grow up in safety and in peace .
we will also keep you safe from terrorism .
hillary clinton wants a 550 percent increase in syrian refugees coming in to the country .
they 'll be pouring into the country .
that 's above obama 's unbelievable thousands and thousands coming in .
her plan would mean generations of terrorism and extremism spreading across our schools and your communities .
and that 's one of the reasons we have all those women for trump signs , ok ?
believe me .
the women do n't want this .
and by the way , i have to tell you , i think i have tremendous support from women , tremendous , very tremendous .
look , we have tremendous support .
we 're going to keep our country safe .
you know , they say well what will you do for women ?
i say start off with we 're going to keep our country safe , is that good ?
is that a good starter ?
i think we 're going to do tremendously with women .
we 're doing tremendously with african - americans , you see that .
you see what 's going on , you see it .
you see what 's going on .
they 're very -- you know these characters in the back , they 're very discouraged because all these lines , people with hats on saying make america great , buttons , shirts .
but big reports about tremendous support from groups that i was not supposed to have as much support from .
it 's throwing -- it 's throwing them a little bit off balance , they 're not happy .
they 're not happy .
the protected one is not being very well protected .
when i 'm elected president , we will suspend the syrian refugee program , and we will keep --   we will keep radical islamic terrorists the hell out of our country , ok ?
believe me , we 'll keep 'em out .
and we 'll build safe havens , and we 'll do things over in syria , we 'll get other countries to pay for it .
we have $ 20 trillion in debt , but we 'll get the gulf states , they have a lot of money , they got a tremendous money , they 'll pay for it , i promise .
because we have to take care of people , but honestly , we have enough -- hey folks , we have enough problems in this country .
look at what 's happening to germany , look at what 's happening to france , look at paris .
i have a friend , every year he goes to paris , i have n't seen him in a while .
paris , oh , the city of lights , he used to tell me .
for years , paris , paris .
i see him like a month ago , how was paris this summer ?
oh , i do n't go to paris , you kidding me ?
it 's no longer paris .
he has n't been there in a long time .
we 're gon na have our country be great again , folks , ok ?
we 're gon na to have smartness .
we 're gon na do it -- we 're gon na do it properly .
we 're gon na do it properly .
we 're gon na -- we 're gon na do it through love , we 're gon na do it in a lot of different ways , but we 're gon na have our country be great .
a trump administration will also secure and defend the borders of the united states .
and yes , we will build a great wall .
and mexico , which is making a fortune with us , just a fortune , at the border , and through trade deficits , our trade deficit with mexico is enormous , just in case you -- well , it 's enormous with everybody , why should they be any different in all fair -- mexico will pay for the wall , ok , believe me , they will pay for the wall .
100 percent .
they might not know it yet , but they 're paying for the wall .
we received the first ever endorsement from our ice and border patrol officers .
they tell us the border crisis is the worst it 's ever been , it 's a national emergency .
the immigration officers warned in a letter that hillary clinton 's plan is the most radical immigration proposal in u.s. history , and that it will lead to the loss of thousands and thousands of lives , that 's what they wrote us .
as secretary of state , hillary clinton allowed many , many people , the most dangerous and violent criminals in the world , to go free , because their home countries very intelligently would n't accept them back .
so we take a killer , a drug lord , a vicious gang member , bring them back to their countries , and they 'd say turn that plane around and get 'em out of there .
and hillary clinton 's state department would say oh , well that 's too bad , oh , well we 'll accept 'em .
and they go in our streets , and they kill people . .
hillary clinton supports -- and i guarantee you one thing -- 

  in four years or eight years , i guarantee you one thing , there wo n't be one instance , not one , where one of these murderers or drug people , or gang members , not one instance , folks , where that plane will come back with that person on that plane , i guarantee you that , there wo n't be one instance .
hillary clinton supports totally open borders , there goes your country , and strongly supports sanctuary cities like san francisco , where kate steinle was murdered by an illegal immigrant who was deported at least five times .
and we 're putting very , very strong language in , it 's going to be submitted the first day i 'm in office .
when they come in once , we deport 'em .
when they come in twice , they go to jail for five years .
when they come in another one , it 'll be 10 years .
and you know what 's gon na happen , sort of pretty simple .
they here , they get caught again , they go to jail for five years , just what 's gon na happen ?
they 're not coming back , folks .
now our people do n't want to do it , our weak , weak politicians do n't wanna do that .
a trump administration will cancel all federal funding to sanctuary cities .
we will end illegal immigration , we are going to stop drugs from pouring into your communities and poisoning our youth and everybody else .
and we will deport all criminal aliens quickly from our country .
we will also repeal the obama clinton defense sequester , and rebuild our badly depleted military .
we 're gon na rebuild it .
our navy is the smallest it has -- have you heard this ?
i mean to me , this is sad .
and then you wonder why china , who 's making a fortune with us , they make our product , they take our money , and they 're fine , i have a great relationship , i 've made a fortune with china , i had the biggest bank in the world is a tenant of mine in new york , china , biggest bank in the world from china .
but you know what ?
you know what ?
they 're building right now a tremendous fortress in the south china sea .
they 're not supposed to be doing it , but they 're doing it because they have no respect for obama , they laugh at hillary , they think -- they think hillary 's a joke , she 's a joke .
she is a joke .
you know what ?
they dream , they dream , they go to sleep at night , these tough leaders , you know , they 're tough , and smart , they 're smart , and really tough .
they go to dream at night , they go to sleep , and they dream that hillary clinton becomes president , that 's what their dream is .
i 've made a lot of money with china , i 'm not sure they like the idea of me , i 'll be honest , but that 's ok .
and we 'll get along great with china , we 'll get along with china better now .
i guarantee , they wo n't be building forts in the middle of the sea , totally against everything .
you know , they 're so -- what they 're doing is such a big violation , but they have no respect for obama , and they no longer respect our country .
our navy is the smallest it has been since world war i. we will build the 350 ship navy that our country needs , and desires , and must have .
that means brand new state - of - the - art ships in places like mayport , right here in jacksonville .
i 'm honored , and this is a great honor for me , to have the endorsement of more than 200 top admirals and generals , and 22 medal of honor recipients .
i 'm also honored to have the greatest temperament that anybody has , because we know how to win .
she spends $ 1 billion , she spends so much money , i see these ads , people that know me they say how can they say that ?
now we have -- you know what , we have a temperament because -- we have a certain temperament .
it 's a temperament of knowing how to win .
it 's knowing how to win .
the leaders of our country , boy , you talk about temperament , and interestingly , whether it 's podesta or bernie sanders , podesta said hillary has bad instincts , and i 'll be honest , i 've read the things that he has said about hillary on the wikileaks .
and if i were hillary , i would fire podesta so fast .
he says such demeaning things about her , she 's got bad instincts , i mean you 've read some of the things , it 's incredible , you know , how do you have people working for you and then you have to deal with them ?
and it was all behind her back , he must be a bad guy , i do n't know , but to say the things he said about her , she should look at him , say podesta , you 're fired .
but she ca n't do that , she probably needs him as a witness in the criminal case , so she ca n't do it .
our new foreign policy will put america first .
hillary brought death and disaster to iraq , syria , libya .
she empowered iran , and she unleashed isis .
you know , she wants to get rid of isis , she 's the one that started it , it came through the vacuum .
now it 's in 32 countries .
and i watched her during the debate , meekly talk about isis .
and i said to her you 've been here for 30 years , hillary .
you started isis .
you were secretary of state when it started .
why are you going to get rid of it ?
you ca n't get rid of anything .
you do n't know what you 're doing .
now she wants to start a shooting war in syria in conflict with a nuclear armed russia , that could very well lead to world war iii , and remember , putin has no respect for her either , has no respect for her .
does n't like her , does n't respect her , does n't respect obama , and does n't like him .
hillary and our failed washington establishment have spent $ 6 trillion on wars in the middle east , wars we never win , and now it 's in worse shape than ever before , wars we never win , folks .
they 've dragged us in to foreign wars that have made us lessly , and they took us , they opened up our borders .
you know , it 's interesting , we fight for their borders , but at home we have open borders .
try and figure that one out .
we fight like hell for their borders , we spend trillions of dollars to do it , but at home we have open borders .
and they 've shipped our jobs on top of everything , and our wealth , to other countries .
that 's got ta end very quickly .
our jobs are coming back , and our companies are n't leaving .
and if our companies wanna leave , there are consequences .
if they wanna go to mexico or some other country , or build a plant and make air conditioners like carrier is doing , or build cars like ford is doing , ford is moving an entire mess of division down , all small car production .
they wanna do that , you tell them very nicely , i 'm sorry .
you know , i always joke that i wanna make those calls so badly .
i do n't want to put anybody in charge of those calls , they 're so easy .
and they 're short .
and our politicians should have done this for years .
but you tell them that when you make your air conditioner or your car , whatever it might be , you build in mexico , enjoy the weather .
when that car or that product comes through our very strong border , now it will be a very strong border , there will be a 35 percent tax .
and you know what 's going to happen ?
nobody 's going to leave , folks .
now the politicians know this , but they 're all taken care of by those special interest groups that want that to happen .
but there will be a 35 percent tax , and nobody 's leaving .
and the ones that do leave , that 's ok too , we 'll make a lot of money .
but nobody says it .
does anybody say it like trump , right ?
so simple .
to all americans , i say it 's time for new leadership .
just think about what we can accomplish in the first 100 days of a trump administration .
we 're going to have the biggest tax cuts since ronald reagan , and hillary is raising taxes very substantially .
she 's raising your taxes .
we 're going to eliminate every unnecessary job - killing regulation .
we will cancel every illegal obama executive order .
we 're going to rebuild our military , and take care of our great , great , great veterans .
they 've never been taken care of properly , 22 suicides a day , not gon na happen .
we 're gon na take care of our veterans .
and i appreciate all the support i get from the military .
there 's a big article today on the front page of the new york times , and they say why does trump have support from the military ?
and by the way , and law enforcement .
and by military i mean including big leagues , our -- our veterans , you know ?
how many veterans are here right now ?
a lot .
yeah , a big , big story , the veterans , the military , and law enforcement .
we 're going to provide school choice and we 're going to put an end to common core , we 're going to bring our education .
we are going to support the great men and women of law enforcement , we 're going to support 'em .
we 're gon na save our second amendment which is under siege .
great people , you know , we have the endorsement of the nra , it 's great , these are great people .
the earliest they 've ever given .
and we will appoint justices to the united states supreme court who will uphold and defend the constitution of the united states , so important , so important .
it is time to cut our ties with the failed and bitter politics of the past .
hillary clinton has been there for 30 years , and she has accomplished nothing .
just words and just made things worse .
she is the candidate of yesterday .
it 's going to be really interesting to see what happens to her .
i wonder .
so let me ask you , let me ask you , she should n't be allowed to run based on the e - mail scandals and all them , ok .
so let me ask you this questions .
i 've never done this before .
will justice be done or not ?
will justice be done , yes or no ?
hard , right ?
i do n't know .
i do n't know , i 'm not sure anybody knows the answer .
they 're protecting her and it 's very -- we are the movement of the future .
our movement represents all americans , from all backgrounds , and all walks of life .
we 're asking for the votes of republicans , democrats , independents , and first - time voters of which there are many .
we are fighting for every american who believes in truth and justice , not money and power .
i 'll tell you , we are going to rule the day , this group , we are going to rule the day .
this group , and many , many , many like you .
every place we go , every place we go , the love of this country is incredible .
thank you .
we are fighting for every citizen who believes that government should serve the people , not the donors , and not the special interests .
we 're fighting to unlock the potential of every american community and every american family who hope and pray and yearn for a better future .
with your vote , we are just , can you believe this , five days away from the chance you 've been waiting for your entire life .
five days away .
together we will make america wealthy again .
we will make america strong again .
we will make america safe again .
and we will make america great again .
thank you very much .
thank you , everybody .
thank you .
thank you .
thank you , everybody .
i am so happy to be back in the great state of texas .
thank you .
thank you .
the people of texas are proud .
they 're independent and they are free .
there is no better place to deliver the message i have to deliver tonight than right here , right in the middle of freedom .
thank you .
tonight 's message is about re - declaring our independence as a country .
on november 8th , a very , very important date , we are going to declare our independence from special interests , corrupt politicians , and i might add , very corrupt politicians .
and from a rigged system that benefits only the insiders .
we 're going to bring our jobs back .
we 're bringing them back to our country .
and we 're going to create millions of new jobs .
we are going to declare our independence from politicians who do n't listen to us and media executives that do n't care about us .
and by the way , who never report our massive and very , very friendly crowds .
that 's for sure .
we are going to declare our independence from rising crime , soaring poverty rates and crushing , crushing debt .
we 're going to declare our independence from failures of the past and create a new american future .
once again , we will have a government of , by and for the people .
americanism , not globalism , will be our credo .
it 's going to be america first from now on .
america first .
thank you .
let me tell you what this new future looks like .
we 're going to cut taxes and create millions and millions of new jobs .
and we are not going to allow other countries to steal our businesses any longer .
we 're going to repeal and replace obamacare .
it 's a disaster .
we 're going to appoint judges who will support , defend and uphold the constitution of the united states .
we 're going to save and cherish our second amendment , which is under siege .
we will ensure every veteran in this country has the right to seek medical treatment at a v.a. facility or with a private doctor of their choice if they do n't get that kind of care .
we are going to eliminate job - killing regulations .
we 're going to unleash an american energy revolution like you 've never seen before .
let 's talk about another issue that is so important to our future and the future of our children .
that 's the issue of crime .
violent crime is rising across the country .
more than 2,700 have been shot in chicago alone this year , 2,700 people shot .
no american should consider this level of crime acceptable .
every american has the right to live in safety and peace .
a trump administration is going to restore law and order .
and while we 're at it , let me take this opportunity to thank our wonderful police and law enforcement officers .
this state ... 

  this state has known unbelievable heartache in the recent days after the murder of five police officers and the wounding of another seven in the assault .
and you know what we 're talking about , the horrible assault on dallas .
we pray for the families and hope for the speedy recovery of the wounded .
to all law enforcement in america , we are with you , we support you and we will always stand with you .
we love you .
together , we 'll ... 

  together , we will create a safe community for every citizen in the land , but especially those and for those who have not known safety in a very , very long time .
and there are plenty of people in our country who have not known safety for a long time .
that includes appointing an attorney general and a secretary of homeland security who are completely committed to upholding the law .
i will appoint federal officials and investigators who will work hand - in - hand with police and citizens to dismantle gangs , cartels and criminal syndicates terrorizing our people .
and they are all over the place .
i will appoint prosecutors who will go into the most dangerous communities in america and work to liberate our citizens from violence and fear .
all citizens deserve to be protected .
no american will be left behind .
i want every african - american parent in this country and all parents in this country to be able to raise their children in safety .
i want to ensure every african - american child in this country and all children in this country who are put on a ladder to success .
we are going to put people in this country on the ladder to success .
a good education with a great paying job , that 's success .
we 're going to have school choice .
we 're going to have charter schools and merit pay for our great teachers .
my opponent , crooked hillary clinton ...   ... discriminates against african - american students by opposing school choice and because she 's owned and paid for by the education bureaucracy , and of course , wall street .
that we know .
no one owns me .
no one owns me .
believe me .
nobody .
i answer only to the american people .
that 's why i 'm doing this .
that 's why i 'm doing this .
thank you .
thank you , everybody .
thank you .
thank you , everybody .
in a new york post column recently , deroy murdock published data confirming what i 've been saying about the devastating economic conditions in the african - american communities .
murdock confirms these facts .
the overall labor force participation rate ... 

  the overall labor force participation rate for black americans has slipped from 63.2 percent down to 3.2 percent recently .
this metric also slump for black teenagers from 29.6 percent to 27.7 percent , down 6.4 percent .
going in the wrong direction .
everything going in the wrong direction .
our country is going in the wrong direction .
the percentage of black americans in poverty has grown under obama , the census bureau reports , from 25.8 percent in 2009 to 26.2 percent , up too much .
too much .
the number of blacks on food stamps soared under obama to 11.7 million people in 2014 , up 58.2 percent .
also , from obama 's arrival through last june 30 , the percentage of black americans who own homes plunged 41.7 percent .
nearly four in 10 african - american children live in poverty .
that 's no good and not fair .
fifty - eight percent of young african- americans are not employed .
homicide is up nearly 50 percent in washington , d.c. and up more than 60 percent in baltimore , and up throughout all of our inner cities .
violent crime rose 17 percent in the 50 largest u.s. cities .
this is the legacy of president obama and hillary clinton .
it ca n't get any worse .
to those suffering , i say what do you have to lose in trying trump ?
what do you have to lose ?
i will fix it .
i will fix it .
i will fix the problem .
with rates of crime , with rates of poverty like you 've just heard , what do you have to lose ?
i will fix the problem .
we will fix it .
let me tell you what we have to gain .
more jobs .
we 'll bring them in .
i will be the greatest jobs president that god ever created , believe me .
believe me .
higher wages and a massive reduction in the terrible crime plaguing our inner cities .
we are going to turn it all around .
give donald trump a chance .
i say this to the african - american community , give donald trump a chance .
we will turn it around .
we will make your streets safe so when you walk down the street , you do n't get shot , which is what 's happening now .
that 's what 's happening now .
success has to be created for everyone and it has to be available to everyone .
that 's how we 're going to create a new american future .
but to make every american safe and prosperous , we must address one of the most vital issues of all , border security .
we are going to build the wall .
and who is going to pay for the wall ?
mexico is going to pay for the wall .
we have massive trade deficits with mexico , with china , with japan , with everybody .
those deficits will go away .
we 're going to bring our jobs back .
you 're going to be so happy .
but mexico in fact will pay for the wall 100 percent .
we are going to enforce the law .
we 're going to protect your jobs and your wages .
we are going to protect them .
your companies are not going to flee our country , think they can make their product and sell it back into our country without serious repercussion .
we are going to keep our country safe .
according to the texas government , nearly 200,000 illegal immigrants were booked into texas jails between 2011 and 2016 .
collectively , those arrested were responsible for more than half a million criminal offenses , including 1,055 homicides , 5,516 sexual assault charges ...   ... and more than 50,000 charges of either burglary or theft .
not going to happen , folks .
we 're not going to let it happen to our country .
it 's enough .
yet hillary clinton wants a totally open border .
she wants catch and release .
she wants obamacare and other things for illegal immigrants , in many cases , more than our great veterans get .
she has said she 's going to give massive amnesty in her first 100 days .
she wants to gut immigration enforcement .
the immigration people to such a great job , but they have no leadership at the top .
she supports sanctuary cities .
she wants to let people overstay their visas without removal .
one lawless order after another .
we must not let that happen .
we are going to vote for president donald trump .
and we 're going to stop it .
we love texas .
love texas .
hillary clinton also wants a 550 percent increase over obama , who 's letting them come in by the thousands , in syrian refugees .
we have no idea who they are , where they come from , no paperwork .
the great trojan horse .
it 's going to be trouble , folks .
there have been hundreds of immigrants and their children charged with terrorism inside the united states since 9/11 and a number of terrible attacks like the boston bombing , san bernardino and orlando .
yet hillary clinton wants to fling open the flood gates to our borders , let everybody come in , open up our country , let people pour in .
we do n't know anything about them .
it 's going to be a nightmare for our country , just like it 's turning out to be an absolute nightmare for europe .
just ask them what 's going on .
i want to create safe zones in the middle east .
and we 'll get the gulf states to pay for them .
we owe almost $ 20 trillion , folks .
we 're not paying .
but we want to help people .
look , i have as big a heart as anybody , believe me .
we have to help people .
we 're going to build safe zones in the middle east .
we 're going to get the gulf states to chip in to pay for them because they have the money .
they 're not doing what they 're supposed to be doing .
my plan suspends visas when we ca n't perform effective screening and it puts forward a new ideological screening program to keep out people from our country who do n't support our values .
i 'm calling it extreme vetting , extreme vetting .
after all , that is what taking the oath of citizenship is all about .
thank you .
thank you .
is there any place that 's better to be or safer to be than a trump rally ?
right -- right in the heart of texas .
this election , so important , will decide whether or not we have a border .
this election will decide whether or not we have a country .
today , i met with the moms of incredible american children killed by illegal immigrants , as a result of the policies of hillary clinton and barack obama .
hillary clinton will never meet with these families .
she will never hear their incredible , but so sad stories .
she will never hear .
she does n't have the heart , believe me .
i would like to invite the mothers who lost their children to illegal immigration to join me on the stage right now .
these are great people .
they 're here with the incredible remembrance project .
come on up .
i also want to invite very , very special people that i 've gotten to know over the years .
and they 've given me their endorsement , first time ever in their history .
the border patrol , folks .
they are so good .
these are incredible people .
the suffering that the families have gone through is incredible .
and jamiel shaw , another friend of mine , what he 's gone through is just unbelievable .
so i just want to thank you .
i want to say that we are with you 100 percent .
and your children did not die in vain because we 're not going to allow it to happen to others .
so thank you very much .
give them a big hand .
thank you very much .
border patrol , amazing .
come here , shaw .
come here .
say something .
thank you .
incredible people .
what they 've gone through , incredible .
thank you , fellas .
thank you .
and so many more hundreds , thousands , so many more .
we will never let these families down .
on immigration clinton is bought and paid for by special interests .
she 's never going to do the right thing .
this corruption relates closely to another corruption scandal that strikes at the heart of our country and our democracy .
every day more and more alarming facts come out .
what are you going to do ?
the scandal i speak of is the state department 's pay - for - play .
it 's right now being looked at very seriously .
probably nothing will happen , even though it should happen , because she is being protected by our country like nothing ever before .
and it 's a disgrace .
and as the world watches , it 's such an embarrassment to everyone in this big arena .
it is a total embarrassment .
if the secretary of state can be bought or bribed or sold .
look , what 's happening right now with government favors then the whole american system is threatened .
so many people for doing so far less are right now suffering tremendous repercussions , tremendous , for doing so far less .
for doing a tiny fraction of what hillary clinton did .
it is a disgrace .
this is a threat to the foundation of democracy , a threat .
this is what happens in third world countries .
it 's the failed conditions of people .
and this is why they flee to america and they come here and they get no better .
our laws and our country is being jeopardized .
america can never elect a candidate who , like hillary clinton , did government favors for those giving her family and her foundation massive amounts of cash .
the new revelations about hillary clinton 's email scandal made clear we have only seen the tip of the iceberg .
hillary clinton is desperate to cover up her crimes .
and she has been unsuccessful .
except that some people that head up some very important groups have said it 's ok , even though it was never ok for others .
that 's why she deleted 33,000 emails and she got away with it , sort of .
that 's also why she lied repeatedly to congress and to the american public .
she said she never sent or received classified materials .
that was a lie proved over and over again .
she claims she used her email server for the convenience of using only one device .
but she used multiple devices .
so that was yet another lie .
she said she turned over all of her work - related emails .
but the fbi found thousands she never turned over .
and now just recently found another 15,000 more .
that was another lie .
can you imagine ?
can you imagine what she had on the 33,000 deleted emails ?
can you imagine ?
she said she sent nothing marked classified , a total lie unmasked to the entire world .
and more , and more to come .
she said her server was secure and had no breaches .
but we know now what was completely unsecure and the fbi director said it could be easily hacked by foreign enemies .
more clinton lies .
clinton said her lawyers reviewed all of her emails before destroying them .
that was a lie .
and why were her lawyers let free when they destroyed the emails ?
lie after lie after lie .
hillary clinton is totally unfit to hold public office .
it is impossible to figure out where the clinton foundation ends and the state department begins .
it is now abundantly clear that the clintons set up a business to profit from public office .
they sold access and specific actions by and really for i guess the making of large amounts of money .
today a phone log was released for cheryl mills .
i will say this .
the bernie protestors were much better , more ...   they were much -- they had much more vim and vigor .
these have very , very , very little energy .
so you had a phone log today that was released .
she was secretary of state clinton 's chief of staff .
you would expect the log to contain only calls concerning department of state business .
but cheryl mills received 148 messages between 2010 and 2012 from the chief operating officer of the clinton foundation .
no other individual or group appears to have left that many messages .
we also just learned today that more than half the people who met with hillary clinton from outside government while she was secretary of state were donors to the clinton foundation .
the specific crimes committed to carry out that enterprise are too numerous to cover in this speech .
i walked through two of them yesterday .
the sale of u.s. uranium to russia and the exemption of a telecom giant from sanctions after they paid bill clinton a tremendous amount of money for a speech .
the ubs saga is another one .
shortly after hillary clinton became secretary of state , she went to geneva and intervened in a dispute concerning secret identities of americans .
that 's nice .
she negotiated a very good deal for ubs , and a very bad deal for law enforcement .
of the 52,000 accounts the u.s. was seeking , the government settled for only 4,450 .
her intervention was described by treasury as " unusual . "
before her unusual intervention , ubs had donated only $ 60,000 to the foundation .
after the clinton favor for ubs , it opened its wallet for big bucks .
and out came a $ 600,000 contribution , a $ 32 million loan , and a $ 1.5 million speaking fee for bill clinton .
this is corruption .
and this is why i have called for a special prosecutor to look into this mess .
justice is supposed to be blind .
it 's never supposed to be for sale .
hillary clinton thinks she 's above the law .
come november the american people will show her that she is not .
we will have a tremendous victory on nov. 8 .
we will win and we will make america great again .
you will be voting for justice , fairness , equality and jobs .
we will be working on making our inner cities and african - american people who have suffered so long in these unsafe , horrible places .
they will be so proud of what takes place over the next four years if i 'm elected president .
you will also be voting for a more inclusive country where no one , no one is left out .
another two million latinas have joined the ranks of those in poverty .
no good .
incomes for latino households have declined by nearly $ 1,000 under president obama .
the number of latino children living in poverty increased by 15 percent .
our pro - growth , pro - jobs , pro - family agenda is going to bring back hope to every community in our nation .
i will dedicate myself to restore the ladder of success to all of those who live in poverty , of which there are tremendous numbers .
we reject the bigotry of hillary clinton , who sees communities of color only as votes , not as human beings worthy of a better future .
she is a disgrace .
the era of division is coming to an end .
we will create a new future of american unity .
are you ready for real , real , real american change ?
you 'll get it .
and it 'll be beautiful .
it 's time to emphasize what we all have in common as americans .
we will promote our common culture , values and principles .
we will be one nation .
we will be one people .
we will share together one great future .
it 's going to be america first again .
we will make america proud again .
we will make america prosperous again .
and we will make america safe again .
friends , citizens and fellow americans , we will make america great again .
thank you .
god bless you .
thank you .
nov. 8 , go out and vote .
thank you , everybody .
thank you .
thank you .
-- first .
your needs are going to come first .
the real divide in this election is not between left and right , but between everyday working people and a corrupt political establishment that works only for itself .
this election is a chance for the great majority of decent citizens to end the rule of a small group of special interests and to return that power to the voters or , as we would say , to the people .
hillary clinton believes only in government of , by and for the powerful .
i am promising government of , by and for the people .
and this fight , which will be a big one , we are taking on ...   ... let 's just win on november the 8th .
that would be the ultimate and that 's what we 're going to do because in this fight , we 're taking on some very entrenched and well financed interests .
money is pouring in to her campaign by the special interests , the lobbyists , the donors , the people that own the companies that are moving your jobs to mexico and other places .
these are the same people who pay hillary $ 10,000 a minute for a speech .
not a good deal .
not a good investment .
these special interests are the same people who own the newspapers that cover up her crimes .
they 're covered up .
these are the same wall street firms who paid hillary clinton a quarter of a million dollars each time she delivered her secret remarks , that nobody knows what she said .
they 're the same people who paid bill and hillary clinton over $ 150 million for speeches since bill left the office .
and who donated countless millions of dollars more to the clinton foundation .
but you have the power , with your vote -- and by the way , new hampshire is a very , very important state in this election ; very important .
and if i win new hampshire -- ok , when i win .
ok .
ok , when i win .
just remember this .
this is a promise .
new hampshire is staying right where it is in terms of primary .
it 's an unbelievable state and an unbelievable tradition .
and there 's a lot of talk of moving you to the back of the pack .
that 's not going to happen .
it 's not going to happen .
so , i give you my word , new hampshire stays right where it is .
ok ?
so you have the power , with your vote , to defeat those special interests and put the people back in charge once more like it 's supposed to be .
this has been a very historic week in american politics .
the voters have always known that our leadership in washington , d.c. is corrupt , and that the system is very badly rigged -- a word that i believe i used first , that has been copied all over the place .
it 's badly rigged and it 's broken .
but this week , the curtain was truly lifted .
the corruption was revealed for all to see .
the veil was pulled back on a vast criminal enterprise run out of the state department by hillary clinton .
as the associated press documented , more than half of the meetings hillary clinton took as secretary of state with people outside government were clinton foundation donors .
hillary 's chief of staff received more messages from the clinton foundation 's chief operating officer than just about anybody else ; 85 donors alone that she met with as secretary gave the foundation $ 156 million .
and i know many of these people .
i know many of these people .
these are not people that are going up to pay their respects and say , " madam secretary , how are you feeling ?
is n't it a beautiful day ?
the weather is so beautiful . "
these are people that want things for their donation .
these are people that expect things for their donation .
and when you follow it out and you see the people that left her office , you take a look at what those people , those companies , and those countries got , believe me , you will find out it is plenty .
on top of that , bill clinton 's total speaking fees rose 44 percent while hillary clinton was secretary of state , often raking in money from people who had business or matters before the state department .
very simple .
as i said weeks ago , hillary clinton ran the state department like a personal hedge fund .
it 's hard to tell where the clinton foundation ends and where the state department begins .
access and favors were sold for cash .
it 's called pay for play .
over and over and over , people who donated to the clinton foundation , or who gave money to bill clinton got favorable treatment from hillary clinton 's state department .
the examples are too many to name here in full .
and i 've gone over , i will tell you , i 've looked at so many over recent days , but they include the deal to sell 20 percent of united states uranium to russia .
or the very favorable treatment given to ubs , big bank giant .
it includes -- we 're all sick of it .
it includes the exemption of telecom giant ericsson from government sanctions .
it includes efforts to put a foundation donor with no national security experience at all onto a highly sensitive national security panel that he wanted to be on , with access to top secret information .
it includes foundation donors getting lucrative contracts in haiti , all while the people of haiti suffered horribly and are not , by the way , big fans of the clintons .
but these examples are only the tip of the clinton corruption iceberg .
hillary clinton 's actions constitute all of the elements of a major criminal enterprise .
you know it .
the government knows it .
and she knows it .
she created a private -- she created a private , illegal mail server in order to hide her corrupt dealings .
that 's all it is , folks .
very simple .
she knew what she was doing 100 percent .
she did so knowing full well it would put american lives at risk by making classified information highly vulnerable to foreign hacking .
and that 's what happened .
and by the way , people that do two percent of what she did , their lives have been destroyed .
but she did n't care , as long as it helped her get away with her crime .
no risk to america was too great .
it did n't matter to her .
and now she 's running for president .
then to further cover up her crime , she deleted 33,000 e - mails to keep them out of the hands of the authorities and the american public .
as a further element of the criminal coverup , she claimed under penalty of perjury that she turned over all of her work - related e- mails .
we now know this to be one more massive clinton lie and deception .
the fbi found thousands of work - related e - mails she failed to turn over , including the new discovery this week of 15,000 more work - related e - mails she did not disclose .
what is being uncovered now is one of the most shocking scandals in american political history .
it 's watergate all over again .
it 's watergate .
and she 's being totally protected by our government .
our secretary of state sold her office to corporations and foreign governments , betraying the public trust , putting innocent lives in danger , and then she went to great lengths to hide , delete , destroy and lie about the evidence .
just like her lie that she never sent any material marked " classified . "
total lie .
lie after lie after lie .
this is the corruption we expect to see in a third - world country , but not in the united states of america .
just imagine the damage to our security , to our integrity , to our standing in the world .
and believe me , the world is laughing as they watch .
if hillary clinton is allowed to sell the oval office in the same way she sold her office as secretary of state , and she ca n't help herself .
she can not help herself .
we can not let this happen , ca n't let it happen .
we must vote on november 8th to keep the american government from being sold to the highest bidder .
vote to save your country .
so important .
so important .
you folks have no idea how important you are in this room and this state .
so important .
and by the way , folks , if you 're looking at the poll numbers , take a look .
we 're doing very well .
they 're very well .
very well .
so vote to protect your family .
vote for honesty , integrity , and accountability now , as all of these revelations have been discovered -- some this week , many this month .
hillary clinton has been hiding .
she 's been hiding .
where is she ?
although i hear for the first time in a long time she 'll be making some kind of a quick statement tonight , but she 's emerging , not to take the responsibility for her unethical and criminal conduct , but instead to make one of the most brazen attempts at distraction in the history of politics .
now , i 've not seen what hillary is going to say , but i 've heard about it .
and in a sense , i do n't want to dignify her statements by dwelling on them too much .
but a response is required for the sake of all decent voters that she is trying to smear .
the news reports are that hillary clinton is going to try and accuse this campaign , and all of you , and the millions of decent americans at record levels .
there has never been anything like this .
this is a movement we have .
this was set up .
this event was set up late last night , and look what happens .
look how many people .
it 's a movement , folks , like they 've never seen before .
and going to accuse decent americans who support this campaign , your campaign , of being racists , which we 're not .
it 's the oldest play in the democratic playbook .
when democratic policies fail , they are left with only this one tired argument : you 're racist , you 're racist , you 're racist .
they keep saying it .
you 're racist .
it 's a tired , disgusting argument .
and it 's so totally predictable .
they 're failing so badly .
it 's the last refuge of the discredited democrat politician .
they keep going back to the same well .
but you know what ?
the people are becoming very smart .
they 've heard it too many times before .
the well is dry .
the well is dry .
this is the year the american people , who believe in much better and much more honest politics say the word " enough , " " enough . "
this is the year that the people who have been betrayed by democratic policies , including millions and millions of african american and hispanic american citizens , reject the politicians who have failed them over and over and over again , for 50 years , for 75 years , without break , for even in some cases 100 straight years .
they failed them , and you 're going to vote for a change .
it 's time .
as i 've discussed for many days now , democratic politicians have run nearly every inner - city in america for the 50 , 60 , 70 , 80 , 90 , 100 years .
their policies have produced only more poverty , total joblessness , and failing schools .
every policy hillary clinton supports is a policy that has failed and betrayed communities of color in this country .
but she does n't care .
she 's too busy raking in cash from people and rigging the system and taking the african american vote and the hispanic vote and saying , " we 're going to do a great job . "
and right after the election , it 's " bye - bye , i 'll see you in four years . "
nothing happens .
nearly four in 10 african american children live in poverty ; 58 percent of african american youth are not working ; more than 2,700 people have been shot in chicago this year alone .
these are the consequences of hillary clinton 's policies and the policies of people that think like her .
she has brought nothing but pain and heartache and broken promises to your inner cities .
on top of that , she wants to raise taxes on african american - owned businesses to as much as nearly 50 percent more than they 're paying now .
i am lowering taxes very , very substantially .
she is asking for a major tax increase .
we should be helping these businesses grow and expand , create jobs .
but hillary clinton is virtually trying to shut them down .
she opposes school choice .
education is a disaster .
she supports open borders that violate the civil rights of african americans by giving their jobs to people here unlawfully .
she supports trade policies that have closed factories in african american communities and put millions of african americans and others , all of us , out of work .
so many people out of work .
she supports radical regulations that puts americans out of a job , and that raise the price of their so many people out of work .
she supports radical regulations that puts americans out of a job , and that raise the price of their energy bills -- you all see it -- beyond anything that you thought would ever , ever happen .
she supports policies on crime that make communities less safe , and that make it harder to raise your children in security and in peace .
you see it all the time .
the inner cities , parents walking with their beautiful child , and they get shot .
they 're shot , their child is shot , often killed .
folks , what do you have to lose ?
what do you have to lose ?
donald trump will fix it .
we 're going to make it better .
we 're going to help education .
we 're going to straighten out crime .
we 're going to create jobs .
we 're going to bring our companies back .
what the hell do you have to lose ?
it ca n't get any worse than what it is right now .
you know , i said this a few weeks ago and i mean it so deeply in my heart , we will fix it .
we will get it fixed .
they 're never going to do it for you .
it 's words , it 's politicians .
you know what i always say about politicians ?
all talk , no action .
they 're controlled by their lobbyists and their special interests and their donors .
me , i put up my money .
i 'm into this thing for a lot of money , i want to tell you .
nobody 's going to be calling me and asking for favors .
we want to move a company to mexico , please make sure it happens .
let me tell you , i 'm going to make sure just the opposite .
i 'm going to make sure it does n't happen .
i believe every single parent in this country , and especially in the inner cities , has to right to raise their children in safety .
walk down the street in safety .
not be shot at .
this is one of the great civil rights issues of our time .
and people do n't talk about it that way .
this is a civil rights issue .
the democrats have run your inner cities .
they 're making a fortune for themselves , and they 're destroying , they 're destroying .
remember this .
the people that live there , they are destroying those people .
this is actually a civil rights issue .
and it 's a disgrace , and they should be ashamed of themselves .
but hillary clinton does n't want to talk about any of this .
she ca n't defend her record .
she 's got a horrible record .
and , as bernie sanders said , she 's got very , very bad judgment .
she really does .
all you have to do is look at what she 's done .
she does n't have one single proposal that has n't been tried and failed .
she does n't have one idea that does anything but destroy jobs for african - americans and hispanic - americans , and all americans in our country .
it 's going to be a disaster .
her trade deals were a disaster .
this will be catastrophic for our country .
so what does she do when she ca n't defend her record ?
that 's right .
she lies .
she lies .
and she smears .
and she paints decent americans , you , as racists .
she bullies voters who only want a better future and tries to intimidate them out of voting for a change .
i 'm for change .
she does n't want change .
as i discussed yesterday these are the same tactics , the establishment power is used to try to scare the british people out of voting for change also .
it did n't work there , and it 's not going to work here .
call me mr. brexit .
the american people are ready to vote for freedom , opportunity and justice .
they are ready to take back control of their own futures .
you have to take it back .
we will take it back .
the movement will take it back together .
it 's time the clintons were held accountable for their inappropriate conduct ...   thank you .
you can see the feeling in this country .
you can see by this , by these outbursts , you can see the anger , the anger at what she got away with but maybe she wo n't get away with it .
but you can see the anger when law enforcement allows her a free pass on something that was so bad .
you can see the anger in this room .
you can see the anger all over the country .
great , great institutions - the fbi , the department of justice - they 've taken a hit in our country and throughout the world like nobody ever thought would be possible .
nobody .
according to the book " game change , " bill clinton shockingly said about president barack obama that a few years ago this guy would have been getting us coffee .
that 's what he said .
and we 've all seen the cringe - worthy comments from hillary clinton which i wo n't get into here but we know what they are .
you 've heard them .
here 's the central point that i want to get across today .
hillary clinton is n't just attacking me .
she 's attacking all of the decent people of all backgrounds - does n't matter - of all backgrounds - who support this incredible once - in - a - lifetime movement .
never seen anything like it .
we ca n't let that stand .
we ca n't .
voters used to the old game where failed politicians like hillary who did lose to barack obama rather decisively - an election she was supposed to win easily - please do n't forget that - where she falsely smears republicans with the charges of racism and other things .
republicans then always have a tendency to back down and be defensive and look bad .
not donald trump .
democrats then continued to push policies that are devastating to communities of color and devastating to lots of other communities .
we must break this corrupt cycle .
we 're going to .
and we are going to break it beginning today in new hampshire .
so let me make some very clear statements before this whole country , including all of those many cameras back there .
first , on the border .
the people of this country who want their laws enforced and respected -- respected by all , and who want their borders secured , are not racists .
if you want to have strong borders so that people come into our country , but they come in legally through a legal process , that does n't make you a racist .
it makes you smart .
it makes you an american .
they 're all patriotic americans .
we will build the wall 100 percent and mexico will be paying for the wall .
we will build it 100 percent .
i see all this stuff given out over the last three or four days by the media that trump does n't want to build the wall .
folks , we are building the wall .
ok ?
and remember this also , i have great respect for mexico 's leaders because frankly they 're smarter , tougher and more cunning than ours .
but remember this also , mexico is making an absolute fortune dealing with the united states .
not only on the border , but with trade : a $ 60 billion trade deficit we have with mexico .
remember what i say , mexico will pay for the wall .
remember .
these are patriotic americans of all backgrounds who want their jobs protected , and their country kept safe .
it 's very simple .
they want to have their country kept safe .
i will never apologize for pledging to enforce and uphold every single law of the united states .
we will uphold those laws for our people .
i will never apologize for making it my -- and this is , i will tell you -- for making it my priority , but is it your priority also ?
i think so .
so i will never apologize for making it my priority on immigration to protect american citizens above every other single consideration .
we have to protect our people .
we 've lost sight of that .
we will end illegal immigration and we will restore the constitutional rule of law .
it will be restored .
next , on national security , people who speak out against radical islam and who warn about refugees are not islamophobes .
they 're not .
they are decent american citizens who want to uphold our value as a tolerant society and who want to keep the terrorists ' hell out of our country .
if the choice is between saving lives or appeasing politically correct censors in washington , d.c. , that is the easiest choice you and i will ever have to make .
we will always choose saving american lives .
we have thousands and thousands of people being brought into our country from the middle east , from syria .
we do n't know where they are or where they 're coming from .
they do n't have paperwork .
there 's no reliable source that can vet these people .
it could be the all- time great trojan horse .
thousands -- and hillary clinton wants to increase that number by 550 percent a year .
not going to happen , folks ; not going to happen .
not on my watch , that i can tell you .
now on crime .
people who support the police and who want crime reduced and stopped are not prejudiced .
they 're concerned and loving citizens and parents whose heart breaks every time an innocent child is lost to totally preventable violence .
there is no compassion in tolerating crime , and poisonous drug dealing , and the killings all over our streets in so many different cities .
i will work to dismantle the criminal gangs and cartels and to liberate our poorest citizens from crime and violence and poverty and fear .
to hillary clinton and her donors and advisers , pushing her to spread smears and her lies about decent people , i have three words .
i want you to remember these three words : shame on you .
when you 're like the clintons getting -- think of this one -- getting $ 69 million in political contributions from wall street and big banks -- and i think i got $ 16,000 .
you saw that ?
and i do n't know who the poor guy is that gave me the money , because he 's not going to get anything for it .
it 's easy to look down on the so - called little people , which is the way she views the people of our country .
it 's easy to ignore the devastation caused by our open borders when you spend all of your time with wealthy donors and hollywood celebrities who ... 
  it 's easy to ignore the heartfelt concerns of communities about radical islam entering our country when you spend your time hanging out with foreign dictators in their lavish palaces and homes .
and it 's easy , no doubt , for hillary clinton to turn a blind eye to the ravages of crime when she has her own personal armed security force .
now she wants to essentially dismantle our second amendment .
i think the first thing she should do is call up washington and immediately request that her great secret service agents drop all weapons .
let them walk around with no weapons .
and let 's see how she feels about that when she wants to take away your guns .
but this is how the system is rigged .
for decades the american people have demanded that their immigration laws be enforced , and that their jobs be protected from out of control immigration .
but the special interests , who only want cheap labor , have stopped it from happening .
they 've totally stopped it .
and they 're putting up tremendous amounts of money .
for years the american people have worried about letting radical islam spread within our shores .
but the elites , who only want to raise more money for global corporations , ignore the concerns of the american voters .
very simple .
for 50 years , people living in our inner cities have suffered under the democrats failed policy regime .
in almost every case it 's democratic rule .
but the democratic politicians , who only want to please media executives and wall street donors , do nothing but expand the hurt and the suffering that our inner cities and our country is going through right now .
it 's time for a new day and a new dawn in america .
on november 8 we will end the rule of special interests , and we will begin the rule of the people .
i am asking for your vote so that we can break free from the failures of the past and create a new american future .
i am asking for your vote so that we can achieve amazing things for the american people .
we can be greater than ever before .
i am telling you we can be greater than ever before .
and african - american citizens and latino citizens will have the time of their life .
because we are going to create jobs like you 've never seen .
we 're gon na bring our companies back , we 're gon na bring our jobs back and we are not going to allow these companies to leave our country , fire all of their workers , make their product and sell it foolishly back into our country with no retribution .
believe me , those days are gone .
so i 'm asking for the vote of every african - american and hispanic - american who wants to see for the first time maybe ever a better future and a future that begins with jobs , jobs , jobs and also education , education , education .
we are going to bring back great education for our inner cities and for our country .
we will fix our disastrous trade deals and stand up to the countries that cheat , of which there are many .
we will lower taxes and create millions of new jobs as a result .
companies will come pouring in .
we will unleash an american energy revolution .
we will eliminate job - killing regulations destroying our businesses .
we will repeal and replace the horrible disaster known as obamacare .
we will enforce our immigration laws and we will put rules in place that hire american workers first .
and that includes hispanic workers , and that african - american workers .
we will end the era of nation - building .
and instead work in partnership with our allies to crush and destroy isis .
we will keep radical islamic terrorism out of our country .
we will promote the values of tolerance , justice and acceptance .
we will steadfastly reject bigotry and hatred and oppression in all of its ugly forms .
america will be one nation , united in common .
we will have a nation the likes of which this world perhaps has never seen before .
we will have dreams , and they 'll be common dreams .
we will have a purpose .
we have no purpose right now .
our citizens will proudly promote our values and our system of government as the best anywhere in the world and they will be proud of it and they will believe it - not just say it - believe it .
and we will do so without apology .
together we will make america prosperous again and wealthy again .
we will make america proud again .
we will make , very importantly , safe again .
friends , citizens and fellow americans , we will make america great again , greater than ever before .
thank you and god bless you .
thank you .
thank you .
and they are terrific .
they have a great future .
they will be taking my job someday .
and i will be happy about it .
in particular , though , i want to thank mr. ron packard .
where is ron ?
is he here someplace ?
yes , he is .
thank you , ron , fantastic job .
and ms. deborah mays , who has really done an incredible job .
deborah , thank you .
thank you .
what a great job .
for hosting us at this beautiful school .
today we are going to discuss one of the most important issues in this campaign , school choice .
but before we do , i want to briefly discuss new revelations about hillary clinton 's very famous e - mails .
according to the fbi report , the fbi did not find that hostile foreign actors -- and think of this , it 's so important -- when they went around -- they went around and were so vigilant , at least as far as this .
but they found that hostile foreign actors gained access to the personal e - mail accounts of individuals with whom clinton was in regular contact .
and in doing so , obtained e - mails sent to or received by clinton , on her personal account .
and every time she talks about the subject , it 's different .
she 's got to get her act together .
remember , hillary clinton was e- mailing about the drone program , among many other extremely sensitive matters .
this is yet more evidence that clinton is unfit to be your commander in chief .
by the way , the whole country saw how unfit she was at the town hall last night .
where she refused to take accountability for failed policies in the middle east that have produced millions of refugees , unleashed horror of radical islamic terrorism all over , and made us less safe than ever before .
throughout it all , she put the country -- and i mean the entire country -- at risk in order to cover up her pay for play scandals as secretary of state .
these include scandals giving up uranium to russia , doing favors for ubs bank , and selling contracts to friends and family in haiti .
it 's all about hiding criminal enterprise , and that 's what it 's about .
as part of her criminal cover up , hillary 's -- and you know her staff , you know it well .
you 'd read it about it all the time .
you just read about it and it 's getting worse and worse .
hillary clinton 's staff deleted and digitally bleached -- which is acid cleaned -- her e - mails after receiving a congressional subpoena .
that 's after receiving , not before .
that 's after receiving .
she gets a subpoena from the united states congress and she deletes and bleaches .
she also , and her staff , destroyed some of her 13 different phones but this time with a hammer .
i 've never done that .
then when she was interviewed by the fbi , she claims she could n't remember important events , 39 times .
she could n't even remember whether she was trained or handling classified information .
did n't remember anything about it .
so if she really did n't remember , that 's a problem .
and if she did remember , that 's a problem .
she even said she did n't know what the letter c stood for , whether it was confidential , classified information , or something .
all the while , as hillary and bill raked in millions of dollars from special interests , the world was falling apart .
hillary clinton 's policies produced ruin in libya , iraq and syria , absolute ruin and death .
she failed in russia .
she failed in china .
she failed miserably in north korea .
her policies unleashed isis , spread terrorism and put iran on a path to nuclear weapons -- not to mention the ransom payments -- those ransom payments .
remember two weeks ago it was $ 400 million in cash .
well , yesterday we found out that in cash it was $ 1.7 billion .
these are unheard of -- this is cash .
this is n't wire transfer , this is n't check .
this is cash , $ 1.7 billion .
then you say , is that going to terror or is that going to people 's bank accounts ?
i actually think it 's going to both .
on top of it all , hillary clinton is trigger happy , totally trigger happy .
she has raced to invade , intervene , and topple regimes .
she believes in globalism , not americanism .
everybody understands it .
last night she even falsely said , no american died in libya .
now i heard that , and i said , could she have forgotten so quickly ?
then she also falsely said there is no ground troops in iraq , even though we have 5,000 military personnel there right now .
iraq is one of the biggest differences in this race .
i opposed going in .
and i did oppose it , despite the media saying , no , yes , no .
i opposed going in .
and i opposed the reckless way hillary clinton took us out , along with president obama , letting isis fill that big , terrible void .
but i was opposed to the war from the beginning , long after my interview with howard stern .
but three months before the iraq war started i said in an interview with neil cavuto , that perhaps we should n't be doing it yet , and that the economy -- these are quotes -- that the economy -- this was on live television -- the economy is a much bigger problem as far as the president is concerned .
this was before the war started , by a very short distance .
then on march 25th of 2003 , just after the war had started , just days after , just a little while after , i was quoted as saying the war is a mess .
and yet , more evidence that i had opposed the war from the start .
i said , the war is a mess .
so i 'm -- television , somewhere .
july of 2003 , i said i would love to see new york city and some of our cities , and some of the states of our nation get some of the money that 's going toward iraq and other places .
because you know , they really need it and they need it badly .
i said that .
we have numerous other quotes , too , both before and shortly after .
then in august of 2004 , very early in the conflict , extremely early in the conflict , right at the beginning , i made a detailed statement in an interview to esquire magazine , so right at the beginning .
and by the way , numerous honest reporters said , well , trump may have said at the beginning , and some said he did say at the beginning because they had cavuto 's clip and other clips , but some said , you know , it does n't matter because right at the beginning he made very strong statements , many years ago .
here 's what esquire magazine said .
this is a quote , absolute quote , look at the war in iraq and the mess that we are in .
so right after the war started .
i would never have handled it that way .
does anybody really believe that iraq is going to be a wonderful democracy where people are going to run down to the voting box and gently put in their ballot and the winner is happily going to step up and to lead the country ?
so it is simply -- i go , come on .
two minutes after we leave there is going to be a revolution .
pretty good .
and the meanest , toughest , smartest , most vicious guy will take over .
well , that 's going to be combinations of isis and iran .
iran 's taking -- they 're taking over , among the richest and largest oil reserves in the world .
we let them do it , we let them do it .
should have never been in the war , but we should have never , ever have got out of the way the way barack obama got us out , along with hillary clinton .
because we opened it up for isis .
so continued .
what was the purpose ?
this is me right at the beginning of the war , in an article .
what was the purpose of this whole thing ?
what was the purpose ?
hundreds and hundreds of young people are being killed .
and what about the people coming back with no arms and with no legs ?
not to mention the other side .
all those iraqi kids who have been blown to pieces .
and it turns out that all the reasons for the war are just blatantly wrong .
all this for nothing , all this for nothing .
this was right at the beginning of the war .
then they see , you know , i see the lies last night -- donald trump was always in favor of the war in iraq .
that 's why i had to do this .
because the media is so dishonest , so terribly dishonest , and you understand it , you understand and you understand .
the media is so terribly dishonest so i had to do this .
i ended with , i would have been tougher on terrorism .
bin laden would have been caught a long time ago , before he was ultimately caught , prior to the downing of the world trade center .
so this was right at the beginning , and those other statements were before the war even started .
and the howard statement was long before .
it was the first time anybody ever asked me about iraq , and i said , i do n't know .
i was very -- but that was superseded because before the war , much closer to the war i gave statements that we should n't go in .
and shortly thereafter , immediately thereafter -- and honestly , a lot of reporters said , hey , right at the beginning he made this statement -- and that statement was a very major story in esquire magazine .
so i just wanted to set the record straight .
there is so much lying going on , and hillary clinton lied last night about worse things including her e - mail , but she also lied about this .
had i been in congress at the time of the invasion , i would have cast a vote in opposition .
for years i have been a critic of this kind of reckless foreign invasions and , look , let 's face it , interventions -- that 's what they are -- that have been a hallmark of trigger happy hillary and her failed career .
she 's been a disaster .
here 's the bottom line .
i was a private citizen .
i had no access to briefings or great intelligence surveys , but she did .
i had no access to anything , i was a private citizen .
frankly , nobody really cared too much about what i said , i was doing business .
i do n't even know why i was asked the question .
i guess because i was asked the question -- someone else .
but i did n't have access to all of the intelligence information that she did and everybody else did .
but in iraq , my judgment was right and hers -- with all of this information and all of this great intelligence information -- was wrong .
along with a lot of other people , in all fairness .
it was a big mistake .
totally destabilized the middle east .
it was a big mistake , death , death to so many people .
hillary clinton is always complaining about what 's wrong .
i just watched her on the tarmac .
she tried to make up for her horrible performance last night .
it was a horrible performance .
so she went on the tarmac and told more lies .
but she 's been there -- remember this -- she 's always talking about things that she 's going to do .
but she 's been there for more than 30 years and she 's never done anything about it , never done anything .
and all you have to do is look at new york state , where she ran for senator .
she said she will bring jobs back to new york state .
it 's a disaster .
no jobs have come back .
jobs have left new york state , upstate new york and the areas that she was talking about .
they are disasters .
all you have to do is look at new york state .
she said she was going to bring tremendous jobs back .
it would be wonderful -- just like she 's saying now .
she would n't know how to bring a job back .
she would n't have a clue .
so it 's all talk , but nothing happens .
and that 's what 's going to happen with our country on jobs .
and nobody is going to bring jobs back like donald trump .
i will be the greatest jobs producing president that god ever created , and i say that with my pastor is in the front row .
my pastor .
believe me .
so we 're on track now to spend -- listen to this -- $ 6 trillion -- $ 6 trillion .
could have rebuilt our country twice .
all together on wars in iraq and afghanistan and the middle east .
meanwhile , massive portions of our country are in a state of total disrepair .
it 's time to rebuild america .
and when i say that , we will also , before we get totally started , we will take out isis .
remember that .
we have no choice , we have no choice .
too many americans living in our inner cities have not been included in the american dream .
we are a nation , and we 're one nation .
when any part of our country hurts , our whole country hurts .
my goal as president will be to ensure that every child in this nation , african american , hispanic american , all americans , will be placed on the ladder to success .
and i define that as great education and a great job .
the ladder rests on a fundamental foundation .
we need safety .
there 's such danger in our inner cities .
there 's such danger in our communities .
in order to help our children succeed , our first duty is to ensure that every kid in america can grow up in a safe community .
you read what 's happening , you see what 's happening .
you ca n't have prosperity without security .
this is the new civil rights agenda of our time , the right to a safe community , a quality education and a wonderful job .
including for those great students that i met just a little while ago .
they 're going to do great , they are really going great .
you 've done such a great job with the education here .
our campaign represents the long awaited chance to break with the bitter failures of the past and to embrace a new and strong american future .
there 's no failed policy more in need of urgent change than our government run education monopoly .
and you know in the back that 's exactly what it is .
they 're protecting a lot of people that have a lot of really high paying jobs , and they 're not doing the jobs like deborah .
that i can tell you .
and deborah , they 're making a lot more money than you , but we 'll have to talk about that later .
the democratic party has trapped millions of african american and hispanic youth in failing government schools that deny them the opportunity to join the ladder of american success .
it 's time to break up that monopoly .
have to do it .
i want every single inner city child in america who is today trapped in a failing school to have the freedom , the civil right , to attend the school of their choice .
their parents will choose the finest school .
they will attend that school .
this includes private schools , traditional public schools , magnet schools and charter schools , which must be included in any definition of school choice .
our government spends more than enough money to easily pay for this initiative , with billions and billions of dollars to be left over .
it 's simply a matter of putting students first , not the education bureaucracy .
and that 's what 's happened .
let 's run through the numbers .
at the state and federal level , the united states spends more than $ 620 billion on k-12 education each year .
that 's an average of about $ 12,296 for every student enrolled in our elementary and secondary public ... 
  ... of costs .
the other roughly $ 560 billion spent on k- 12 education comes from the states .
we spend more per student than almost any other major country in the world , and we 're doing very poorly in terms of a - list .
we spend more by far , and we 're doing very poorly .
so obviously common core does not work .
our largest cities spend some of the largest amounts of money on public schools , it 's their biggest cost .
new york city spends $ 20,226 per pupil , baltimore spends $ 15,287 per student , chicago spends $ 11,976 per student , and los angeles it 's $ 10,602 .
just imagine if each student in these school systems was given a scholarship for this amount of money allowing them and their family to choose the public or private school of their choice .
would n't that be great ?
not only would this empower families but it would create a massive education market that is competitive and produces better outcomes .
and i mean far better outcomes .
these schools would then cater to the needs of the individual student and family , not the needs of the teachers union -- which is a tremendous force and a tremendous barrier to getting done what you want to get done .
and they will be a beneficiary , because they will be also working in these great schools .
that 's what 's going to happen .
they will come in ... 
  ... school choice .
it will be done by re - prioritizing existing federal dollars , we have to re - prioritize .
specifically my plan would use $ 20 billion of existing federal dollars to establish a block grant for the 11 million school age kids living in absolute poverty .
we will give states the option to allow these funds to follow the student through the public or private school they attend .
the parents will be so happy .
number one , we 'll have safe streets .
and number two , they will walk their child to a school that they want to be in .
how about that ?
how is that ?
what a difference .
what a difference .
compare that to today where people say , how do you do it ?
how do you do it ?
distribution of this grant will favor states that have private school choice and charter roles , encouraging them to participate .
they 're going to be encouraged to participate .
this $ 20 billion will instantly extend choice to millions and millions more students .
a state like ohio will benefit greatly from these new funds .
ohio is a leader in school choice .
ohio has five private school choice programs that serve over 30,000 students , and 384 charter schools serving 143,844 students .
great job .
but the $ 20 billion is only a beginning .
as president , i will establish the national model of providing school choice to every american child living in poverty .
that means that we want every disadvantaged child to be able to choose local public , private or charter school , a magnet school , any of these schools that is best for them and for their family , for mom and dad .
each state will develop its own formula , but we want the dollars to follow the student .
so important , the dollars will follow the student , and the student will follow the right school .
they 're going to follow the right school .
nine in ten dollars spent on k-12 education is spent at the state and local level .
to achieve this long - term goal , we will have to make this a shared national mission , to bring hope to every child in every city in this land .
in our country , in our great country , i will use the pulpit of the presidency to campaign for this in all 50 states .
and i will call upon the american people to elect officials at the city , state and federal levels who support school choice .
so important .
my administration will partner with the leadership of inner city -- and i mean any one of them , any one of them , any inner city in america -- chicago , baltimore , detroit , cleveland .
i love cleveland .
we love cleveland .
got a great experience in cleveland .
that 's all i know .
and by the way , your police department did a phenomenal job .
and that 's any city that is willing to run a pilot program to provide school choice to every child in that community .
in baltimore , for instance , that would mean more than $ 15,000 in funds available per student .
ca n't beat that .
i 'm confident that the politicians will not be able to suppress the will of the people anymore .
it 's too much , too strong .
eventually they break .
the politicians , they always break .
they certainly break on trade for our country without making a good deal , right ?
they break on an hourly basis .
if we can put a man on the moon , dig out the panama canal , and win two world ... 
  ... can provide school choice to every disadvantaged child in american .
if the states collectively contribute another $ 110 billion of their own education budgets toward school choice , on top of the $ 20 billion in federal dollars , that could provide $ 12,000 in school choice funds to every single k-12 student who today is living in poverty .
the money will follow the student .
that means the student will be able to attend that public , private , charter , magnet school of their choice and each state will develop its own system that works best for them .
they can develop systems the likes of which you 've never seen , and some states will do better than others .
and then they get those people to come to your state .
then other things will be happening .
it will be so exciting .
it 's not really a question of the money because we 'll be saving money and having a far better education .
as your president , i will be the nation 's biggest cheerleader for school choice .
i understand many stale , old politicians will resist .
there will be a lot of pressure , they 'll get a lot of pressure on that .
but it 's time for our country to start thinking big and correct , once again .
we spend too much time quibbling over the smallest things , when we should spend our time dreaming about the great adventures that lie ahead .
i will also support merit pay for teachers , the great teachers .
so that we reward our best teachers , instead of the failed tenure system that rewards bad teachers and punishes the good ones .
and the bad ones are making the same money and sometimes more , than the good ones .
at the same time , we have to ensure that jobs are waiting for our young kids when they graduate high school and college .
my policy will add millions of new jobs for the future , especially for african american and hispanic communities , produce such great jobs .
my plan to lift restrictions on the production of american energy will not only make home energy bills a lot cheaper -- your electric bills will be a lot less -- but it will add an estimated half a million jobs per year .
by reducing radical regulations and over taxation -- we 're bringing your taxes way down -- we can bring thousands of new companies into our poorest communities .
crucially , my trade reforms will create a manufacturing revival in america .
as you know , all of your companies -- cleveland is a great example -- but your companies are being ripped out of your community and your people are being left jobless .
and your governments being left with taxes .
we have nearly $ 800 billion -- think of it , $ 800 billion annual trade deficit with the world .
we trade with the world .
we have a trade deficit of $ 800 billion .
who is negotiating these deals ?
who 's doing it ?
that 's actually very good .
hillary clinton is absolutely a good answer .
hillary clinton and people like hillary clinton that have n't got a clue , and the clue they do have goes to their donors and the special interests , believe me .
that 's money coming straight out of the states like ohio , and pennsylvania , and michigan and maine and so many others .
i 've seem so many , it 's so sad .
when i campaigned during the primaries , i saw everything , and it was so sad to see communities that have just been left jobless , where the companies have moved to other countries .
mexico in particular , but other countries .
by ending foreign currency manipulation , product dumping and other predatory trading practices , we will be able to open thousands of new plants and factories across america .
in driving over today , i saw so many places , factories , 20 , 30 years ago that were thriving , and they 're just dead , worthless .
a real estate person , you would n't pay anything , worthless .
we 'll put them back into action again .
the future is filled with limitless possibilities for our nation , and exciting opportunities for our wonderful children .
we all have to do and we just have to work -- we all have to work .
but we all have to cut our ties with the failed politics of the past .
you have to cut your ties , have to cut your ties .
these are the people that put us in this situation .
they 're not going to take us out , they 're not going to take us out .
that includes   and hillary clinton created a lot of the problems .
and now she 's saying how she 's going to take us out .
she does n't have a clue , not even a little clue .
we 've had such a failed foreign policy with the people we have now .
a failed education policy , a totally failed economic policy .
and underneath it all a failed political system that rewards politicians for how many donors they have or how many journalists they know , not how many americans they help to live better and more prosperous lives .
that 's how they get rewarded .
they 'll talk to you and talk to you .
they 'll come into cleveland , she 'll be saying what a wonderful job she 's going to do .
she 'll get your vote .
then she 'll say , see you in four years .
she might even say , see you in four years , suckers .
because that 's what it is .
see you in four years suckers .
but the failures of the past are about to end .
that ending begins on a very special day for this country , november 8th .
get out and vote .
we will have one american nation .
we will be one american people who are fighting to give every child in every forgotten stretch of this country the chance to live out their dreams in safety and in peace .
that means a safe neighborhood , a quality education , and a secure , high - paying and exciting job .
we only have bad jobs .
there are n't good jobs any more .
many of our good jobs have left , they 're gone .
this is how we will rebuild our future .
this is how we will make america great again for everyone .
thank you , everybody .
thank you very much .
thank you .
such a crowd , beautiful .
thank you very much .
thank you .
thank you .
please .
thank you for the invitation to speak to you today .
it is wonderful to be in detroit .
been here many times .
we now begin a great national conversation about economic renewal for america .
it is a conversation about how to make america great again for everyone , especially -- and i say especially for those who have at the very least .
the city of detroit is where our city begins .
detroit was once the economic envy of the world .
the people of detroit help to power america to its position of global dominance in the 20th century .
thank you .
thank you very much .
when we were governed by the america first policy , detroit was absolutely booming .
engineers , builders , laborers , shippers and countless others went to work each day , provided for their families and lived out -- totally lived out the american dream .
but for many living in this city , that dream has long ago vanished .
when we abandon the policy of america first , we started rebuilding other countries instead of our own .
the skyscrapers went up in beijing and many other cities around the world , while factories and neighborhoods crumbled right here in detroit .
our roads and bridges fell into disrepair , yet we found the money to resettle millions of refugees at taxpayer expense .
today , detroit has a per capita income of under $ 15,000 , about half of the national average ; 40 percent of the city 's resident live in poverty , over 2.5 times the national average .
the unemployment rate is more than twice the national average .
half of all detroit residents do not work .
detroit tops the list of the most dangerous cities in terms of violent crime .
thank you .
thank you .
thank you .
detroit tops the list of most dangerous cities in terms of violent crime .
these are silent victims whose stories are never told by hillary clinton , but victims whose suffering is no less real or permanent .
in short , the city of detroit is the living , breathing example of my opponent 's failed economic agenda .
every policy that has failed this city and so many others is a policy supported by hillary clinton .
she supports the high taxes and radical regulation that forced jobs out of your community , and the crime policies have made you far , far less safe , and the immigration policies that have strained local budgets and the trade deals like nafta , signed by her husband , that have shipped your jobs to mexico and other countries .
and she supports the education policies that deny your students choice , freedom and opportunity .
she is the candidate of the past ; ours is the campaign of the future .
this is a city controlled by democratic politicians at every level , and unless we change policies , we will not change results , 100 percent .
today , i will outline my economic vision .
in the coming weeks , we will be offering more detail on all of these policies and the ones we have already rolled out ...   thank you , everybody .
this is what happens when you go from 35 people to close to 2,000 people , i guess .
in the coming weeks , we will be offering more detail on all of these policies , and the ones we have already rolled out can be viewed on my campaign website .
our opposition , on the other hand , has long ago run out of ideas .
all hillary clinton has to offer is more of the same -- more taxes , more regulation , more bureaucrats , more restrictions on american energy and more restrictions on american production .
more of that .
if you are a foreign power looking to weaken america , you could not do better than hillary clinton 's economic agenda .
nothing would make a foreign adversaries happier than for our country to tax and regulate our companies and our jobs right out of existence .
the one common feature of every hillary clinton idea is it punishes you for working and doing business in the united states .
every policy she has tilts the playing field for other countries at our expense , and that is why she tries to distract us with tired political rhetoric that seeks to label us , divide us and pull us apart .
my campaign is about reaching out to everyone as americans and returning to a government that puts the american people first .
thank you .
thank you .
here is what an america first economic plan looks like .
first , let 's talk tax reform .
taxes are one of the biggest differences in this race .
hillary clinton , who has spent her career voting for tax increases , plans another massive job killing -- $ 1.3 trillion tax increase , big increase , one of the biggest ever .
her plan would tax many small businesses by almost 50 percent .
recently , at a campaign event , hillary clinton short circulate -- you know this , you 've heard this one -- hillary clinton short circuited again , to use a -- now famous term -- when she accidentally told the truth and said she wanted to raise taxes on the middle class .
i am proposing an across the board income tax reduction , especially for middle income americans .
this will lead to millions of new and really good paying jobs .
the rich will pay their fair share , but no one will pay so much that it destroys jobs or undermines our ability as a nation to compete .
as part of this reform , we will eliminate , the carried interest deduction .
thank you .
as part of this reform , we will eliminate the carried interest deduction , well known deduction and other special interest loop holes that have been so good for wall street investors and for people like me but unfair to american workers .
tax simplification will be a major feature of the plan .
our current tax code is so burdensome and so complex that we waste nine billion hours a year in tax code alliance .
my plan will reduce the current number of brackets from seven to three and dramatically streamline the process .
we will work with house republicans on this plan using the same brackets they have proposed , 12 percent , 25 percent , and 33 percent .
for many american workers , their tax rate will be zero .
well , we will develop our own set of assumptions and policies agreeing in some areas but , not in all or in others .
we will be focused on the same shared goals and guided by the same shared principles , jobs , growth , and opportunity .
these reforms will look for the biggest tax revolution since the reagan tax reform , which unleashed years of continued economic growth and job creation .
we will make america grow again .
the days ahead , we will provide more details on this plan and how it will help you , and most importantly your family .
it will present a night and day contrast to the job killing , tax raising , poverty inducing obama - clinton agenda .
so important , the state of new york has already lived through hillary clinton 's failed leadership , the washington post just published today , a devastating article on hillary clinton 's broken promises .
she pledged 200,000 jobs for up - state new york when she was a senator , but what happened -- what happened ?
the washington post writes and i quote " up - state jobs growth stagnated overall during her tenure with manufacturing jobs plunging to record - setting levels , " plunging nearly 25 percent .
the former first lady was totally unable to pass big - ticket legislation .
many promised jobs .
they were all promised .
i remembered so well .
vote for jobs , she 'll bring back your jobs .
many promised jobs never materialized and others migrated to other states .
she turned her first presidential run , which also was a disaster ...   thank you .
thank you .
data shows that upstate actually lost jobs , a lot of them , during clinton 's first term .
in other words , she was all talk , no action , upstate new york , what a disaster .
it 's a disaster what 's happened to upstate new york .
and nafta , which her husband signed , is a very , very big reason .
compare that to my record .
in a recent new york post article , by steve cuozzo , " how donald trump helped save new york city . "
the paper writes that i , and this is a direct quote , in other words , it 's not from me .
thank you .
thank you .
all very well planned out .
every .
and this is a direct quote , that basically , " donald trump waded into a landscape of empty 5th avenue storefronts .
the dust ball   mugging ground that was central park -- so dangerous -- and a wall street area seemingly on its last legs as companies moved out .
then , almost by sheer force of will , he rode to the rescue , expressing rare faith in the future .
he was instrumental in kickstarting the regeneration of neighborhoods and landmarks , almost given up on for dead . "
true , i have to say .
i did n't say it , they said it .
this is what i want to do .
you all remember , new york city was a disaster .
we made it great .
we made it great .
this is what i want to do .
thank you .
this is what i want to do for our country .
i want to jumpstart america , and it can be done , and it wo n't even be that hard .
now , let 's look at what the obama - clinton policies have done nationally .
their policies produced 1.2 percent growth , the weakest so - called recovery since the great depression   all over .
it 's a disaster .
and a doubling of the national debt during the obama years .
there are now 94.3 million americans outside of the labor force .
it was 80.5 million when president obama took office , an increase of 14 million people .
the obama - clinton agenda taxed , spent and regulated has created a silent nation of jobless americans .
home ownership is at its lowest rate in 51 years .
thank you very much .
thank you .
i will say the bernie sanders people had far more energy and spirit , i will say .
nearly 12 million people have been added to the food stamp and these people are growing and growing so rapidly since president obama took office .
another nearly 7 million people , great americans , are right now living in poverty , poverty ok ?
poverty .
we have the lowest labor force participation rates in four decades .
58 percent of the african - american youth are either outside of the labor force or not employed .
one in five american households do not have a single member in the labor force , not a single member of a household .
these are the real unemployment numbers .
the 5 percent figure is one of the biggest hoaxes in american modern politics .
meanwhile american households are earning more than $ 4,000 ; think of that , $ 4,000 less today than they were 16 years ago .
the average worker today pays 31.5 percent of their wages to income and payroll taxes .
on top of that state and local taxes consume another 10 percent , very grim picture .
the united states also has the highest business tax rate among the major industrial industrialized nations of the world at 35 percent .
it 's almost 40 percent , it 's almost 40 percent when you add in taxes at the state level and in many cases and many states it 's much higher than that .
in other words , we punish companies for making products in america but let them ship products into the united states tax - free if they move overseas .
this , ladies and gentlemen , is backwards .
this is backwards .
all of our policies should be geared toward keeping jobs and wealth inside of the united states .
under my plan no american company will pay more than 15 percent of their business income in taxes .
in other words we 're reducing your taxes from 35 percent to 15 percent .
thank you , thank you .
small businesses will benefit the most from this plan .
hillary clinton 's plan will require small business to pay as much as three times more in taxes than what i 'm proposing .
and her onerous regulations will put them totally out of business and you wo n't be able to start , you can not ever start a small business under the tremendous regulatory burden that you have today in our country .
i 'm going to end it .
i am going to cut regulations massively , massively .
our lower business tax will also end job killing corporate inversions , and cause trillions in new dollars in wealth to come pouring into our country .
and by the way , into cities like right here in detroit , to help unleash this new job creation we will allow businesses to immediately expense new business investments .
no one will gain more from these proposals than low and middle income americans .
my plan will also reduce the cost of child care by allowing parents to fully deduct the average cost of child care spending from their taxes .
we are also going to bring back trillions of dollars from american businesses that are now parked overseas , they ca n't bring their money back into our country .
our plan will bring that cash home , applying only a 10 percent tax .
this money will be reinvested in states like michigan -- states like michigan , which are having serious problems .
finally , no family will have to pay the death tax .
american workers have paid taxes their whole lives and they should not be taxed again at death , it 's just plain wrong and most people agree with that .
we will repeal it . '
next comes regulatory reform .
as with taxes i will have one overriding goal when it comes to regulation , i want jobs and i want wealth to stay in america .
motor vehicle manufacturing is one of the most heavily regulated industries in the country and even in the world .
the us economy today is 25 percent smaller than it would have been without the surge of regulations since 1980 .
it is estimated that current overregulation is costing our economy as much as $ 2 trillion a year .
that 's money taken straight out cities like detroit -- so many of our cities are suffering so gravely right out of detroit and others .
the federal register is now over 80,000 pages long .
as the wall street journal noted , president obama has issued close to 400 new major regulations since taking office .
each with a cost to the american economy of $ 100 million or more .
in 2015 alone , the obama administration unilaterally issued more than 2,000 new regulations ; each a hidden tax on american consumers .
and a massive lead weight on the american economy .
it is time to remove the anchor dragging us down , and that 's what it 's doing ; it 's dragging us down .
upon taking office , i will issue a temporary moratorium on new agency regulations .
my running mate , mike pence -- and by the way , a great guy -- signed a similar order when it came and became and when he worked so hard in indiana as its governor .
this will give our american companies the certainty they need to reinvest in our community ; get cash off of the sidelines , start hiring new jobs , and expanding their businesses ; so important .
that 's what it 's about .
i will also immediately cancel all illegal and overreaching executive orders .
next , i will ask each and every federal agency to prepare a list of all of the regulations they impose on americans which are not necessary , do not improve public safety , and which needlessly kill many , many jobs .
those regulations will be eliminated quickly .
we are in a competition with the world , and i want america to win .
we do n't win anymore , but when i am president , we will start winning again .
big league .
one of the most important reforms of all is trade reform .
as bernie sanders has said , hillary clinton has bad judgment .
he said it many times .
we 've seen this bad judgment overseas in libya , iraq and syria .
we 've seen it in iran , we 've seen it from president obama when he gives $ 150 billion to iran - the number one terrorist state , and even gives them $ 400 million in money laundered cash as a ransom payment .
but we 've also seen the terrible obama - clinton judgment , right here for everybody to see in detroit .
hillary clinton has supported the trade deals , stripping this city and this country of its jobs and it 's wealth .
she supported bill clinton 's nafta .
she supported china 's entrance into the world trade organization .
she supported job killing trade deals , and that was a really bad one , with south korea and she supports the trans - pacific partnership .
not now , but very soon , if she wins and we ca n't let her win , because that will be a disaster for detroit and everybody else .
let 's talk about south korea for a moment , because it 's perfectly and it just perfectly illustrates the broken promises that have hurt so many american workers .
president obama and the usual so - called experts who have been wrong about every trade deal for decades predicted that the trade deal with south korea would increase our exports to south korea by more than $ 10 billion , resulting in some 70,000 jobs .
like hillary clinton 's broken promises to new york , these pledges all turned out to be false .
instead of creating 70,000 jobs , it has killed nearly 100,000 jobs according to the economic policy institute .
our exports to south korea have n't increased at all , but their imports to us have surged more than $ 15 billion , more than doubling our trade deficit with that country .
what else is new ?
it 's happening with everyone .
the next betrayal will be the trans - pacific partnership .
hillary clinton 's closest friend , terry mcauliffe , confirmed what i 've been saying , and this is from the beginning .
if sent to the oval office , hillary clinton will enact the tpp as sure as you 're sitting there .
her donors will make sure a vote for hillary clinton is a vote for the tpp , and it 's also a vote for nafta .
our annual trade deficit in goods with mexico has risen from close to zero , think of that , close to zero in 1993 to almost $ 60 billion today .
our total trade deficit in goods hit nearly $ 800 billion last year .
total trade deficit almost $ 800 billion .
this is a strike at the heart of michigan and our nation as a whole .
according to the bureau of labor statistics , before nafta went into effect there were 285,000 auto workers in michigan .
today , that number is only 160,000 auto workers .
detroit is still waiting for hillary clinton 's apology .
she has been a disaster , obama has been a disaster .
i expect detroit will get that apology right around the same time hillary clinton turns over the 33,000 e- mails she deleted .
hillary clinton 's trans - pacific partnership will be an even bigger disaster for the auto industry , believe me .
even bigger and even worse than nafta .
in fact , ford motor company has announced its opposition to the deal .
according to the economic policy institute , the u.s. trade deficit -- with the proposed tpp member -- all of the member countries has cost over 1 million manufacturing jobs in the year 2015 , 1 million jobs .
by far , the biggest losses occur in motor vehicles and parts which lost nearly 740,000 manufacturing jobs .
what are we doing ?
michigan ranks first for jobs lost as a share of state workforce due to the trade deficit with tpp members .
just imagine how many more auto mobile jobs will be lost if the tpp is actually approved , it will be catastrophic .
that 's why i have announced we will withdraw from the deal before that can ever , ever , ever happen .
hillary clinton will never withdraw from tpp .
she is bought , controlled , and paid for by her donors and special interests , 100 percent .
because my only interest is the american people , i have previously laid out a detailed seven - point plan for trade reform available on my website .
it includes strong protections against currency manipulation , big problem .
tariffs against any countries that cheat by unfairly subsidizing their goods and it includes a total renegotiation of nafta which is a disaster for our country , a total renegotiation .
and if we do n't get a better deal , we will walk away .
at the center of my plan is trade enforcement with china .
this alone could return millions of jobs into our country .
china is responsible for nearly half of our entire trade deficit .
they break the rules in every way imaginable , including militarily .
china engages in a legal export , sub cities , prohibited currency manipulation and rampant theft of intellectual property .
it 's rampant , it 's out of control .
they also have no real environmental or labor protections , further undercutting american workers .
totally undercutting our workers .
just enforcing intellectual property rules alone could save millions and millions of american jobs .
according to the u.s. international trade commission , improved protection of america 's intellectual property in china would produce more than 2 million more jobs right here , right now in the united states .
add that to the same jobs from cracking down on currency cheating and product dumping .
and we will bring trillions of dollars in new wealth and wages back to our country , the united states of america .
thank you .
so simple .
so simple .
trade has big benefits -- thank you .
trade has big benefits , and i am in favor , totally in favor of trade .
but i want trade deals for our country that create more jobs and higher wages for american workers .
isolation is not an option .
thank you .
thank you .
isolation is not an option .
only great and well- crafted trade deals where we as a country for once benefit , instead of being taken advantage -- instead of being taken advantage of , we are going to benefit , and our workers are going to benefit , or we 're not going to make those deals .
also critical to our economic renewal will be energy reform .
the obama - clinton administration has blocked and destroyed millions of jobs through their anti - energy regulations , while raising the price of electricity for both families and businesses .
as a result of recent obama epa actions , coal - fired plants across michigan have either shut down entirely or undergone expensive conversions , making them non - competitive in many cases .
the obama- clinton war on coal has cost michigan over 50,000 jobs .
hillary clinton says her plan will put a lot of coal companies and coal miners out of business .
we will put our coal miners and our steelworkers back to work , where they want to be .
clinton not only embraces president obama 's job killing energy restrictions , but wants to expand them , including going after oil and natural gas production that employs some 10 million americans .
according to the heritage foundation , by 2030 -- think of that , 2030 -- the obama - clinton energy restrictions will eliminate another half a million manufacturing jobs , reduce economic output by $ 2.5 trillion and reduce incomes by $ 7,000 per person .
a trump administration will end this war on the american worker and unleash an energy revolution that will bring fast new wealth to our country .
according to the institute for energy research , lifting the restrictions on all sources of american energy will do the following : increase gdp by more than $ 100 billion annually , add over 500,000 new jobs annually and increase annual wages by more than $ 30 billion over the next seven years .
additionally , it will increase federal , state and local tax revenue by almost $ 6 trillion over four decades , increase total economic activity by more than $ 20 trillion over the next 40 years .
the reforms i have outlined today are only the beginning .
when we reform our tax , trade , energy and regulatory policies , we will open a new chapter in american prosperity , which is so desperately needed .
we need a new chapter .
we can use this new wealth to rebuild our military -- which is desperately needed -- and our infrastructure .
as part of this new future , we will also be rolling out proposals to increase choice and reduce costs in child care , offering much - needed relief to american families .
they are suffering .
they are suffering we are going to get them this much needed relief .
i will unveil ...   thank you .
i will unveil my plan on this in the coming weeks that i have been working on with my daughter , ivanka , who is here .
stand up .
she feels so strongly about this and an incredible team of experts .
likewise , our education reforms will help parents send their kids to a school of their choice .
it will be so good for detroit .
we will also give our police and law enforcement the funds and support they need to restore law and order to this country .
thank you .
thank you .
without -- without security , there can be no prosperity .
without security , there can be no prosperity .
we must have law and order .
we must have law and order .
by the way , our police in this country are really unrecognized for the incredible job that they do .
thank you .
in the coming days , we will be rolling out plans on all of these items .
one of my first acts as president will be to repeal and replace disastrous obamacare , saving another 200 million american jobs .
we will also rebuild our military and get our allies to pay their fair share for the protection we provide to them , saving us countless more billions of dollars to invest in our own country .
we also have a plan on our website for complete reform of the veterans administration .
this is something so desperately needed , to make sure our vets are fully supported and get the care they deserve , which they have not been getting -- not even close .
detroit , the motor city , will come roaring back .
roaring back .
we will offer a new future , not the same old failed policies of the past .
our party has chosen to make new history by selecting a nominee from the outside , and that is outside of the very , very already proven rigged system .
the other party has reached backwards into the past to choose a nominee from yesterday , who offers only the rhetoric of yesterday and the policies of yesterday .
just take a look at what happened to new york state manufacturing , and take a look at her promises before this happened .
a disaster .
there will be no change under hillary clinton , only four more years of weakness and president obama .
but we are going to look boldly into the future .
we will build the next generation of roads , bridges , railways , tunnels , seaports and airports .
that , believe me folks , is what our country deserves .
american cars , american cars will travel the roads .
american planes will connect our cities .
and american ships will patrol the seas .
american steel , steel -- american steel -- we will send new skyscrapers soaring all over our country .
we will put new american metal into the spine of this nation .
it will be american hands that rebuild this country .
and it will be american energy , mined from american sources that powers this country .
it will be american workers who are hired to do the job , american workers .
americanism , not globalism , will be our new credo .
our country will reach amazing new heights maybe heights never attained before .
all we have to do is stop relying on the tired voices of the past .
we can fix a rigged system by relying on the people , and just remember this , so important .
we are reliant on people that rigged this system in the past .
we ca n't fix it .
and we 're going to rely on those people again .
we ca n't solve that problem .
so we ca n't solve our problems if we 're going to just go back and rely on these politicians .
because that 's what we 've been doing .
only by changing to new leadership and new solutions will we get new and great results .
we need , thank you ; we need to stop believing in politicians and start believing in our great country .
before everything great that has happened , the doubters have always said , it could n't be done .
they say it right now .
it could n't be done .
they actually said it when i ran for political office .
not going to happen , he 's never done it before .
it happened .
american is ready to prove the doubters wrong .
they want you to think small .
i am asking you to think big .
we are ready to dream great things for our country once again .
we are ready to show the world that america is back .
bigger and better and stronger than ever before .
thank you very much , god bless you , thank you .
thank you very much .
thank you .
thank you very much .
thank you , everybody .
thank you .
thank you very much .
senator , governor and rudy , thank you very much .
wow , what a group !
what a group !
very excited , very , very excited to be with you tonight .
thank you very much .
the people of jackson and the state of mississippi have such incredible energy , that very powerful word " energy , " unbelievable , incredible energy and spirit , folks .
thank you very much .
and thank you for all the support you 've given me right from the beginning .
i will not forget it , mississippi .
we love mississippi right from the beginning , right from the beginning .
this is the spirit we need to rebuild our country a hundred percent .
and this is our chance to break free from the bitter failures of the past and to create a new american future .
to everyone watching across our nation right now , to everyone who has been let down by our terrible , terrible politicians , i am asking for your vote on november 8th .
this is your chance to remove the special interests from their throne of power and to once again have a government of , by and for the people .
no one will be left behind anymore .
i 'd like to take this moment to send our thoughts and prayers to everyone at the american university in kabul , afghanistan .
they are going through a lot .
we must defeat radical islamic terrorism !
anyone who will not name our enemy is not fit to lead our country .
eight years of obama / clinton policies have sacrificed our safety and undermined our freedom and independence .
our jobs have moved to other countries .
islamic terrorism has spread within our shores .
and an open border has crushed low - income workers and threatened , and i mean totally threatened , our security .
the issues we face here in america are similar to the issues faced in britain during their referendum on membership in the european union .
this is the movement known as brexit .
on june 23rd , the people of britain voted to declare their independence , which is what we 're looking to do also , folks ...   ... from their international government which has n't worked .
they voted to break away from rule by large corporations and media executives who believe in a world without borders .
they voted to reclaim control over immigration , over their economy , over their government .
working people and the great people of the u.k. took control of their destiny .
the people profiting from the rigged system , and it is rigged , we 're finding it out every single day , the multinational banks , the media celebrities , the big donors tried to scare the british people out of voting for change .
the same thing is happening right here in the united states .
it 's happening .
all the people benefiting from our rigged system do n't want things to change .
they want you to believe things ca n't be changed .
and they can so easily , so easily and so smartly .
and we all know things have to change .
we have no choice .
and they have to change right now .
before the vote , i said that britain would leave the eu , sometimes referred to as european union , and i said it and i took a lot of heat when i said it .
people said , what does he know , what does he know ?
and guess what ?
i was very supportive of their right to do it and to take control of their own future , like exactly what we 're going to be voting for on november 8th .
hillary clinton , who has been on the wrong side of history in every major decision , she 's only made bad decisions , she 's got bad judgment , she does n't know what she 's doing , folks .
she got this one wrong , too .
she got this one wrong , too , folks .
she got this one wrong , too .
she gets them all wrong .
she gets them all wrong , does n't she ?
she really got the e - mails wrong , that i can tell you .
and now hillary wants to surrender america to globalism , just what we do n't want .
she wants a country without borders .
she wants trade deals written for the benefit of foreign corporations .
she wants a government that ignores the will of the people .
she wants to sell out american security to the clinton foundation for a big , fat pile of cash .
it 's hard to tell where the clinton foundation ends and where the state department begins .
according to the associated press , more than half the meetings she took as secretary of state with people outside government were with foundation donors .
hillary clinton does not believe in america first .
we believe in america first .
hillary believes in donors first and special interests and lobbyists .
she will never straighten out our country .
she does n't have the strength , the stamina or the ability to straighten out our country .
we 'll have four more years of obama and that 's just what we do n't want .
she would rather give a job to a refugee from overseas than an unemployed american veteran or to an unemployed african american or hispanic .
the job of a public official is to serve and protect the citizens of the united states ...   ... not illegal immigrants , not foreign nationals seeking entry , but the people living here lawfully today , including millions of african - american and hispanic citizens , millions , millions being treated very , very unfairly , i can tell you that .
my focus will always be on the well - being of more than 300 million american citizens who call this country home and who love their country .
i will fight for their security .
i will fight for their jobs .
we will not let jobs be taken out of our country , be ripped out of our country and moved to mexico and many other countries .
we will not let it happen anymore .
we 'll be fighting for their jobs and we 'll be fighting for your families , that i can tell you .
it ends .
what 's been going on ends on november 8th .
we will have one american nation , not divided , we will be together .
hillary clinton has betrayed her duty to the people .
november 8th is our chance to re - declare american independence .
this is a great honor for me .
i am going right now to invite onto the stage the man behind brexit and a man who led brilliantly the united kingdom independence party in this fight and won despite all odds , despite horrible name - calling , despite so many obstacles .
ladies and gentlemen , mr. nigel farage .
wow !
thank you , nigel .
what a job !
what a job he did .
what a job he did against all odds .
thank you , nigel .
that was some job that he did against all odds .
everybody said it could n't be done .
and by the way , it 's looking like a very wise decision right now by the voters , so i really congratulate nigel and i thank you for being here .
thank you .
and if i may , we had some tremendous polls come out today .
i wo n't bring it up , i refuse to mention it , but they were very good .
we 're leading in a lot of locations .
thank you .
it 's time for america to recapture , like you just heard , to recapture our destiny .
our government leaders and our media have totally lost touch with the people .
they have , they have totally lost touch .
you need no better evidence of that then the fact that the media ignores the plight of americans who have lost their children to illegal immigrants , but spends day after day pushing for amnesty for those here in total violation of the law .
we ca n't allow that .
why do our leaders spend so much time talking about how to help people here illegally , they 're here illegally , and they spend and they work and they try so hard to help them , but they do n't try helping american citizens , some of whom have been devastated by what 's happened to their children and their families ?
devastated .
my priorities will never change : jobs , wages and security for americans .
and the immigration policy i support as president must pass these three tests .
first , it must improve jobs and wages for united states citizens .
we have people in this room who were making more money in real wages 18 years ago , were not working as hard as they 're working now and they 've gotten older , not supposed to be that way , and in many cases and largely because of the disaster known as " obamacare " they have to hold two jobs , not one , but two jobs and , in some cases , three jobs .
not going to happen , folks , not going to happen .
second , it must improve the safety and security for united states citizens .
third , it must improve the quality of life for u.s. citizens .
the quality of life , our quality of life is going down .
our level of security , you look back years , you 're more insecure now in terms of security than you were 10 , 15 and 20 years ago .
hillary clinton 's radical immigration plan fails these tests and it fails them very , very badly .
her push for open borders will lower the wages and kill the jobs of lawful american residents .
her support for catch - and - release will put innocent american lives at risk and already has , just like president obama released the illegal immigrant at the border who then killed magnificent , magnificent sarah root .
yesterday i met with her mom , michelle .
hillary clinton only talks about the separation of families who choose to come here illegally .
i want to focus on the american families who have been permanently separated from their children because of the sanctuary cities and open borders that hillary clinton so strongly supports .
where is the sanctuary for american children ?
where is that sanctuary ?
the dreamers we never talk about are the young americans .
why are n't young americans dreamers also ?
i want my dreamers to be young americans .
hillary clinton also wants to push to bring in 620,000 refugees in her first term ...   ... a large number of whom come from large countries where women and gays are horribly brutalized , which will weaken our tolerant way of life .
i only want to bring people to our country who share our values and love our people and are capable of loving america .
importantly , i will also create millions and millions of jobs for our people .
we are going to cut taxes , reduce regulations , fix our trade deals , unleash american energy and repeal and replace the horror show known as " obamacare . "
we are going to create jobs , jobs , jobs !
i will be the greatest jobs president that god ever created , believe me .
so we 're going to have millions and millions of jobs , jobs like you have never seen in this country before , because our jobs are being stolen from us , our companies are being stolen from us , our manufacturing is down by 40 percent and 50 percent and numbers that nobody even believes .
those days will be over if donald trump is elected president of the united states , believe me .
rising incomes , higher wages , thousands of new companies all across this nation , they 'll come in and they 'll form .
we are going to renegotiate the worst trade deal ever made , not only in this country , but anywhere in the world , known as nafta and signed by bill clinton .
we 're going to stand up to china on trade .
we 're going to keep out of what will be a disastrous trade deal , trans - pacific partnership , tpp .
it will not happen with me .
it will absolutely happen with crooked hillary , believe me .
this state has lost more than 40 percent of its manufacturing jobs since bill clinton signed nafta , and it 's lost one in four manufacturing jobs since he put china into the world trade organization , both deals supported by hillary clinton .
horrible deals , destructive deals , what those deals have done to our jobs and to our country .
we are going to bring back jobs to mississippi ...   ... and in north carolina , which has treated me so well , and ohio and to michigan where our auto plants are leaving and leaving and leaving and going to mexico and other places , and to pennsylvania , where i went to school , and to maryland and all across this land .
we 're going to bring our jobs back and we 're not going to let our jobs be taken away .
thank you .
thank you .
and i 'm going to make it my personal mission to bring opportunity , safety and prosperity to our very , very troubled inner cities .
the democratic party has failed and betrayed the african - american community .
democratic crime policies , education policies and economic policies have produced only more crime , more broken homes and more poverty than we 've ever had in those communities before .
nearly four in 10 african - american children live in poverty .
fifty - eight percent of african - american youth are not working .
more than 2,700 people have been shot in chicago since the beginning of this year alone .
violent crime has risen 17 percent , and in america 's 50 largest cities it 's only going one way , folks , and that 's up .
homicides are up nearly 50 percent in washington , d.c. and more than 60 percent from last year in baltimore .
the democratic party has taken the votes of african americans totally for granted , and they 've done nothing in return .
they 've just assumed they 'll get your support and they 've done nothing , absolutely nothing to deserve it .
it 's time to give the democrats some competition for african- american votes and for hispanic votes .
it 's time to rebuild the inner cities of america and do it properly .
it 's time to reject the failed leadership of a rigged political system .
and i was the first to use that term , it 's a rigged , disgusting system .
to those hurting and suffering and left behind , i say , what do you have to lose by trying something new ?
what do you have to lose by voting for donald trump for president ?
what do you have to lose ?
i will fix the problem .
i will fix the problem .
if you keep voting for the same people , you will keep getting the same horrible results .
but i also want to talk about what you have to gain , right ?
right ?
what do you have to gain ?
we will create school choice and allow charter schools to absolutely thrive .
what else will we gain ?
we will empower young americans to pursue their dreams of opening a small business and make it easier for them to get the credit that they need .
we will renegotiate our horrible trade deals to bring back jobs and opportunity .
and the african - american community and the hispanic community will be our biggest beneficiary of that .
we will lower taxes and unleash job creation and we will tap into trillions of dollars in new energy wealth that we never even knew we had before .
we will protect your jobs from illegal immigration and broken visa programs .
and we will rebuild the roads , the bridges , the infrastructure , the tunnels , the airports in your communities and we will rebuild it with our companies , with our steel and with our labor .
hillary clinton is a bigot who sees people of color ...   ... only as votes , not as human beings worthy of a better future .
she 's going to do nothing for african americans .
she 's going to do nothing for the hispanics .
she 's only going to take care of herself , her husband , her consultants , her donors .
these are the people she cares about .
she does n't care what her policies have done to your communities .
she does n't care .
remember this .
you 've had her policies , democrats running some of the inner cities for 50 , 70 , 80 , even over a hundred years .
and look what you have right now , poverty , no education , crime , you ca n't walk down the street with your child .
we 're going to fix it , we 're going to fix it .
hillary clinton has no remorse .
i will fight to create a better future for every american .
the hedge fund managers and wall street donors are throwing money at hillary clinton to try and stop our change agenda .
of course , if they start looking at the polls they may stop doing that .
they 're going to have to start studying those polls .
that 's why you need to come out and you have to vote , you have to vote .
that is why you must make your voice heard on november 8th , have to do it .
another crucial issue in this race is national security .
hillary clinton may go down as the worst secretary of state that has ever served in that office .
let 's look back at the middle east at the very beginning of 2009 before the obama / clinton administration , that i call a catastrophe , took over .
libya was stable .
syria was under control .
iraq was experiencing a reduction in violence .
the group that would become what we now call isis was close to being extinguished , would never have happened .
iran was being choked off by economic sanctions .
fast forward to today .
after spending $ 4 trillion , maybe $ 5 trillion , nobody even knows how much money has been sucked out of our country , what have the decisions of obama / clinton produced ?
libya is in ruins .
our ambassador and three other brave americans are dead .
and isis has gained a new base of operations , they 're all over the world .
syria is in the midst of a totally disastrous civil war .
isis controls large portions of the territory .
a refugee crisis now threatens europe and is threatening the united states because hillary is allowing these people to pour into our country .
and we do n't know who they are , where they come from .
we know nothing .
iraq is in chaos and isis is on the loose .
isis has spread across the middle east and into the west .
at the same time , isis is trying to infiltrate refugee flows into europe and definitely , folks , definitely , i 've been very good at predicting , definitely into the united states .
iran has become the world 's largest state sponsor of terrorism , is now flush with up to $ 150 billion in cash released by the united states , plus another $ 400 million in cash , cash , cash ransom ...   ... that president obama said had nothing to do with ransom , had nothing to do with the hostages , and his own people said he was wrong .
he lied .
he lied .
just like he said obamacare , " keep your plan , you 'll keep your doctor , " 28 times , " keep your plan , keep your doctor . "
and because of that lie , democrats that would have never passed it passed it and now they regret that they passed it because it is a total disaster .
worst of all , the nuclear deal puts iran , the number - one state sponsor of radical islamic terrorism , on a path to nuclear weapons .
in short , the obama / clinton foreign policy has unleashed isis , destabilized the middle east and put the nation of iran , which chants , constantly chants " death to america " in a dominant position of regional power and in fact aspiring to be a dominant world power .
and we put them there over the last three years !
this is the legacy of barack obama and hillary clinton : death , destruction , terrorism and weakness .
but hillary clinton 's legacy does not have to be america 's legacy .
we 're going to end the era of nation - building , a disastrous concept , a disastrous era , and create new foreign policy joined by our partners in the middle east that is focused completely on destroying isis .
we have no choice destroying isis .
we will extend a hand of friendship to any nation that will work with us in good faith on this vital mission .
i have a message for the terrorists trying to kill our people , our citizens , trying to hurt the world , but trying to hurt the united states : we will find you , we will destroy you and we will win !
thank you .
thank you .
this is not only a military fight , but it will also require cyber warfare and financial warfare .
it 's also an ideological fight .
we will confront directly the hateful , it 's just so hateful , ideology of radical islam and promote american values and american culture and america 's system of government .
only by standing up for and supporting , we have to stand up for and support , our values can we become a united country once again ...   ... a country of great jobs and wealth , a country of security and freedom , a country of strength and unity .
the future is limitless .
all we have to do is believe in america once again .
we have to believe it can happen .
it can happen .
we will put back our faith in america 's special destiny .
we will lift the burdens on small business which is being driven into extinction by what 's happening in our government .
we 'll create a level playing field for american workers .
we 'll never ever let what 's happened to them happen to them again .
we 'll establish justice and opportunity and safety in every community in the land .
i am asking for the vote of every citizen in this country , african american , hispanic , all americans , all americans who want a better , brighter and stronger future for yourselves and for our country .
i am the change candidate .
this is our moment to show the whole world that america is back , bigger and better and stronger than ever before .
i am asking for your vote so i can be your champion in the white house .
i will be your champion and i will work hard to be your champion .
and i wo n't be playing golf instead of going to see the people in louisiana who have been devastated by floods .
i 'm going to be the champion to every parent who dreams for their children .
and to every child who dreams for their future , i say these words to you tonight : i am with you , i will fight for you , and we will win for you , we will win .
together we will make america strong again , we will make america safe again , we will make america great again .
thank you and god bless you .
thank you , mississippi .
we love mississippi .
god bless you .
thank you .
we want to achieve a stable , peaceful world with less conflict and more common ground .
i am proposing a new foreign policy focused on advancing america 's core national interests -- so important -- promoting regional stability and producing and easing the tensions within our very troubled world .
this will require rethinking the failed policies of the past .
we can make new friends , rebuild old alliances and bring new allies into the fold .
and we can do that .
i 'm proud to have the support of war - fighting generals , active duty military and top experts who know both how to win and how to avoid endless wars that we 're caught up in , like the one we have right now that just never ever ends , our longest war .
just yesterday , 88 top generals and admirals endorsed my campaign .
and these people are fantastic .
in a trump administration , our actions in the middle east will be tempered by realism .
the current strategy of toppling regimes with no plan for what to do in the day after only produces power vacuums that are filled simply by terrorists .
gradual reform , not sudden and radical change , should be our guiding objective in that region .
we should work with any country that shares our goal of destroying isis and defeat radical islamic terrorism .
and we 're going to form new friendships and partnerships based on this mission and this mission alone .
we now have an administration and a former secretary of state who refuse to say radical islamic terrorism .
and unless you 're going to say the words , you 're never going to solve the problem .
it 's very simple .
immediately after taking office , i will ask my generals to present to me a plan , within 30 days , to defeat and destroy isis .
this will require military warfare , but also cyber warfare , financial warfare and ideological warfare , as i laid out in my speech on defeating radical islamic terrorism several weeks ago .
instead of an apology tour , which you saw president obama give over and over again , i will proudly promote our system of government and our way of life as the best in the world , just like we did in our campaign against communism during the cold war .
we will show the whole world how proud we are to be americans .
at the same time , immigration security is a vital part of our national security .
we only want to admit people to our country who will support our values and love our people .
they have to love our people .
these are , in fact , the pillars of a sound national security strategy .
unlike my opponent , my foreign policy will emphasize diplomacy , not destruction .
hillary clinton 's legacy in iraq , libya , syria has produced only turmoil and suffering and death .
her destructive policies have displaced millions of people .
then she has invited these refugees into the west with no plan to screen them , including veteran health care costs -- and this was just announced and read over the last number of weeks -- the price of the wars in iraq and afghanistan will total approximately $ 6 trillion .
we could have rebuilt our country over and over and over again .
yet after all this money was spent and lives lost , clinton 's policies as secretary of state have left the middle east in more disarray than ever before .
not even close .
had we done nothing , we would have been in a far better position .
meanwhile , china has grown more aggressive and north korea more dangerous and belligerent than ever .
russia has defied this administration at every single turn .
putin has no respect for president obama and has absolutely no respect for hillary clinton .
sometimes it seemed like there was n't a country in the middle east that hillary clinton did n't want to invade , intervene in or topple .
she 's trigger happy and very unstable .
whether we like it or not , that 's what 's going on .
she 's also reckless , so reckless , in fact , that she put her emails on an illegal server that our enemies could easily hack , and probably have .
then clinton 's team used a technology called bleachbit , which is basically acid .
and this is going to acid wash her emails .
who would do this ?
and nobody does it because of the expense .
who would do this ?
they even took a hammer to some of her 13 phones to cover up her tracks in obstruction of justice .
these email records were destroyed after she received a subpoena -- remember that word -- after -- after she received a subpoena from congress to turn them over .
if you do that in private enterprise , it 's a violation of the law .
she did this after receiving a subpoena from the united states congress .
in the fbi report , she claimed she could n't recall important information on 39 separate and different occasions .
she ca n't even remember whether she has trained in the use of classified information .
and she said she did n't know the letter " c " means confidential or at least classified .
if she ca n't remember such crucial events and information , honestly , she 's totally unfit to be our commander - in- chief , totally unfit .
but i have a feeling she did remember and she does know and that also makes her unfit .
her conduct is simply disqualifying .
she talks about her experience but hillary clinton 's only foreign policy experience ended up in absolute failure .
everywhere she got involved , things got worse .
let 's look back at the middle east at the very beginning of 2009 , before hillary clinton was sworn in .
libya was stable .
syria was under control .
egypt was ruled by a secular president and an ally of the united states .
iraq was experiencing a reduction in violence .
the group that would become what is now called isis was close to being extinguished .
it would have never happened .
it would have never happened .
iran was being choked off by economic sanctions .
fast forward to today .
what have we gotten from the horrible , horrible made by barack obama and secretary clinton ?
libya is in ruins .
our ambassador and three other brave americans are dead .
and isis has gained a new base of operations and taking their very valuable oil .
syria is in the midst of a disastrous civil war .
isis controls large portions of territory .
a refugee crisis now threatens europe and the united states .
and hundreds of thousands of people are dead .
in egypt , terrorists have gained a foothold in the sinai desert , near the suez canal , one of the most essential what worries anywhere in the world .
iraq is in chaos and isis is on the loose .
and iran , by the way , will be taking over iraq and their vast oil reserves .
isis has spread across the middle east and into the west .
iran , the world 's largest state sponsor of terrorism , is now flush with $ 150 billion in cash , being released and released by the united states , plus another $ 1.7 billion that was just learned about last evening in cash ransom payments .
we thought it was $ 400 million .
it turns out that it 's now $ 1.7 billion in cash .
in other words , our country was blackmailed and extorted into paying this unheard of amount of money as ransom and our president lied to us .
worst of all , the nuclear deal puts iran , the number one state sponsor of radical islamic terrorism , on a path to nuclear weapons .
and at best , will go very quickly .
this is hillary clinton 's foreign policy legacy -- failure and death .
but that 's not all .
president obama and hillary clinton have also overseen deep cuts of our military , which only invite more aggression .
really , we will have aggression like you 've never seen before and you 've got it already happening .
our adversaries are champing at the bit .
history shows that when america is not prepared is when the danger is by far the greatest .
we want to deter , avoid and prevent conflict through our unquestioned military strength .
we have the greatest people in the world .
we have to give them the greatest equipment .
under barack obama , and hillary clinton , defense spending is on track to fall to its lowest level as a share of the economy since the end of world war ii .
we currently have the smallest army since 1940 .
the navy is among the smallest it has been since 1915 .
that 's 100 years ago .
and the air force is the smallest it 's been since 1947 .
when ronald reagan left office , our navy had 592 ships .
when barack obama took office , it had 285 ships .
today , the navy has just 276 ships .
the average air force aircraft is 27 years old .
we have second generation b-52 bombers .
their fathers flew the same plane as they are flying right now .
this is not the united states .
our army has been shrinking rapidly from 553,000 soldiers to - in 2009 to just 479,000 soldiers today .
that 's some decrease .
and they want to make it smaller .
in 2009 , our marine corps had 202,000 active marines .
today , it 's 182,000 .
our ship count is below the minimum of 308 that the navy says is needed to execute the current missions at a minimal level .
president obama plans to reduce the army to 450,000 troops , which would hamstring our ability to defend the united states .
it takes 22 years on average to field a major new weapon system .
in 2010 , the united states spent $ 554 billion on non - war based defending .
in the year - and i have to say , currently , we 're spending $ 548 billion , a cut of 10 percent , and that number is going down very rapidly looking into the future , unless i become your president , i have to say .
this reduction was done through what is known as sequester , which you 've all heard about , or automatic defense budget cuts .
under the budget agreement , defense took half of the cuts , even though it makes up only one - sixth of the budget .
so they put it all in defense .
as soon as i take office , i will ask congress to fully eliminate the defense sequester and will submit a new budget to rebuild our military .
it is so depleted .
we will rebuild our military .
this will increase certainty in the defense community as to funding and will allow military leaders to plan for our future defense needs .
and , most importantly , we will be defended , because without defense , we do n't have a country .
as part of removing the defense sequester , i will ask congress to fully offset the costs of increased military spending .
in the process , we will make government leaner and more responsive to the public .
i will ask that savings be accomplished through common sense reforms that eliminate government waste and budget gimmicks and that protect , absolutely protect , hard - earned benefits for americas .
government - wide , improper government payments are estimated to exceed $ 135 billion per year .
and the amount of unpaid taxes is estimated to be as high as $ 385 billion a year .
we can also reduce the size of the federal bureaucracy through responsible workforce attrition .
that is - that is when employees retire , they can be replaced by a smaller number of new employees .
that 's the best way to do it .
we can also stop funding programs that are not authorized in law .
congress spent $ 320 billion last year on 256 expired laws .
these are laws that are gone .
spent all of that money .
removing just 5 percent of that will reduce spending by almost $ 200 billion over a ten - year period .
the military will not be exempt either .
the military bureaucracy will have to be trimmed down .
we have to create that strength and sometimes we have to reduce bureaucracy .
it just gets in our way .
early in my term , i will also be requesting that all nato nations promptly pay their bills , which many are not now doing .
only five nato countries , including the united states , are currently meeting their minimum requirement to spend 2 percent of gdp on defense .
they understand it .
they know they have to do it .
they can afford to do it .
they have no respect for our leadership .
they have no respect for our country .
they will do it .
they 'll be happy to do it .
they will be happy to do it .
additionally , i will be respectfully asking countries such as germany , japan , south korea , saudi arabia to pay more for the tremendous security we provide them .
and they 'll fully understand .
they 're economic behemoths .
they 're tremendously successful countries , but we 're subsidizing them for billions and billions of dollars .
i think they 'll fully understand .
finally , we will have at our disposal additional revenues from unleashing american energy .
the institute for energy research cites a short - run figure of as much as $ 36 billion annually from increased energy production .
tremendous amounts of money .
tremendous numbers of jobs and tremendous amounts of money .
and , your electric bills will go down .
there 's something nice about that .
using these new funds , i will ask my secretary of defense to propose a new defense budget to meet the following long - term goals .
we will build an active army of around 540,000 as the army 's chief of staff has said he needs desperately and really must have to protect our country .
we now - we now have only 31 brigade combat teams or 490,000 troops and only one - third of combat teams are considered combat ready .
that 's not good for our country .
i actually do n't even like saying it , because plenty of countries are watching us right now , but we 'll get it shaped up very quickly .
we will build a marine corps based on 36 battalions , which the heritage foundation notes is the minimum needed to deal with major contingencies .
right now , we only have 23 .
we will build a navy of 350 surface ships and submarines as recommended by the bipartisan national defense panel .
we right now only have 276 ships and it 's not enough .
and we will build an air force of at least 1,200 fighter aircraft , which the heritage foundation again has shown to be needed to execute current missions .
we now have 1,113 .
not enough .
we will also seek to develop a state of the art missile defense system .
under obama / clinton , our ballistic missile defense capability has been degraded , at the very moment in the united states history , and its allies , we are facing the strongest and most heightened missile threat that we have ever , ever had .
you look at iran .
you look at north korea .
you look at terrorists .
we do n't even know where to look .
we do n't know where to look .
but , believe me , you can look all over .
so we are going to do that .
we need a form of shield .
we want to protect our country .
as these potential adversaries grow their missile programs , u.s. military facilities in asia and the middle east , as well as our allies , are increasingly in range with the united states homeland and we are really absolutely and potentially being threatened .
and within two years , we will absolutely have a real threat .
they 'll be able to reach us so easily the way it 's going right now .
we propose to rebuild the key tools of missile defense , starting with navy cruisers that are the foundation of our missile defense capabilities in europe , asia , and the middle east .
the obama / clinton administration tried repeatedly to remove our cruisers from service , then refused to modernize these very old , aging , aging ships .
they 're old .
they 're tired .
we will start by modernizing our cruisers to provide the ballistic missile defense capability our nation needs .
this will cost around $ 220 million per modernization as we seek to modernize a significant portion of these 22 ships .
it will also mean jobs for our country .
ok , jobs for our country .
and that is one of the big benefits .
it 's called jobs for our country , which we desperately need .
as we expand our navy toward the goal of 350 ships , we will also procure additional modern destroyers that are designed to handle the missile defense mission in the coming years .
accomplishing this missile rebuild and our military retooling will be a 50-state effort .
every state in the union will be able to take part in rebuilding our military and developing technologies of tomorrow .
in other words , the workers and the jobs will take place throughout the united states .
in addition , we will improve the department of defense 's cyber capabilities , a new threat , a new problem , very expensive and we 're not doing very well with cyber .
hillary clinton has taught us really how vulnerable we are in cyber hacking .
that 's probably the only thing that we 've learned from hillary clinton .
which is why one of the first things we must do is to enforce all classification rules and to enforce all laws relating to the handling of classified information .
hillary clinton put her e - mails on a secret server nobody knew about except for the man that was giving the fifth , remember ?
what ever happened to him ?
where is he ?
what happened to him ?
where did he go ?
he pled the fifth .
never heard - that 's the end of him .
aye - yi - yi .
she put her e - mails on a secret server to cover up her pay - for- play scandal in the state department .
nothing threatens the integrity of our democracy more than when government officials put their public office up for sale .
we will also ...   we will also make it a priority to develop defensive and offensive cyber capabilities at our u.s. cyber command and recruit the best and brightest americans .
one of my first directives after taking office will be asking the joint chiefs of staff and all relevant federal departments to conduct a thorough review of united states cyber defenses and identify all vulnerabilities .
and we have to do that immediately , including to our power grid , our communications system , and all vital infrastructure .
i will then ask for a plan to immediately protect those vulnerabilities and then fix them .
at the same time ...   at the same time , we will invest heavily in offensive cyber capabilities to disrupt our enemies , including terrorists who rely heavily on internet communications .
isis is using the internet to recruit .
isis is using the internet to intercept and do all sorts of things to our country .
we have to be many steps ahead of them and we will be .
these new investments in cyber security and the modernization of our military will spur substantial new job creation in the private sector and help create the jobs and technologies of tomorrow .
that 's what we have to do .
america must be the world 's dominant technological powerhouse of the 21st century .
and young americans , including in our inner cities , should get these new jobs through training , through education .
it will happen .
we must also ensure that we have the best medical care , education and support for our military service members and their families , both when they serve and when they return to civilian life .
our veterans are not being treated well .
our veterans , in many cases , are being treated worse than illegal immigrants , people that come into our county illegally .
our veterans are not being treated well .
and , by the way , hillary clinton has been doing this for 35 years .
now she says she can do it .
she does n't have a clue .
does n't have a clue .
our debt to our men and women in uniform is eternal , always will be .
to all of those who have served this nation , i say so strongly that i will never ever let you down .
we will protect those who protect us .
it 's very simple .
we will protect those who protect us .
and we will follow their example of unity .
we will work across all racial and income lines to create one american nation .
together , we will have one great american future .
our potential is unlimited .
we will be one people under one god , saluting one american flag .
and , by the way , we love our flag .
america will be a prosperous , generous and inclusive society .
we will discard the failed policies and division of the past and embrace true american change to rebuild our economy , rebuild our inner cities .
they need help so desperately .
and rebuild our country .
we will bring back our jobs and we will not let our jobs go to other countries .
we will make america strong again .
we will make america safe again .
and we will make america great again , greater than ever before .
thank you very much and god bless you .
thank you .
thank you .
thank you very much .
thank you .
thank you !
thank you , everybody !
thank you !
what a group !
wow !
beautiful , thank you !
thank you , everybody .
thank you .
it 's great to be here tonight .
i 'm honored also to be joined this evening by governor scott walker , a great gentleman and a really great governor , chairman reince priebus and mayor rudolph giuliani .
we 're at a decisive moment in this election .
last week , i laid out my plan to bring jobs back to our country , desperately needed jobs .
yesterday i laid out my plan to defeat radical islamic terrorism .
tonight i 'm going to talk about how to make our communities safe again from crime and lawlessness .
let me begin by thanking law enforcement officers here in this city and across this country for their service and sacrifice in difficult , difficult , difficult times .
the violence , riots and destruction that have taken place in milwaukee is an assault on the right of all citizens to live in security and to live in peace .
law and order must be restored .
it must be restored for the sake of all , but most especially for the sake of those living in the affected communities , of which there are many .
the main victims of these riots are law - abiding african- american citizens living in these neighborhoods .
it 's their job , it 's their homes , it 's their schools and communities which will suffer the most as a result .
there 's no compassion in tolerating lawless conduct for anyone .
crime and violence is an attack on the poor and will never be accepted in a trump administration .
the narrative has been pushed aggressively for years and now by our current administration and pushed by my opponent , hillary clinton , you know is a totally false one .
you know that .
the problem in our poorest communities is not that there are too many police .
the problem is that there are not enough police .
more law enforcement , more community engagement , more effective policing is what our country needs desperately .
just like hillary clinton is against the miners , she is against the police , believe me .
you know it and i know it .
and guess what ?
she knows it .
those pedaling the narrative of cops as a racist force in our society , a narrative supported with a nod by my opponent , shared directly in the responsibility for the unrest in milwaukee and many other places within our country .
they have fostered the dangerous anti - police atmosphere in america and all throughout america .
every time we rush to judgment with false facts and narratives , whether in ferguson or in baltimore , and foment further unrest , we do a direct disservice to poor african- american residents who are hurt by the high crime in their community .
a big , big , unfair problem .
during the last 72 hours while protesters have raged against the police here in milwaukee , another nine were killed in chicago and another 46 were wounded .
more than 2,600 people have been shot in chicago since the beginning of the year and almost 4,000 people killed in president obama 's hometown area since his presidency began .
not too good , that 's for sure .
so how are we serving these american victims by attacking law enforcement officers ?
the war on our police must end and it must end now .
thank you .
the war on police is a war on all peaceful citizens who want to be able to work and live and send their kids to school in safety .
our job is not to make life more comfortable for the rioter or the robber or the looter or the violent disrupter , of which there are many .
our job is to make life more comfortable for the african - american parent who wants their kids to be able to safely -- safely -- walk the streets and walk to school , or the senior citizen waiting for a bus , or the young child walking home from school .
for every one violent protester , there are a hundred moms and dads and kids on the same city block who just want to be able to sleep safely at night .
they want safety .
my opponent , hillary , would rather protect the offender than the victim , a big problem in our society .
hillary clinton - backed policies are responsible for the problems in the inner cities today , and a vote for her is a vote for another generation of poverty , high crime and lost opportunities .
i care too much about my country to let this happen .
thank you .
the fact is we all care too much about our country to let this happen .
good policing saves lives .
my wonderful friend who you just heard , rudy giuliani , knows a thing or two about this .
he 's done an amazing job .
the policies put into place by rudy ultimately brought down crime by 76 percent and murder by 84 percent in new york .
think of how many families were saved , how much heartache was prevented when police were put into communities and criminals were automatically and systematically removed .
imagine how many lives could have been saved all across this country if democratic politicians had n't blocked in their cities what rudy did in new york city .
i 'll make sure we deliver safe neighborhoods here in milwaukee , and milwaukee has got so many problems , so many problems .
the world is watching right here in milwaukee , but also across the country .
it 's easy for hillary clinton to turn a blind eye to crime when she has her own private security force that , by the way , carries guns -- second amendment .
i believe all americans , not just the powerful , are entitled to security .
hillary clinton has had her chance .
she 's failed at so many things , almost everything she 's done .
now it 's time for new leadership .
the hillary clinton agenda hurts poor people , by far , the most .
there is no compassion in allowing drug dealers , gang members and felons to prey on innocent people .
it is the first duty of government to keep the innocent safe .
and when i 'm president , i will fight for the safety of every american and especially those americans who have not known safety for a very , very long time .
i 'm asking for the vote of every african - american citizen struggling in our country today who wants a different and much better future .
it 's time for our society to address some honest and very , very difficult terms .
the democratic party has failed and betrayed the african - american community .
democratic crime policies , education policies and economic policies have produced only more crime , more broken homes and more poverty .
thank you .
let us look at the situation right here in milwaukee , a city run by democrats for decade after decade .
last year , killings in this city increased by 69 percent , plus another 634 victims of non - fatal shootings .
18- to 29-year - olds accounted for nearly half of the homicide victims .
the poverty rate here is nearly double the national average .
almost four in 10 african - american men in milwaukee between the ages of 25 and 54 do not have a job .
nearly four in 10 single - mother households are living in poverty .
fifty - five public schools in this city have been rated as failing to meet expectations , despite $ 10,000 in funding per pupil , which is a very , very high number .
there 's only a 60 percent graduation rate , and it 's one of the worst public school systems anywhere in the country .
one in five manufacturing jobs has disappeared in milwaukee since we fully opened our markets , and you understand what that means , we opened these markets to china and many african - american neighborhoods , look , they have suffered .
we opened our markets , they 've taken our jobs .
they give us our products that we do n't make anymore .
and african - american neighborhoods along with many other neighborhoods have suffered greatly .
to every voter in milwaukee , to every voter living in the inner city or every forgotten stretch of our society , i 'm running to offer you a much better future , a much better job ...   ... at a much higher wage .
thank you .
thank you .
the democratic party has taken the votes of african - americans for granted .
they 've just assumed they 'll get your support and done nothing in return for it .
they 've taken advantage of the african- american citizen .
it 's time to give the democrats some competition for these votes , and it 's time to rebuild the inner cities of america and to reject the failed leadership of a rigged political system .
and that 's what it is , it 's a rigged system .
i 'm not part of the corrupt system .
in fact , the corrupt system is trying to stop me .
i 've been paying my own way , tens of millions of dollars , tens of millions of dollars .
the voters in the republican party this year defied the donors , the consultants , the power brokers and chose a nominee from outside our failed and corrupt , broken system .
the nominee is me .
the other party , the democratic party , nominated the personification of special - interest corruption .
the democratic party rigged the nomination to give it to hillary clinton , thus giving the soul of their party this year to special interests .
what else is new ?
i 'm running to listen to your voice , to hear the cries for help from so many people in our nation .
the quiet voices in our society , not the loudest demonstrators , need to have their demands heard .
jobs , safety , opportunity , fair and equal representation -- we reject the bigotry of hillary clinton , which panders to and talks down to communities of color and sees them only as a votes , that 's all they care about , not as individual human beings worthy of a better future .
they have taken advantage .
she does n't care at all about the hurting people of this country or the suffering she has caused them , and she meaning she and her party officials .
there has been tremendous suffering because of what they have brought .
the african - american community has been taken for granted for decades by the democratic party and look how they 're doing .
it 's time to break with the failures of the past .
i want to offer americans a new and much better future .
it 's time for rule by the people , not rule for the special interests , which we have right now .
thank you .
every insider getting rich off our broken system , and it is broken , is throwing money at hillary rodham clinton .
the hedge fund managers , the wall street investors , the professional political class , it 's the powerful protecting only the powerful .
they do n't care about you , believe me .
insiders fighting for insiders , but i 'm fighting for you , that 's what i 'm doing .
when we talk about the insider , who are we talking about ?
it 's the comfortable politicians looking out for their own interests .
it 's the lobbyists who know how to insert that perfect loophole into every single bill and get richer and richer and richer at your expense .
it 's the financial industry that knows how to regulate their competition right out of existence so there is no competition .
the insiders also include the media executives , anchors and journalists in washington , los angeles and new york city who are part of the same failed status quo and want nothing to change .
they do n't want it to change .
they like it just fine the way it is now .
every day you pick up a newspaper or turn on the nightly news and you hear about some self - interest banker or some self - discredited washington insider say they oppose donald trump 's campaign .
but you do n't oppose it , that i can tell you .
you do n't oppose it .
thank you .
thank you .
thank you .
thank you very much , a great honor , it 's a great honor .
and you have three times as many people standing outside trying to get in , so i just want to tell you thank you .
amazing .
or some encrusted old politician says they oppose our campaign or some big - time lobbyist says they oppose the campaign of trump .
i wear their opposition as a badge of honor ...   ... because it means i 'm fighting for real change , not just partisan change where everybody else gets rich but you .
a rigged , rigged system , remember it , i said it first , i 'll probably be saying it for a long time .
but eventually we 're going to break that system .
i 'm fighting , all of us across the country are fighting for a peaceful regime change in our country .
the media / donor / political complex that 's bled this country dry has to be replaced with a new government of , by and for the people .
the leadership class in washington , d.c. , of which hillary clinton has been a member for 30 years , has abandoned the people of this country .
they care about themselves , they only care about themselves .
i am going to give the people their voice back .
think about it .
the people opposing our campaign are the same people who have left our border open and let innocent people suffer as a result , including vast amounts of crime , vast amounts of drugs pouring into our country and poisoning our youth and our people .
the people opposing our campaign are the same people who have led us into one disastrous foreign war after another , one after another .
no wins , no victory , no nothing .
the people opposing our campaign are the same people who lie to us about one trade deal after another .
they keep getting worse .
are n't you tired of a system that gets rich at your expense ?
because that 's what 's happening .
are n't you tired of big media , big businesses and big donors rigging the system to keep your voice from being heard ?
are you ready for change ?
are you ready for leadership that puts you , the american people , first together , first ?
that puts our country first , america first .
remember that , america first , america first , america first .
let 's talk about what this means for the inner cities of america , a big , big problem unsolved forever .
it 's time to break through the television noise , the entrenched interests which are just decimating our country and our inner cities .
i understand that a lot of powerful people are in our political system .
a lot of people who 've created our problems will lose a lot of their contracts and a lot of their money if african - american voters and all the minority voters support my campaign .
that i know , that i know for sure .
it 's time to stop making the special interests rich .
it 's time to make the american people much richer than they 've ever been before .
i 'm going to make america wealthy again .
we have to make america wealthy again if we 're going to do what we want to do .
we have to be smart .
we have to make america wealthy again .
the democratic party has run nearly every inner city in this country for 50 years and run them into financial ruin , virtually every single one .
they 've ruined the schools .
they 've driven out the jobs .
they 've tolerated a level of crime no american should consider acceptable , worse than many third - world countries , so bad that people do n't want to even report on it .
the real numbers are beyond belief .
violent crime has risen 17 percent in america 's 50 largest cities last year .
killings of police officers this year is up nearly 50 percent .
homicides are up more than 60 percent in baltimore alone .
they 're up more than 50 percent in washington , d.c. this is the future offered by the policies of hillary clinton and her friends : more poverty , more crime and basically just more of the same .
the future she offers is the most pessimistic thing i could possibly imagine .
it 's time for a different future .
here is what i 'm proposing .
first , on immigration .
no community in this country has been hurt worse by hillary clinton 's immigration and all of her policies than the african - american community .
and she considers them a guaranteed vote .
now she is proposing to print instant work permits for millions of illegal immigrants to come in and take everybody 's job , including low - income african - americans .
not right , not going to happen .
i will secure our border , protect our workers and improve our jobs and wages in your community .
we 're going to improve our wages .
we 're going to improve our jobs .
and we 're not going to let companies leave our country so quickly and so easily for other lands and then take their products and sell it to us .
not going to happen .
we will only invite people to join our country who share our tolerant values , who support our constitution and who love all of our people .
they love our people , they have to love our country , or what are we doing ?
on trade , i 'm going to renegotiate nafta , one of the worst trade deals ever signed in the history of our country , perhaps the worst ever signed in the history , frankly , of the world .
we 're going to stand up to china , withdraw from tpp , which is another disaster , and protect every last american job .
we are going to protect every last american job , which we 're not doing now .
on taxes , i 'm going to give a massive tax cut to every worker and small business in this country , bring thousands of new companies and millions of new jobs onto our shores , and make it very difficult for our businesses to leave .
it will be a costly proposition for them to fire everybody and leave .
i 'm going to reform our regulations so jobs stay in america and new businesses come to america to hire workers , even right here in milwaukee .
every policy my opponent has sends jobs outside of the country and overseas .
i 'm going to bring trillions in new wealth back into the united states .
our education , believe me , you look at our education , it 's time to have school choice , merit pay for teachers and to end the tenure policies that hurt good teachers and reward bad teachers .
and there is no job more important than a good teacher , please remember that .
there is no job more important .
we are going to put students and parents first .
hillary clinton would rather deny opportunities to millions of young african - american children just so she can curry favor with the education bureaucracy which is very big and a lot of votes .
i am going to allow charter schools to thrive and help young kids get on the american ladder of success .
a good education and a good- paying job , that 's what they want .
on crime , i am going to support more police in our communities , appoint the best prosecutors and judges in the country , pursue strong enforcement of federal laws , and i 'm going to break up the gangs , the cartels and the criminal syndicates terrorizing our neighborhoods all over the country , and that includes milwaukee .
to every lawbreaker hurting innocent people in this country , i say your free reign will soon come crashing to an end .
on health care , we 're going to get rid of " obamacare , " repeal it and replace it .
it 's caused soaring , double - digit premium increases .
and we 're going to give choice to patients and to consumers across our land .
aetna just today announced that they are dropping out , as are many of the major insurance companies . "
obamacare " is a disaster .
it 's a disaster .
on government corruption , i 'm going to restore honor to our government .
we 've seen the corruption of hillary clinton , the mass e- mail -- look at what 's going on , folks .
look at what 's going on -- the mass e - mail deletions .
have you see the 33,000 deletions ?
the pay - for - play at the state department , the profiteering , the favors given to foreign corporations and governments at your expense and taxpayers ' expense , and it 's not acceptable any longer .
it 's corrupt .
we 've seen a former secretary of state lie to congress about her illegal e - mail scheme , risk innocent american lives and bring dishonor onto our government , great , great dishonor .
in my administration , i 'm going to enforce all laws concerning the protection of classified information .
those laws are already protected , we thought , but perhaps everybody is wrong .
perhaps all of those that have served jail time were wrong .
she got special favors and nobody has ever seen anything like it in the history of our country .
no one will be above the law .
i am going to forbid senior officials from trading favors for cash by preventing them from collecting lavish speaking fees through their spouses when they serve .
i am going to ask my senior officials to sign an agreement not to accept speaking fees from corporations with a registered lobbyist , for five years after leaving office , or from any entity tied to a foreign government .
what 's happening is disgraceful .
this is all just the beginning .
we are going to make this a government of the people once again .
this is our chance , this is it , this is it , your last chance .
this is our chance to take back power from all the people who 've taken it from you over so many years .
the reason you see the establishment and the establishment media lining up behind my opponent is because they are scared that you with your vote can take away their power and return it to your family and to your community .
and they are scared .
and they have no idea how many people on november 8th are going to come out and vote .
thank you .
thank you .
thank you .
these are tough times , but i know we can make america greater than ever before .
i have absolutely no doubt .
i have gotten to know the people of this country .
and i 'll tell you , there are no people like the people i have gotten to know , no people .
to do this , we are going to need a fighter in the white house .
i will be your fighter .
believe me , i will be your fighter .
to defeat crime and radical islamic terrorism in our country , to win trade in our country , you need tremendous physical and mental strength and stamina .
hillary clinton does n't have that strength or stamina , believe me .
and you know it and they know it and everybody knows it .
she can not win for you .
most importantly , she has very , very bad judgment .
bad judgment on terrorism , bad judgment on foreign policy , bad judgment on trade .
the only individuals she 's ever delivered for are her donors ; not the people , just the donors .
i 've said it before and i 'll say it again .
my opponent asks her supporters to recite a three - word pledge .
her pledge reads : i 'm with her .
i choose to recite a totally different pledge .
my pledge reads : i 'm with you , the american people .
i will fight to ensure that every american is treated equally , protected equally and honored equally .
we will reject bigotry and hatred and oppression in all of its many ugly forms and seek a new future of security , prosperity and opportunity , a future built on our common culture and values as one american people .
i am asking for your vote on november 8th so i can be your champion in the white house .
ok ?
ok ?
i will be your champion , i will be your voice in the white house .
we will bring it back .
we will once again be a country of law and order .
and we will once again be a country of great and unchallenged success .
to every parent who dreams for their children and to every child who dreams for their future , i say these words to you tonight .
i 'm with you , i will fight for you and i will win for you .
together , we will make america strong again , we will make america safe again , and we will make america great again , greater than ever before .
thank you and god bless you .
thank you .
thank you .
thank you .
wow .
thank you .
that 's a lot of people , phoenix , that 's a lot of people .
thank you very much .
thank you , phoenix .
i am so glad to be back in arizona .
the state that has a very , very special place in my heart .
i love people of arizona and together we are going to win the white house in november .
now , you know this is where it all began for me .
remember that massive crowd also .
so , i said let 's go and have some fun tonight .
we 're going to arizona , ok ?
this will be a little bit different .
this wo n't be a rally speech , per se .
instead , i 'm going to deliver a detailed policy address on one of the greatest challenges facing our country today , illegal immigration .
i 've just landed having returned from a very important and special meeting with the president of mexico , a man i like and respect very much .
and a man who truly loves his country , mexico .
and , by the way , just like i am a man who loves my country , the united states .
we agree on the importance of ending the illegal flow of drugs , cash , guns , and people across our border , and to put the cartels out of business .
we also discussed the great contributions of mexican - american citizens to our two countries , my love for the people of mexico , and the leadership and friendship between mexico and the united states .
it was a thoughtful and substantive conversation and it will go on for awhile .
and , in the end we 're all going to win .
both countries , we 're all going to win .
this is the first of what i expect will be many , many conversations .
and , in a trump administration we 're going to go about creating a new relationship between our two countries , but it 's going to be a fair relationship .
we want fairness .
but to fix our immigration system , we must change our leadership in washington and we must change it quickly .
sadly , sadly there is no other way .
the truth is our immigration system is worse than anybody ever realized .
but the facts are n't known because the media wo n't report on them .
the politicians wo n't talk about them and the special interests spend a lot of money trying to cover them up because they are making an absolute fortune .
that 's the way it is .
today , on a very complicated and very difficult subject , you will get the truth .
the fundamental problem with the immigration system in our country is that it serves the needs of wealthy donors , political activists and powerful , powerful politicians .
it 's all you can do .
thank you .
thank you .
let me tell you who it does not serve .
it does not serve you the american people .
does n't serve you .
when politicians talk about immigration reform , they usually mean the following , amnesty , open borders , lower wages .
immigration reform should mean something else entirely .
it should mean improvements to our laws and policies to make life better for american citizens .
thank you .
but if we 're going to make our immigration system work , then we have to be prepared to talk honestly and without fear about these important and very sensitive issues .
for instance , we have to listen to the concerns that working people , our forgotten working people , have over the record pace of immigration and it 's impact on their jobs , wages , housing , schools , tax bills and general living conditions .
these are valid concerns expressed by decent and patriotic citizens from all backgrounds , all over .
we also have to be honest about the fact that not everyone who seeks to join our country will be able to successfully assimilate .
sometimes it 's just not going to work out .
it 's our right , as a sovereign nation to chose immigrants that we think are the likeliest to thrive and flourish and love us .
then there is the issue of security .
countless innocent american lives have been stolen because our politicians have failed in their duty to secure our borders and enforce our laws like they have to be enforced .
i have met with many of the great parents who lost their children to sanctuary cities and open borders .
so many people , so many , many people .
so sad .
they will be joining me on this stage in a little while and i look forward to introducing , these are amazing , amazing people .
countless americans who have died in recent years would be alive today if not for the open border policies of this administration and the administration that causes this horrible , horrible thought process , called hillary clinton .
this includes incredible americans like 21 year old sarah root .
the man who killed her arrived at the border , entered federal custody and then was released into the u.s. , think of it , into the u.s. community under the policies of the white house barack obama and hillary clinton .
weak , weak policies .
weak and foolish policies .
he was released again after the crime , and now he 's out there at large .
sarah had graduated from college with a 4.0 , top student in her class one day before her death .
also among the victims of the obama - clinton open - border policy was grant ronnebeck , a 21-year - old convenience store clerk and a really good guy from mesa , arizona .
a lot of you have known about grant .
he was murdered by an illegal immigrant gang member previously convicted of burglary , who had also been released from federal custody , and they knew it was going to happen again .
another victim is kate steinle .
gunned down in the sanctuary city of san francisco , by an illegal immigrant , deported five previous times .
and they knew he was no good .
then there is the case of 90-year - old earl olander , who was brutally beaten and left to bleed to death in his home , 90 years old and defenseless .
the perpetrators were illegal immigrants with criminal records a mile long , who did not meet obama administration standards for removal .
and they knew it was going to happen .
in california , a 64-year - old air force veteran , a great woman , according to everybody that knew her , marilyn pharis , was sexually assaulted and beaten to death with a hammer .
her killer had been arrested on multiple occasions but was never , ever deported , despite the fact that everybody wanted him out .
a 2011 report from the government accountability office found that illegal immigrants and other non - citizens , in our prisons and jails together , had around 25,000 homicide arrests to their names , 25,000 .
on top of that , illegal immigration costs our country more than $ 113 billion a year .
and this is what we get .
for the money we are going to spend on illegal immigration over the next 10 years , we could provide 1 million at - risk students with a school voucher , which so many people are wanting .
while there are many illegal immigrants in our country who are good people , many , many , this does n't change the fact that most illegal immigrants are lower skilled workers with less education , who compete directly against vulnerable american workers , and that these illegal workers draw much more out from the system than they can ever possibly pay back .
and they 're hurting a lot of our people that can not get jobs under any circumstances .
but these facts are never reported .
instead , the media and my opponent discuss one thing and only one thing , the needs of people living here illegally .
in many cases , by the way , they 're treated better than our vets .
not going to happen anymore , folks .
november 8th .
not going to happen anymore .
the truth is , the central issue is not the needs of the 11 million illegal immigrants or however many there may be -- and honestly we 've been hearing that number for years .
it 's always 11 million .
our government has no idea .
it could be 3 million .
it could be 30 million .
they have no idea what the number is .
frankly our government has no idea what they 're doing on many , many fronts , folks .
but whatever the number , that 's never really been the central issue .
it will never be a central issue .
it does n't matter from that standpoint .
anyone who tells you that the core issue is the needs of those living here illegally has simply spent too much time in washington .
only the out of touch media elites think the biggest problems facing america -- you know this , this is what they talk about , facing american society today is that there are 11 million illegal immigrants who do n't have legal status .
and , they also think the biggest thing , and you know this , it 's not nuclear , and it 's not isis , it 's not russia , it 's not china , it 's global warming .
to all the politicians , donors , and special interests , hear these words from me and all of you today .
there is only one core issue in the immigration debate , and that issue is the well being of the american people .
nothing even comes a close second .
hillary clinton , for instance , talks constantly about her fears that families will be separated , but she 's not talking about the american families who have been permanently separated from their loved ones because of a preventable homicide , because of a preventable death , because of murder .
no , she 's only talking about families who come here in violation of the law .
we will treat everyone living or residing in our country with great dignity .
so important .
we will be fair , just , and compassionate to all , but our greatest compassion must be for our american citizens .
thank you .
president obama and hillary clinton have engaged in gross dereliction of duty by surrendering the safety of the american people to open borders , and you know it better than anybody right here in arizona .
you know it .
president obama and hillary clinton support sanctuary cities .
they support catch and release on the border .
they support visa overstays .
they support the release of dangerous , dangerous , dangerous , criminals from detention .
and , they support unconstitutional executive amnesty .
hillary clinton has pledged amnesty in her first 100 days , and her plan will provide obamacare , social security , and medicare for illegal immigrants , breaking the federal budget .
on top of that she promises uncontrolled , low - skilled immigration that continues to reduce jobs and wages for american workers , and especially for african - american and hispanic workers within our country .
our citizens .
most incredibly , because to me this is unbelievable , we have no idea who these people are , where they come from .
i always say trojan horse .
watch what 's going to happen , folks .
it 's not going to be pretty .
this includes her plan to bring in 620,000 new refugees from syria and that region over a short period of time .
and even yesterday , when you were watching the news , you saw thousands and thousands of people coming in from syria .
what is wrong with our politicians , our leaders if we can call them that .
what the hell are we doing ?
hard to believe .
hard to believe .
now that you 've heard about hillary clinton 's plan , about which she has not answered a single question , let me tell you about my plan .
and do you notice --   and do you notice all the time for weeks and weeks of debating my plan , debating , talking about it , what about this , what about that .
they never even mentioned her plan on immigration because she does n't want to get into the quagmire .
it 's a tough one , she does n't know what she 's doing except open borders and let everybody come in and destroy our country by the way .
while hillary clinton meets only with donors and lobbyists , my plan was crafted with the input from federal immigration offices , very great people .
among the top immigration experts anywhere in this country , who represent workers , not corporations , very important to us .
i also worked with lawmakers , who 've led on this issue on behalf of american citizens for many years .
and most importantly i 've met with the people directly impacted by these policies .
so important .
number one , are you ready ?
are you ready ?
we will build a great wall along the southern border .
and mexico will pay for the wall .
one hundred percent .
they do n't know it yet , but they 're going to pay for it .
and they 're great people and great leaders but they 're going to pay for the wall .
on day one , we will begin working on intangible , physical , tall , power , beautiful southern border wall .
we will use the best technology , including above and below ground sensors that 's the tunnels .
remember that , above and below .
above and below ground sensors .
towers , aerial surveillance and manpower to supplement the wall , find and dislocate tunnels and keep out criminal cartels and mexico you know that , will work with us .
i really believe it .
mexico will work with us .
i absolutely believe it .
and especially after meeting with their wonderful , wonderful president today .
i really believe they want to solve this problem along with us , and i 'm sure they will .
number two , we are going to end catch and release .
we catch them , oh go ahead .
we catch them , go ahead .
under my administration , anyone who illegally crosses the border will be detained until they are removed out of our country and back to the country from which they came .
and they 'll be brought great distances .
we 're not dropping them right across .
they learned that .
president eisenhower .
they 'd drop them across , right across , and they 'd come back .
and across .
then when they flew them to a long distance , all of a sudden that was the end .
we will take them great distances .
but we will take them to the country where they came from , ok ?
number three .
number three , this is the one , i think it 's so great .
it 's hard to believe , people do n't even talk about it .
zero tolerance for criminal aliens .
zero .
zero .
zero .
they do n't come in here .
they do n't come in here .
according to federal data , there are at least 2 million , 2 million , think of it , criminal aliens now inside of our country , 2 million people criminal aliens .
we will begin moving them out day one .
as soon as i take office .
day one .
in joint operation with local , state , and federal law enforcement .
now , just so you understand , the police , who we all respect -- say hello to the police .
boy , they do n't get the credit they deserve .
i can tell you .
they 're great people .
but the police and law enforcement , they know who these people are .
they live with these people .
they get mocked by these people .
they ca n't do anything about these people , and they want to .
they know who these people are .
day one , my first hour in office , those people are gone .
and you can call it deported if you want .
the press does n't like that term .
you can call it whatever the hell you want .
they 're gone .
beyond the 2 million , and there are vast numbers of additional criminal illegal immigrants who have fled , but their days have run out in this country .
the crime will stop .
they 're going to be gone .
it will be over .
they 're going out .
they 're going out fast .
moving forward .
we will issue detainers for illegal immigrants who are arrested for any crime whatsoever , and they will be placed into immediate removal proceedings if we even have to do that .
we will terminate the obama administration 's deadly , and it is deadly , non - enforcement policies that allow thousands of criminal aliens to freely roam our streets , walk around , do whatever they want to do , crime all over the place .
that 's over .
that 's over , folks .
that 's over .
since 2013 alone , the obama administration has allowed 300,000 criminal aliens to return back into united states communities .
these are individuals encountered or identified by ice , but who were not detained or processed for deportation because it would n't have been politically correct .
my plan also includes cooperating closely with local jurisdictions to remove criminal aliens immediately .
we will restore the highly successful secure communities program .
good program .
we will expand and revitalize the popular 287 partnerships , which will help to identify hundreds of thousands of deportable aliens in local jails that we do n't even know about .
both of these programs have been recklessly gutted by this administration .
and those were programs that worked .
this is yet one more area where we are headed in a totally opposite direction .
there 's no common sense , there 's no brain power in our administration by our leader , or our leaders .
none , none , none .
on my first day in office i am also going to ask congress to pass kate 's law , named for kate steinle .
to ensure that criminal aliens convicted of illegal reentry receive strong mandatory minimum sentences .
strong .
and then we get them out .
another reform i 'm proposing is the passage of legislation named for detective michael davis and deputy sheriff danny oliver , to law enforcement officers recently killed by a previously deported illegal immigrant .
the davis - oliver bill will enhance cooperation with state and local authorities to ensure that criminal immigrants and terrorists are swiftly , really swiftly , identified and removed .
and they will go face , believe me .
they 're going to go .
we 're going to triple the number of ice deportation officers .
within ice i am going to create a new special deportation task force focused on identifying and quickly removing the most dangerous criminal illegal immigrants in america who have evaded justice just like hillary clinton has evaded justice , ok ?
maybe they 'll be able to deport her .
the local police who know every one of these criminals , and they know each and every one by name , by crime , where they live , they will work so fast .
and our local police will be so happy that they do n't have to be abused by these thugs anymore .
there 's no great mystery to it , they 've put up with it for years , and no finally we will turn the tables and law enforcement and our police will be allowed to clear up this dangerous and threatening mess .
we 're also going to hire 5,000 more border patrol agents .
who gave me their endorsement , 16,500 gave me their endorsement .
and put more of them on the border instead of behind desks which is good .
we will expand the number of border patrol stations significantly .
i 've had a chance to spend time with these incredible law enforcement officers , and i want to take a moment to thank them .
what they do is incredible .
and getting their endorsement means so much to me .
more to me really than i can say .
means so much .
first time they 've ever endorsed a presidential candidate .
number four , block funding for sanctuary cities .
we block the funding .
no more funds .
we will end the sanctuary cities that have resulted in so many needless deaths .
cities that refuse to cooperate with federal authorities will not receive taxpayer dollars , and we will work with congress to pass legislation to protect those jurisdictions that do assist federal authorities .
number five , cancel unconstitutional executive orders and enforce all immigration laws .
we will immediately terminate president obama 's two illegal executive amnesties in which he defied federal law and the constitution to give amnesty to approximately five million illegal immigrants , five million .
and how about all the millions that are waiting on line , going through the process legally ?
so unfair .
hillary clinton has pledged to keep both of these illegal amnesty programs , including the 2014 amnesty which has been blocked by the united states supreme court .
great .
clinton has also pledged to add a third executive amnesty .
and by the way , folks , she will be a disaster for our country , a disaster in so many other ways .
and do n't forget the supreme court of the united states .
do n't forget that when you go to vote on november 8 .
and do n't forget your second amendment .
and do n't forget the repeal and replacement of obamacare .
and do n't forget building up our depleted military .
and do n't forget taking care of our vets .
do n't forget our vets .
they have been forgotten .
clinton 's plan would trigger a constitutional crisis unlike almost anything we have ever seen before .
in effect , she would be abolishing the lawmaking powers of congress in order to write her own laws from the oval office .
and you see what bad judgment she has .
she has seriously bad judgment .
can you imagine ?
in a trump administration all immigration laws will be enforced , will be enforced .
as with any law enforcement activity , we will set priorities .
but unlike this administration , no one will be immune or exempt from enforcement .
and ice and border patrol officers will be allowed to do their jobs the way their jobs are supposed to be done .
anyone who has entered the united states illegally is subject to deportation .
that is what it means to have laws and to have a country .
otherwise we do n't have a country .
our enforcement priorities will include removing criminals , gang members , security threats , visa overstays , public charges .
that is those relying on public welfare or straining the safety net along with millions of recent illegal arrivals and overstays who 've come here under this current corrupt administration .
number six , we are going to suspend the issuance of visas to any place where adequate screening can not occur .
according to data provided by the senate subcommittee on immigration , and the national interest between 9/11 and the end of 2014 , at least 380 foreign born individuals were convicted in terror cases inside the united states .
and even right now the largest number of people are under investigation for exactly this that we 've ever had in the history of our country .
our country is a mess .
we do n't even know what to look for anymore , folks .
our country has to straighten out .
and we have to straighten out fast .
the number is likely higher .
but the administration refuses to provide this information , even to congress .
as soon as i enter office i am going to ask the department of state , which has been brutalized by hillary clinton , brutalized .
homeland security and the department of justice to begin a comprehensive review of these cases in order to develop a list of regions and countries from which immigration must be suspended until proven and effective vetting mechanisms can be put in place .
i call it extreme vetting right ?
extreme vetting .
i want extreme .
it 's going to be so tough , and if somebody comes in that 's fine but they 're going to be good .
it 's extreme .
and if people do n't like it , we 've got have a country folks .
got to have a country .
countries in which immigration will be suspended would include places like syria and libya .
and we are going to stop the tens of thousands of people coming in from syria .
we have no idea who they are , where they come from .
there 's no documentation .
there 's no paperwork .
it 's going to end badly folks .
it 's going to end very , very badly .
for the price of resettling , one refugee in the united states , 12 could be resettled in a safe zone in their home region .
which i agree with 100 percent .
we have to build safe zones and we 'll get the money from gulf states .
we do n't want to put up the money .
we owe almost $ 20 trillion .
doubled since obama took office , our national debt .
but we will get the money from gulf states and others .
we 'll supervise it .
we 'll build safe zones which is something that i think all of us want to see .
another reform , involves new screening tests for all applicants that include , and this is so important , especially if you get the right people .
and we will get the right people .
an ideological certification to make sure that those we are admitting to our country share our values and love our people .
thank you .
we 're very proud of our country .
are n't we ?
really ?
with all it 's going through , we 're very proud of our country .
for instance , in the last five years , we 've admitted nearly 100,000 immigrants from iraq and afghanistan .
and these two countries according to pew research , a majority of residents say that the barbaric practice of honor killings against women are often or sometimes justified .
that 's what they say .
that 's what they say .
they 're justified .
right ?
and we 're admitting them to our country .
applicants will be asked their views about honor killings , about respect for women and gays and minorities .
attitudes on radical islam , which our president refuses to say and many other topics as part of this vetting procedure .
and if we have the right people doing it , believe me , very , very few will slip through the cracks .
hopefully , none .
number seven , we will insure that other countries take their people back when they order them deported .
there are at least 23 countries that refuse to take their people back after they 've been ordered to leave the united states .
including large numbers of violent criminals , they wo n't take them back .
so we say , ok , we 'll keep them .
not going to happen with me , not going to happen with me .
due to a supreme court decision , if these violent offenders can not be sent home , our law enforcement officers have to release them into your communities .
and by the way , the results are horrific , horrific .
there are often terrible consequences , such as casey chadwick 's tragic death in connecticut just last year .
yet despite the existence of a law that commands the secretary of state to stop issuing visas to these countries .
secretary hillary clinton ignored this law and refused to use this powerful tool to bring nations into compliance .
and , they would comply if we would act properly .
in other words , if we had leaders that knew what they were doing , which we do n't .
the result of her misconduct was the release of thousands and thousands of dangerous criminal aliens who should have been sent home to their countries .
instead we have them all over the place .
probably a couple in this room as a matter of fact , but i hope not .
according to a report for the boston globe from the year 2008 to 2014 nearly 13,000 criminal aliens were released back into u.s. communities because their home countries would not , under any circumstances , take them back .
hard to believe with the power we have .
hard to believe .
we 're like the big bully that keeps getting beat up .
you ever see that ?
the big bully that keeps getting beat up .
these 13,000 release occurred on hillary clinton 's watch .
she had the power and the duty to stop it cold , and she decided she would not do it .
and , arizona knows better than most exactly what i 'm talking about .
those released include individuals convicted of killings , sexual assaults , and some of the most heinous crimes imaginable .
the boston globe writes that a globe review of 323 criminals released in new england from 2008 to 2012 found that as many as 30 percent committed new offenses , including rape , attempted murder , and child molestation .
we take them , we take them .
number eight , we will finally complete the biometric entry - exit visa tracking system which we need desperately .
for years congress has required biometric entry - exit visa tracking systems , but it has never been completed .
the politicians are all talk , no action , never happens .
never happens .
hillary clinton , all talk .
unfortunately when there is action it 's always the wrong decision .
you ever notice ?
in my administration we will ensure that this system is in place .
and , i will tell you , it will be on land , it will be on sea , it will be in air .
we will have a proper tracking system .
approximately half of new illegal immigrants came on temporary visas and then never , ever left .
why should the ?
nobody 's telling them to leave .
stay as long as you want , we 'll take care of you .
beyond violating our laws , visa overstays , pose -- and they really are a big problem , pose a substantial threat to national security .
the 9/11 commission said that this tracking system would be a high priority and would have assisted law enforcement and intelligence officials in august and september in 2001 in conducting a search for two of the 9/11 hijackers that were in the united states expired visas .
and , you know what that would have meant , what that could have meant .
would n't that have been wonderful , right ?
what that could have meant ?
last year alone nearly half a million individuals overstayed their temporary visas .
removing these overstays will be a top priority of my administration .
if people around the world believe they can just come on a temporary visa and never , ever leave , the obama - clinton policy , that 's what it is , then we have a completely open border , and we no longer have a country .
we must send a message that visa expiration dates will be strongly enforced .
number nine , we will turn off the jobs and benefits magnet .
we will ensure that e - verify is used to the fullest extent possible under existing law , and we will work with congress to strengthen and expand its use across the country .
immigration law does n't exist for the purpose of keeping criminals out .
it exists to protect all aspects of american life .
the work site , the welfare office , the education system , and everything else .
that is why immigration limits are established in the first place .
if we only enforced the laws against crime , then we have an open border to the entire world .
we will enforce all of our immigration laws .
and the same goes for government benefits .
the center for immigration studies estimates that 62 percent of households headed by illegal immigrants use some form of cash or non - cash welfare programs like food stamps or housing assistance .
tremendous costs , by the way , to our country .
tremendous costs .
this directly violates the federal public charge law designed to protect the united states treasury .
those who abuse our welfare system will be priorities for immediate removal .
number 10 , we will reform legal immigration to serve the best interests of america and its workers , the forgotten people .
workers .
we 're going to take care of our workers .
and by the way , and by the way , we 're going to make great trade deals .
we 're going to renegotiate trade deals .
we 're going to bring our jobs back home .
we 're going to bring our jobs back home .
we have the most incompetently worked trade deals ever negotiated probably in the history of the world , and that starts with nafta .
and now they want to go tpp , one of the great disasters .
we 're going to bring our jobs back home .
and if companies want to leave arizona and if they want to leave other states , there 's going to be a lot of trouble for them .
it 's not going to be so easy .
there will be consequence .
remember that .
there will be consequence .
they 're not going to be leaving , go to another country , make the product , sell it into the united states , and all we end up with is no taxes and total unemployment .
it 's not going to happen .
there will be consequences .
we 've admitted 59 million immigrants to the united states between 1965 and 2015 .
many of these arrivals have greatly enriched our country .
so true .
but we now have an obligation to them and to their children to control future immigration as we are following , if you think , previous immigration waves .
we 've had some big waves .
and tremendously positive things have happened .
incredible things have happened .
to ensure assimilation we want to ensure that it works .
assimilation , an important word .
integration and upward mobility .
within just a few years immigration as a share of national population is set to break all historical records .
the time has come for a new immigration commission to develop a new set of reforms to our legal immigration system in order to achieve the following goals .
to keep immigration levels measured by population share within historical norms .
to select immigrants based on their likelihood of success in u.s. society and their ability to be financially self- sufficient .
we take anybody .
come on in , anybody .
just come on in .
not anymore .
you know , folks , it 's called a two - way street .
it is a two - way street , right ?
we need a system that serves our needs , not the needs of others .
remember , under a trump administration it 's called america first .
remember that .
to choose immigrants based on merit .
merit , skill , and proficiency .
does n't that sound nice ?
and to establish new immigration controls to boost wages and to ensure that open jobs are offered to american workers first .
and that in particular african- american and latino workers who are being shut out in this process so unfairly .
and hillary clinton is going to do nothing for the african- american worker , the latino worker .
she 's going to do nothing .
give me your vote , she says , on november eighth .
and then she 'll say , so long , see you in four years .
that 's what it is .
she is going to do nothing .
and just look at the past .
she 's done nothing .
she 's been there for 35 years .
she 's done nothing .
and i say what do you have to lose ?
choose me .
watch how good we 're going to do together .
watch .
you watch .
we want people to come into our country , but they have to come into our country legally and properly vetted , and in a manner that serves the national interest .
we 've been living under outdated immigration rules from decades ago .
they 're decades and decades old .
to avoid this happening in the future , i believe we should sunset our visa laws so that congress is forced to periodically revise and revisit them to bring them up to date .
they 're archaic .
they 're ancient .
we would n't put our entire federal budget on auto pilot for decades , so why should we do the same for the very , very complex subject of immigration ?
so let 's now talk about the big picture .
these 10 steps , if rigorously followed and enforced , will accomplish more in a matter of months than our politicians have accomplished on this issue in the last 50 years .
it 's going to happen , folks .
because i am proudly not a politician , because i am not behold to any special interest , i 've spent a lot of money on my campaign , i 'll tell you .
i write those checks .
nobody owns trump .
i will get this done for you and for your family .
we 'll do it right .
you 'll be proud of our country again .
we 'll do it right .
we will accomplish all of the steps outlined above .
and , when we do , peace and law and justice and prosperity will prevail .
crime will go down .
border crossings will plummet .
gangs will disappear .
and the gangs are all over the place .
and welfare use will decrease .
we will have a peace dividend to spend on rebuilding america , beginning with our american inner cities .
we 're going to rebuild them , for once and for all .
for those here illegally today , who are seeking legal status , they will have one route and one route only .
to return home and apply for reentry like everybody else , under the rules of the new legal immigration system that i have outlined above .
those who have left to seek entry -- 

  thank you .
thank you .
thank you .
those who have left to seek entry under this new system -- and it will be an efficient system -- will not be awarded surplus visas , but will have to apply for entry under the immigration caps or limits that will be established in the future .
we will break the cycle of amnesty and illegal immigration .
we will break the cycle .
there will be no amnesty .
our message to the world will be this .
you can not obtain legal status or become a citizen of the united states by illegally entering our country .
ca n't do it .
this declaration alone will help stop the crisis of illegal crossings and illegal overstays , very importantly .
people will know that you ca n't just smuggle in , hunker down and wait to be legalized .
it 's not going to work that way .
those days are over .
importantly , in several years when we have accomplished all of our enforcement and deportation goals and truly ended illegal immigration for good , including the construction of a great wall , which we will have built in record time .
and at a reasonable cost , which you never hear from the government .
and the establishment of our new lawful immigration system then and only then will we be in a position to consider the appropriate disposition of those individuals who remain .
that discussion can take place only in an atmosphere in which illegal immigration is a memory of the past , no longer with us , allowing us to weigh the different options available based on the new circumstances at the time .
right now , however , we 're in the middle of a jobs crisis , a border crisis and a terrorism crisis like never before .
all energies of the federal government and the legislative process must now be focused on immigration security .
that is the only conversation we should be having at this time , immigration security .
cut it off .
whether it 's dangerous materials being smuggled across the border , terrorists entering on visas or americans losing their jobs to foreign workers , these are the problems we must now focus on fixing .
and the media needs to begin demanding to hear hillary clinton 's answer on how her policies will affect americans and their security .
these are matters of life and death for our country and its people , and we deserve answers from hillary clinton .
and do you notice , she does n't answer .
she did n't go to louisiana .
she did n't go to mexico .
she was invited .
she does n't have the strength or the stamina to make america great again .
believe me .
what we do know , despite the lack of media curiosity , is that hillary clinton promises a radical amnesty combined with a radical reduction in immigration enforcement .
just ask the border patrol about hillary clinton .
you wo n't like what you 're hearing .
the result will be millions more illegal immigrants ; thousands of more violent , horrible crimes ; and total chaos and lawlessness .
that 's what 's going to happen , as sure as you 're standing there .
this election , and i believe this , is our last chance to secure the border , stop illegal immigration and reform our laws to make your life better .
i really believe this is it .
this is our last time .
november 8 .
november 8 .
you got to get out and vote on november 8 .
it 's our last chance .
it 's our last chance .
and that includes supreme court justices and second amendment .
remember that .
so i want to remind everyone what we 're fighting for and who we are fighting for .
i am going to ask -- these are really special people that i 've gotten to know .
i 'm going to ask all of the " angel moms " to come join me on the stage right now .
these are amazing women .
these are amazing people .
i 've become friends with so many .
but jamiel shaw , incredible guy , lost his son so violently .
say just a few words about your child .
thank you , thank you .
you know what ?
name your child and come right by .
go ahead .
these are amazing people , and i am not asking for their endorsement , believe me that .
i just think i 've gotten to know so many of them , and many more , from our group .
but they are incredible people and what they 're going through is incredible , and there 's just no reason for it .
let 's give them a really tremendous hand .
that 's tough stuff , i will tell you .
that is tough stuff .
incredible people .
so , now is the time for these voices to be heard .
now is the time for the media to begin asking questions on their behalf .
now is the time for all of us as one country , democrat , republican , liberal , conservative to band together to deliver justice , and safety , and security for all americans .
let 's fix this horrible , horrible , problem .
it can be fixed quickly .
let 's our secure our border .
let 's stop the drugs and the crime from pouring into our country .
let 's protect our social security and medicare .
let 's get unemployed americans off the welfare and back to work in their own country .
this has been an incredible evening .
we 're going to remember this evening .
november 8 , we have to get everybody .
this is such an important state .
november 8 we have to get everybody to go out and vote .
we 're going to bring -- thank you , thank you .
we 're going to take our country back , folks .
this is a movement .
we 're going to take our country back .
thank you .
thank you .
this is an incredible movement .
the world is talking about it .
the world is talking about it and by the way , if you have n't been looking to what 's been happening at the polls over the last three or four days i think you should start looking .
you should start looking .
together we can save american lives , american jobs , and american futures .
together we can save america itself .
join me in this mission , we 're going to make america great again .
thank you .
i love you .
god bless you , everybody .
god bless you .
god bless you , thank you .
start by thanking the fire marshal .
days , we are going to win   wisconsin .
we 're going to deliver real change .
we 're going to renegotiate , stop the massive , cut taxes and regulation   and .
create millions of jobs , and repeal and replace job - killing obamacare .
new jobs will come back   like you 've never seen before .
trump administration .
taxes will go way down .
hillary .
companies wo n't be leaving wisconsin .
there will be consequences .
we 're also going to end government corruption .
hillary clinton is the most corrupt person ever to run for the presidency of the united states .
newly released fbi documents --   everybody understands exactly .
newly released fbi documents made public just today revealed just how deep this corruption goes .
the undersecretary of state , patrick   the fbi   unclassify e - mails from hillary 's illegal server .
in other words , the state department is trying to cover up hillary 's crimes of sending classified information on her server where our enemies could easily access .
this is a criminal act of conspiracy that included hillary 's deleting and bleaching .
2,000 people .
and by the way , that 's only a small percentage of this .
but that 's ok .
thank you .
thank you .
thank you very much .
so you have the disappearance of 13 iphones , many of them whacked with a hammer .
who here has gotten rid of your phone and hit it with a hammer ?
anybody ?
nobody ?
oh , i want to .
but she whacked them , a lot of them with her hammer ; just whacked them .
two boxes -- i do n't know if you know this -- two boxes of e - mail evidence has gone missing two weeks ago .
and the destruction of laptops in a secret deal with the fbi .
remember also that crooked hillary lied under oath to congress , saying she had never sent or received classified information on her insecure server .
and she pretended not to know that the letter " c " meant confidential information .
hillary then told the fbi she could n't remember 39 times .
bad memory .
and then in written testimony last week under oath , she could n't remember approximately 21 times .
i 'll tell you .
this is one of the great miscarriages of justice in the history of this country .
what 's happened to the department of justice , what 's happened to the fbi is so sad .
you have so many incredible people in justice and the fbi .
and they must be absolutely reeling .
they probably do n't believe themselves what 's going on .
we 're witnessing a criminal enterprise that has turned our government into a   personal profit   your expense .
but it gets worse .
it gets worse .
the fbi documents which undersecretary of state dr. kennedy made the request for   altering classification as part of a quid pro quo .
in other words , a deal .
this is totally corruption by any standards .
undersecretary kennedy needs to resign .
.
i have to tell you , we have n't had any of this .
the bernie supporters had much more energy .
they really did .
they had a lot more energy .
so clinton and her cronies have sacrificed your security , your family 's safety and your country 's safety as though it meant nothing to her at all , which it did n't .
this magnitude is worse , in my opinion and in the opinion of many people in law enforcement , this is worse than watergate , what 's going on with her .
and what did she get out of it ?
she gets to run for the presidency of the united states .
but we 're going to put an end to that on november 8th .
those polls were great today , but , you know , they 're also showing there 's like an undercurrent that they ca n't poll .
remember when i was in the primaries : how 's he doing in such and such ?
well , it looks like he wo n't win that state .
then the next day it 's like , he won in a landslide .
they said , what happened ?
we 'll take it any way .
i mean , this is , i guess like people do n't want to say they are voting for trump , which is ok .
we 'll take it any way we can .
do you agree ?
but there 's a big , big undercurrent out there .
another series of e - mails shows top officials in the clinton campaign scheming to take massive sums of money from foreign lobbyists .
one of the e - mails from a top hillary official said , quote , " take the money with " -- and you know what they had , exclamation , exclamation -- " just take the money . "
this is money bundled by people registered as lobbyists on behalf of foreign governments .
remember , we 're competing in a rigged election .
this is a rigged election process .
and i said it with me -- remember i won louisiana ?
i said : oh , how many delegates do i get ?
and they showed me that my opponents had more than i. i said , wait a minute , what 's going on here ?
i won the state .
i went there on a friday night .
we had these massive crowds , great state , and i won the state .
so a week later i 'm going over delegates , right , and they 're saying : how many ?
i said , wait a minute , this guy has 18 and i have nine .
i wanted to say .
no , well that 's the way the system works .
i said , well , then it 's a rigged system .
but you have to say we figured it out , right ?
we figured it out .
but it is .
and bernie sanders with his , you know , super delegates , everything else , bernie sanders , i 'll bet he wished he wished he did n't endorse hillary .
he would have been something very special in history , but we 're not going to let that happen to us , ok ?
not to the movement .
the media is trying to rig the election by giving credence -- and this is so true -- by giving credence to false stories that have no validity and make it the front page .
they take a story with absolutely nothing , that did n't exist , and they put it front page news because they want to poison the minds of the voters .
well , they really do .
i mean , they want to poison the minds .
they take things and statements and put it in from 30 years ago , from 20 years ago .
by the way , just so you understand , just to be very clear , events that never happened .
just so you do understand that .
it 's so amazing .
it 's amazing .
i think most people do believe me .
that 's why we are having -- and it 's in our favor -- a backlash like nobody 's ever seen before .
they 're tired .
people are tired of it -- front page news , a phone call ; front page news , and then it turns out it 's false stuff .
it 's all false stuff .
there 's a backlash .
a very , very prominent person from wisconsin just left the back room .
i said hello to him , and he said , " mr. trump , i want to thank you .
you are taking abuse the likes of which nobody has ever run for office has taken . "
very prominent person .
and i really appreciate it .
.
and most importantly , you have your former miss wisconsin , right ?
your former miss wisconsin , who got out of the hospital to be with us .
this is one of the greatest people you will ever -- who got out of the hospital .
stay out of that hospital , will you ?
this is an amazing person , an amazing woman .
thank you .
thank you for being here .
and we have our generals and we have our sheriff .
nobody going to mess with this guy .
nobody going to mess with this guy .
and he was there early when he endorsed trump .
he was there very early when he endorsed .
thank you , sheriff .
i appreciate it .
sheriff clark .
and his family , more importantly , more importantly .
thank you for being here .
appreciate it .
the media is an extension of the clinton campaign , as wikileaks has proven .
and they do n't talk about wikileaks .
they just keep talking about trump , trump , trump .
they want to put nice sexy headlines up , even though nothing happened , nothing took place , even though it 's a total fabrication .
they 've got to start talking about wikileaks .
they 've got to start talking about the things that are going on .
hillary even got the questions and answers .
we need some truth .
we need truth .
we do need truth .
you know , to make america great again , we do need some truths from these people , .
because they poison the minds of others .
not everybody understands what 's happening , and by the time they do figure it out , it 's too late .
they 're poisoning the minds of others .
remember this , hillary even got -- 
  .
that 's ok .
you notice , it 's always one at a time .
one at a time .
by the way , where is diane hendricks ?
where is she ?
where is she ?
she 's so amazing .
one of your great , great successful people .
she 's an amazing woman .
diane , i know you 're here someplace .
wherever you are , an amazing woman .
hillary even got the questions and answers in advance of a major debate .
how do you do that ?
and think of it , nobody made a big deal .
nobody even knows about it .
she got the questions in advance to essentially a debate .
can you imagine -- no , no -- can you imagine if donald trump got the questions in advance ?
you know what they 'd do ?
they 'd reinvent the electric chair .
that 's what they 'd do .
you do n't even hear about that .
sheriff , did you ever hear about this ?
nobody has .
she got -- and by the way , behind you is one of your great football players , folks .
look at this guy .
and he is a man of god , i will tell you .
thank you .
thank you .
one of the greats .
oh , those championships .
i do n't know about green bay this year .
what do you think ?
are they going to be ok ?
he says yes , they 'll be ok .
a new report from the center of public integrity shows that 96 percent of so - called journalists or reporters who made presidential donations this cycle gave their money , gave themselves , gave everything to crooked hillary clinton .
can you believe that ?
they even want to try to rig the elections at the polling booths .
and believe me , there 's a lot going on .
do you ever hear these people ?
they say there 's nothing going on .
people that have died 10 years ago are still voting .
illegal immigrants are voting .
i mean , where are the street smarts of some of these politicians ?
they do n't have any .
he 's right .
so many cities are corrupt and voter fraud is very , very common .
the following information comes straight from pew research , quote , " approximately 24 million people , one of every eight , voter registrations in the united states are no longer valid or significantly inaccurate . "
one in eight .
more than 1.8 million deceased individuals right now are listed as voters .
oh , that 's wonderful .
well , if they 're going to vote for me , we 'll think about it , right ?
but i have a feeling they 're not going to vote for me .
of the 1.8 million , 1.8 million is voting for somebody else .
approximately 2.75 million people have registrations in more than one state .
do we love our police .
do we love our police law enforcement ?
law enforcement , thank you .
thank you .
you can see they 're getting angrier and angrier with .
no , because there 's such a disturbance .
then there 's the issue of illegal immigrants voting .
the following comes from a 2014 report from the washington post .
this article was entitled , " could non - citizens decide the november election ? "
here are some excerpts . "
more than 14 percent of non - citizens in both 2008 and 2010 samples indicated that they were registered to vote . "
oh , is n't that wonderful . "
because non - citizens tend to favor democrats , " to put it mildly , " obama won more than 80 percent of the votes of non - citizens in the 2008 sample . "
you do n't read about this , right ?
they do n't tell you about this .
your politicians do n't tell you about this when they tell you how legitimate all of these elections are .
they do n't want to tell you about this . "
we find that this participation was large enough to plausibly account for democratic victories in various close elections . "
ok ?
all right ? "
non - citizen votes could have given senate democrats the pivotal 60th vote needed to overcome filibusters in order to pass healthcare reform and many other reforms , and other obama administration priorities . "
now , it continues : " it is possible that non - citizen votes were responsible for obama 's 2008 victory in north carolina .
obama won the state by 14,000 votes , so a turnout by 5.1 percent of north carolina 's adult citizens " -- and by the way , we 're doing great in north carolina ; we 're going to win north carolina .
but we do n't want non - citizen voters , if that 's ok .
is that all right to ask that ?
it could have provided his margin of victory .
our system is also rigged by the donors giving hundreds of millions of dollars to hillary clinton 's campaign .
and again , i will have spent over $ 100 million on my campaign .
i am controlling myself .
i 'm working for you , folks .
i 'm working for you , believe me .
and they 're all telling me what a great job and what a big movement -- there 's never been anything like this in this country , and they all admit it .
even the enemies back there admit it .
but if i do n't win , it will be the greatest waste of time , energy and money that i will have -- oh , what a waste .
what a waste .
they all say , it wo n't be a waste .
you 'll be in the history books .
let me tell you something , folks : i do n't want to be in -- i want to win .
if we win , we will do something .
we will make -- we 're going to make america great again .
the reason that hillary clinton pushes the job - killing nafta , trans - pacific partnership -- which you can not let happen .
it 's a disaster .
and for complete -- oh , do n't worry , we 're building the wall .
build the wall .
who is going to pay for the wall ?
one hundred percent .
by the way , i 'm not kidding , 100 percent .
all of these partnerships and for completely open borders .
she wants open borders .
she wants people to pour across our borders .
we wo n't have a country , folks .
it 's because her international donors control every single move she makes .
if we let the clinton cartel run this government , history will record that 2017 was the year america lost its independence .
we will not let that happen .
it is time .
it is time to drain the swamp in washington , d.c.   this is why i 'm proposing a package of ethics reforms to make our government honest once again .
when bill clinton -- who was right about obamacare two weeks ago , by the way .
he said it 's crazy -- came into office , he signed an executive order saying if you work for the white house or a federal agency , you ca n't lobby the government for five years after you leave .
but then president clinton did what the clintons always do .
he rigged the system on his way out .
clinton lifted the executive order so clinton cronies like john podesta could start raking in cash .
so here 's what we as a group are announcing tonight .
first , i 'm going to reinstitute a five - year ban on all executive branch officials lobbying the government for five years after they leave government service .
i 'm going to ask congress to pass this ban into law so that it can not be lifted by executive order , right ?
second , i 'm going to ask congress to institute its own five - year ban on lobbying by former members of congress and their staffs .
third , i 'm going to expand the definition of " lobbyist " so we close all the loopholes that former government officials use by labeling themselves consultants , advisers , all of these different things , and they get away with murder .
fourth , i 'm going to issue a lifetime ban against senior executive branch officials lobbying on behalf of a foreign government .
fifth , i 'm going to ask congress to pass a campaign finance reform that prevents registered foreign lobbyists from raising money in american elections and politics .
this will go a long way to ending our government corruption , but we will end economic stagnation also , and that will help .
my plan for the economy can be summed up in three very beautiful words : jobs , jobs , jobs .
jobs .
they 're taking our jobs away .
they 're going to mexico .
they 're going all over the place .
we 're going to keep our companies here , folks .
they 're not leaving .
if they want to leave , there will be consequences .
you understand that .
and they wo n't leave when they hear those consequences .
believe me , they 're not leaving .
our politicians have worked for years to try and keep our companies .
it 's so easy .
it 's so easy .
you want to leave ?
you want to build ?
you want to build -- whatever you want to build -- cars .
ford is leaving .
carrier is leaving .
so many companies .
there 's so many .
you know , we lost 70,000 factories -- 70,000 factories since the signing of nafta .
i thought it was a typographical error .
i figured maybe 700 ; maybe 7,000 : 70,000 factories .
at the center of my jobs plan will be fixing our terrible trade bills .
they are horrible .
forty - seven million americans are in poverty , and 45 million americans are on , right now , food stamps .
we have nearly an $ 800 billion annual trade deficit in goods with the rest of the world ; and the worst so - called recovery by far since the great depression .
did you see the jobs numbers the other day ?
horrible .
you saw our gdp is going to be , in my opinion , less than 1 percent .
you know , if china goes to 7 percent , 8 percent , 9 percent , it 's like a national catastrophe .
if we are at less than 1 percent , which is what it will be , it 's like , oh , what else ?
we 're not going to put up with it .
it 's the clintons who gave us nafta .
he signed it , remember that .
bill clinton signed the worst trade deal in the history of the world .
and the clintons who gave us china 's entry into the world trade organization .
here in wisconsin -- do we love wisconsin ?
you know why i 'm here ?
first of all , i have a lot of friends here .
but you know why i 'm here ?
i 'm here because everyone 's calling me , everyone 's calling to say we 're going to win wisconsin .
it 's not so traditional -- no , but it 's not so traditional for a republican to be in this position .
mostly they say , well , we 'll have to skip wisconsin .
not me .
we 're going to win wisconsin .
companies like briggs & amp ; stratton have cut thousands of manufacturing jobs and moved them where ?
to china .
g.e. healthcare recently closed its milwaukee location and shipped those jobs to mexico .
did you know that , sheriff ?
they just closed up .
that 's a lot of jobs they shipped over to mexico .
johnson controls shuttered its plants in milwaukee and west allis and moved the jobs to mexico and moved the jobs to china , and moved the jobs all over the place except for here .
the list goes on and on .
many , many companies leaving wisconsin , leaving everywhere .
they 're leaving our country .
we are living through the single greatest jobs theft in the history of the world .
it 's true .
our companies are being raided .
our jobs are being let go .
we end up with unemployment and empty buildings .
they end up with cash .
they end up with cash ; tremendous factories like you 've never seen , magnificent plants , jobs all over the place .
you know , we end up actually with two things : unemployment and drugs .
they end up with the cash .
we end up with the drugs .
not so good .
a trump administration is going to renegotiate nafta , stand up to china , and get along with china .
we do n't get along with china now .
they rip us off .
and stop the jobs from leaving our country .
and i do a lot of business with china .
i have the largest bank in the world as a tenant in one of my buildings in manhattan , and china is wonderful .
i mean , i wish our people ran our country , i mean , like , they 're like smart people .
they 're smart people .
we do n't have smart people running our country .
we have people that are incompetent .
we have a president -- we have a president , all he wants to do is campaign for hillary clinton so that she can double your health care costs .
all he does is campaign .
this guy , every time you see him , he 's campaigning for clinton , and frankly , he ought to be working on jobs .
he ought to be working on the second amendment and the border and all these different things .
he ought to be working on taking care of our veterans , right , and our military .
there 's a guy -- we go into mosul .
we go into mosul .
and why do n't we just go in quietly , right ?
they used to call it a sneak attack .
let 's call it we want to do it nice and easy .
i 've been reading about it for four months .
now a primary reason for going in was we wanted to get the leaders of isis , right ?
they 're gone , folks .
they 're smart people .
they read the same newspapers and articles that we read .
they said , " hey , they 're going to attack mosul in four months ; let 's get the hell out of here . "
they 're all over the place .
how stupid are our people .
can you imagine the great general george patton and general macarthur ?
i really had a lot of respect .
you know what they 're doing , right ?
they 're spinning in their graves .
and i see we will be attacking some time next week .
i 've been reading about this for months .
and i honestly -- a big , big part , i 've always heard -- and i always used to wonder why they do n't go in .
but i meant like , why are they , right ?
surprise .
remember ?
they used to call it the element of surprise .
now our element of surprise is in four months we will be attacking mosul .
i wonder what general clinton -- what our generals think about that .
not too good .
not too good .
i can tell you what generals think .
as part of our plan to create at least 25 million jobs in 10 years , we 're going to lower our business tax from 35 percent to 15 percent .
we 're going to make our nation rich again .
we 're going to have great companies .
we 're going to have great jobs and jobs are going to start coming back to america .
but to be a rich country , we must also be a safe country .
national security begins at the border .
speaking in a secret meeting to a foreign government , hillary clinton said her dream is for total open trade -- there go the rest of your jobs -- and open borders .
there goes your country .
between open trade -- your jobs -- open borders -- your country -- so you lost your jobs and your country .
other than that , she 's doing a great job .
by " open trade , " she means foreign countries can cheat us out of millions of dollars and millions of jobs -- and literally not millions of dollars ; really , it 's really trillions and trillions of dollars .
by " open borders , " she means totally unlimited immigration .
in a secret speech to goldman sachs , she said citizens   irredeemable .
he 's a deplorable guy .
so hillary thinks most of the country is either deplorable or irredeemable , un - american , racist , or basement dwellers .
that 's what she called bernie sanders 's people -- basement dwellers .
oh , bernie , why did you do it , bernie ?
we know his people are saying : why did you do it , bernie ?
why did you do it ?
poor bernie .
now he has a rally and 100 people show up .
he could have left a great mark on history .
he wo n't .
hillary 's plan includes -- although i think we 're going to get a lot of bernie people because one of the things bernie knew is that we were being ripped off on trade .
it 's a big factor .
-- are not only going to make that , but we 're going to have a lot of trade .
we 're going to make breakthroughs .
we 're going to have a double highway .
we 're going to have things coming back to us -- .
so let me state this as clearly as i can .
-- administration will secure -- 
  -- and defend our borders .
and yes , we will build the wall that we just -- so tell me about the wall .
other people , many other people , but they are poisoning our youth before our youth gets a chance to go and make it .
they are being poisoned by this garbage that 's pouring in from the southern border .
secretary of state hillary clinton allowed thousands of criminal aliens to be released because their home countries would n't take them back .
we would bring them -- we would have a murderer , we would have a drug lord , we would have the heads of gangs and gang members , we 'd bring them back to their countries .
they intelligently said , " we do n't want them . "
kick them out .
and our guys would say , " oh , yes , ok . "
and hillary clinton never forced these criminals back into their own countries where they came from .
and i guarantee you , not one time as president will you see that happen , not one time .
there will be no times when we do n't take these people and put them into their country where that country is telling us , " take them back ; we do n't want that murderer . "
that country is taking their people back .
there 's a reason they are here .
you remember a long time ago i said they are forcing some of the people in .
let me tell you , we have some people in this country that are bad dudes .
we 're getting them out , we 're bringing them back to the country they came from , and the country is going to take them .
the ice officers , in their endorsement of me , described hillary 's proposal as , quote , " the most radical immigration proposal in united states history . "
here is a summary of hillary 's plan .
support totally for sanctuary cities -- 
  -- some bad , bad people are getting security in sanctuary cities .
social security , medicare , and lifetime welfare for illegal immigrants by making them all citizens .
and in many cases they are being treated better than our great veterans .
remember that .
and we 're not going to allow it .
obamacare for illegal immigrants ; no deportation of visa overstays ; expanded catch and release on the border .
you catch them , hey , go ahead , do whatever you want .
it 's called catch and release .
expanding president obama 's unconstitutional executive amnesty , including instant work permits for millions of illegal workers .
bringing even more criminal aliens by expanding obama 's non- enforcement directives .
and she wants a 550 percent increase in syrian refugees to come into this country .
and that 's over obama 's number .
either we win this election or we lose our country .
i mean that .
i really believe this is the last time .
this is it , folks .
this is it .
i really believe this is the last shot we have .
i sort of felt it last time .
this time i do n't just feel it .
i know it .
under a trump administration it 's going to be america first .
by the way , that is the most beautiful little girl .
a lot of beautiful -- look how beautiful .
hi .
you want to come up and see me ?
you want to come up ?
come on .
the most beautiful little girl .
wow .
and she got all decked out for this evening .
wow .
so beautiful .
oh , come on , ok , just -- no more of those .
no more .
come on , bring her .
so beautiful .
what 's your name ?
and do you know that -- where are your parents ?
where are your parents ?
wow , congratulations .
what a gem .
what a beautiful person you are .
they did a good job .
come on up here .
come on .
so beautiful .
look at this .
and do you love wisconsin ?
this is what it 's all about , right ?
beautiful .
beautiful job ; beautiful job , mom and dad .
we just made two big stars .
we made two big stars .
two great people .
thank you .
here are some of the amazing things we are going to do for our country starting in 2017 .
we 're going to have one of the biggest job- producing tax cuts in american history .
it 's going to be amazing .
we 're going to eliminate every unnecessary job - killing regulation .
we are going to defend religious liberty .
we will provide school choice to every low - income child in america .
rebuild our depleted military and take care of our great , great , great veterans .
we 're going to support the men and women of law enforcement .
we will again repeal and replace obamacare .
here 's one very important to wisconsin .
we will save our second amendment --   -- which is under siege .
we will appoint justices to the united states supreme court who will uphold and defend the constitution of the united states .
you have 22 days to make every dream you 've ever dreamed for yourself and your family come true .
on november 8th , the arrogance of washington , d.c. will come face to face with the righteous verdict of the american voter , which is .
i 'm going to fight for every citizen of every background , from every stretch of this nation .
i 'm going to fight for every child living in poverty .
we have so much poverty in this country , which is so hard to believe .
i 'm going to fight for every mom who lost her child to illegal immigration and drugs and gang violence .
i 'm going to fight for every community whose jobs and dreams have been ripped out and shipped to other countries .
so many .
i 'm going to fight for every person in this country who believes government should serve the people , not the donors and special interests .
i 'm going to fight to bring us all together as americans .
we live in a very divided country .
we 're not going to live in a divided country much longer .
there 's going to be spirit .
we 're going to get along .
imagine what our country could accomplish if we started working together as one people , under one god , saluting one american flag .
i want to tell you , wisconsin loves this country .
you really do .
you people are amazing .
in 10 and 20 and 30 and 40 years , you 're going to look back at this rally for the rest of your life .
you 're going to remember this day .
this is a movement like nobody in this country has ever seen before .
you 're going to look back at this election and say , " this is by far the most important vote i 've ever cast for anyone at any time . "
because once again , we 're going to have a government of , by and for the people .
and you will see things start to happen .
we are going to make america wealthy again .
we are going to make america strong again .
we are going to make america safe again .
and we are going to make america great again .
thank you .
thank you .
thank you very much .
god bless you , everybody .
god bless you .
this is amazing .
what a great place .
thank you very much .
we have thousands of people outside trying to get in .
but we should start .
do we agree ?
we should start .
so they 'll come in .
they 'll come in .
first of all i want to thank you .
special , special place .
it 's a special place with incredible people .
in one day , do you believe this ?
one day we are going to win the great state of north carolina ...   and we are going to win back the white house .
this election will decide whether we are ruled by a corrupt political .
you 're seeing what 's happening .
everybody 's watching .
or whether we are ruled by the people .
we 're going to be ruled by the people , folks .
that is going to be the choice .
a failed political establishment has delivered nothing but poverty , nothing but problems , nothing but losses .
nothing but losses .
we do n't win anymore as a country .
we 're going to start winning again .
they get rich by making america poorer in many cases .
it 's time to reject the media and political elite that has bled our country dry .
and these are among the most dishonest people .
they do n't give you the truth , folks .
they do n't give you the truth .
they rarely give you the truth .
you know it .
and they know it .
that 's the scary part .
they know it .
it 's time to fight for america .
i 'm not a politician , i can say proudly .
my only special interest is you .
it 's you .
we 're going to bring back the jobs that have been stolen from you .
we 're going to bring back the wealth that has been taken from our country .
we 're going to bring back the miners and the factory workers and the steel workers .
we 're going to put them back to work .
the economic policies of bill and hillary clinton have destroyed manufacturing in your state and throughout the entire country .
the corrupt clintons gave us nafta .
china 's too horrible entry into the world trade organization .
one of the disasters .
the job - killing deal with south korea .
that was a hillary clinton beauty .
and the trans - pacific partnership , which will be a total disaster .
that hillary clinton said this is the gold standard .
and you know what ?
it is the gold -- she lied .
she lied during the debate .
she said -- hey , by the way , who won the debate ?
did we win that debate ?
but she lied during the debate .
she lied during the debate .
she said it 's the gold standard .
and then she said she never said it .
do n't worry about coal .
we 're bringing back coal , sir .
he 's holding up a couple of ...   clean coal .
clean coal .
right ?
we 're going to do clean coal , the miners .
the miners are going to be back .
not if hillary clinton gets in .
the miners , i guess you got to start thinking about something else .
but the miners are going to be back .
clean coal .
clean coal .
you know , thinking about it , though .
also , people , the press does n't talk about it .
donna brazile gets the questions through a debate ...   ... but then it turns out to be a number of debates .
who cares about donna brazile ?
she 's turned out to be not what people thought .
she gets , illegally -- illegally .
she gets the questions to the debate .
she then takes those questions and gives them to crooked hillary clinton .
now , does crooked hillary report it ?
does she say i should n't have these questions or these answers ?
i think they gave them the answers also , right ?
no , she does n't .
they does n't .
i wonder if she had -- i wonder if she had the questions in my debates .
i do n't think so because she did n't do that well .
i do n't think so .
i do n't think so .
but the years of betrayal will end .
and they will end .
and they 're going to end quickly .
they 're going to end as of the day we take office , which is going to be very , very soon .
the theft of north carolina jobs will end .
you 've taken in harder than most states .
real change begins with immediately repealing and replacing obamacare .
sadly , it 's just been announced that the residents of north carolina are going to experience massive double - digit premium hikes .
ninety - five ...   ... of the 100 north carolina counties will only have one insurer in the obamacare exchange next year .
lots of luck negotiating .
honestly , it 's not going to matter because we 're going to win and we 're going to terminate it .
you 're going to have such great health care ...   ... for much less money .
it wo n't matter .
are searching .
companies are leaving .
insurers are fleeing .
doctors are quitting .
by the way , doctors , they 're leaving .
they 're quitting .
i have a friend who 's a doctor .
he said that i have more accountants than i have nurses , it 's so complicated .
and deductibles are going through the roof .
yet hillary clinton wants to double down and expand obamacare and make it even more expensive .
i 'm asking for your vote so we can repeal and replace obamacare , and save health care for every family in north carolina .
thank you .
thank you .
thank you .
people are pouring in , folks .
they 're pouring in .
did you see last night in michigan the crowd we had ?
and the crowd we had -- by the way , how about 24,000 maybe 25,000 right next to fort brag .
you saw that the other night .
and we went to minnesota .
minnesota 's been treated very , very badly .
we went to minnesota where we 're doing very well .
everyone said why minnesota ?
that does n't go republican .
it 's going republican this day , i 'll tell you .
minnesota .
great place .
and you know , you 've been watching and you 've been seeing and these people are being driven crazy , the .
we 're winning ohio .
we 're winning iowa .
we 're winning , we think , new hampshire .
we 're going to do great in new hampshire .
i hear we 're winning north carolina big ...   i hear .
we 're winning florida .
we 're winning florida , doing really well .
headlines today are   how well we 're doing in florida .
and i think we 're going to win the great state of pennsylvania , i do .
then we 're winning plenty of other places .
so we have to go .
the big key , you have to go .
you do n't win a rigged system , folks .
we 're in a rigged system .
you got to go .
you got to vote .
got to make sure that vote gets registered .
real change also means restoring honesty to our .
thank you .
thank you .
wow .
great , great spirit .
i have a job right next to -- we have a beautiful , beautiful property right next to -- right near charlotte .
you know about it , folks ?
it 's great right ?
some of the people .
but it 's an amazing place .
it 's an amazing place to work and to live , and we love it .
hillary clinton is the most corrupt person ever to seek the office of the presidency of the united states .
she threatened national security ,   to the highest bidder .
and then to cover her tracks ...   ... she needed 33,000 ...   she 's being protected by a totally rigged system -- general james cartwright -- nothing happened .
a four - star general .
three weeks ago -- a totally rigged system , folks .
but he said he did .
you know james cartwright ...   ... life was destroyed .
and here she is .
she 's running for president .
she 's done 25 times worse than anybody 's ever dreamt .
it 's a rigged system .
it is a rigged , rigged system .
do n't worry , folks .
the cameras will never spin around and show this crowd .
they never do .
my face and the two people behind me , not the thousands behind me .
they never do .
they never do .
so dishonest .
there they are .
there they are .
my group .
women for trump .
women for trump .
they 've been following me , these ladies , for a long time .
how are we doing ?
are we doing well ?
great people .
women for trump .
and now it 's up to the american people to deliver the justice that we deserve at the ballot box tomorrow .
at the ballot box .
we 're going to win .
i think it 's a great way of showing what we have to show in light of what 's going on with justice in this country .
i really do .
i think it 's a great way .
you show it tomorrow .
we show it tomorrow .
my contract with the american voter begins with a plan to end government corruption and to take our country back from the special interests .
and folks , i was on the other side for a long time .
it 's a very good place to be .
but i love the country .
i love this country .
i 've really gotten to love the people of this country because i have been everywhere .
we have the greatest people on earth .
but i love this country .
and i could n't watch it when they made the iran deal .
they gave them $ 150 billion , a terrorist state .
a state that was ready to collapse until we made them rich and powerful .
we gave them a path to nuclear weapons .
they were ready to collapse .
we gave them , remember , $ 400 billion , right ?
we gave them $ 400 million .
then we found out that was -- it was n't $ 400 million .
it was $ 1.7 billion in cash .
in cash .
do you know what $ 1.7 billion in cash is ?
you could take that whole side of the arena and you would n't have enough room .
how stupid are we to allow this to happen ?
our leaders are incompetent .
president obama is campaigning today with hillary clinton because she ca n't campaign .
she ca n't campaign .
so obama is taking air force one , which costs a fortune .
you know he 's very much into the environment .
and he 'll take a massive , old engine 747 .
very much into the environment .
very much into the ozone layer .
and yet he 'll fly that 747 all over the place to campaign for crooked hillary .
and i do n't think it 's going to work .
and she 's not getting any crowds .
so she gets beyonce and jay - z. i like them .
i like them .
and you know what they do ?
i get bigger crowds than they do .
it 's true .
i get far bigger crowds .
look at this place .
i mean , look at the crowds we had in michigan .
by the way , michigan is in play .
it has n't been in play for republicans for 30 something years .
michigan is in play because they 're tired of watching their car factories be taken out .
they 're tired of losing their jobs to mexico .
ford .
ford right now moved all of its small car production to mexico .
they 're building the biggest plants in the world in mexico .
and michigan   complaining about it for five years to michigan .
no , we 're going to have some -- tomorrow 's going to be a very historic day .
i really believe that .
i think it 's going to show -- i think it 's going to be a brexit plus , plus , plus .
does that make sense ?
plus , plus , plus .
it will be amazing .
it will be amazing .
i want the entire corrupt washington establishment to hear the words we 're all about to say .
this is a phrase , i told you .
i did n't like it .
i thought it was hokie .
but it 's not hokie .
it 's called " drain the swamp . "
we 're going to go to washington .
we 're going to drain the swamp .
ca n't believe it .
i told the story .
i hated that expression .
i said no way i 'm going to say that , no way .
that 's so hokie .
and i said it .
the place went crazy .
then i said it to another place .
it went crazier .
then i said it with more confidence because you know confidence is -- and it went wild .
now i love the expression .
i think it was genius .
drain the swamp .
drain the swamp .
is there any place better to be than a trump rally ?
are we having fun ?
are we having fun ?
no ?
and i do n't have a guitar .
and i do n't have a piano .
all we have is great concepts for our country , which is the most important thing .
because frankly , when people get on stage , and they 're entertainers , and they entertain in order to get people to fill up a room for hillary clinton .
and by the way , they use the dirtiest language the other night .
and it was -- many of the people left .
you know they 're political people .
they heard words they 've never heard before .
they left .
so the place was half empty by the time -- actually , it never got full , even with them .
then it was pretty much empty midway through .
and then most of the people just left .
and when hillary got up there was practically -- she might as well just have started with a few people .
it would 've been easier .
but you know she hears those words .
i wo n't use the words .
i wo n't even address the words .
because if i do the crooked media will say " did you hear what donald trump said today ? "
but honestly -- yes .
those words were disgusting .
if i ever said those words that jay - z said or that beyonce said the other night , you know what would happen to me ?
the reinstitution of the electric chair .
it would be -- how about if i got the answers to the debate ?
or if i got the questions ?
supposing instead of hillary getting the questions to the debate , which is cheating .
she 's a cheat .
she is a cheat .
she never reported it .
she is a cheat .
so supposing instead of her -- supposing somebody gave donald trump the questions to the debate .
headlines all over the world .
he must withdraw from the race .
you do n't even hear anything about crooked hillary .
she got the questions .
to me that 's such a big difference .
some people say , my people , oh do n't mention that , it 's just -- i say to me it 's a big deal .
it 's a big deal .
but it 's not a big deal for the dishonest media to say .
they do n't want to report it .
but just think about it , supposing it was us .
at the core of my contract is my plan to bring back our jobs .
bring them back to america .
and by the way , you have a great governor .
support your governor .
he 's a great guy .
where is he ?
he 's here someplace .
he 's a great guy and he 's in a tough fight .
and he 's going to win that fight .
but he 's a great guy .
so hopefully you 'll support your governor .
north carolina has lost nearly half of its manufacturing jobs since nafta , a deal signed by bill clinton and his lovely wife , hillary .
well think of it .
think of it .
think of the numbers of jobs .
here 's the one that gets me the most .
two things get me the most .
two things that just do n't seem real .
because we 're going to take care of our veterans , right ?
like big league .
because our veterans are great .
but two statistics i ca n't believe .
twenty - two suicides a day for our veterans .
think of it .
you would n't think that 's possible .
because they 're treated so badly .
they wait on line for six , seven , eight days for simple procedure that could solve their problem or for a prescription .
but two numbers i do n't -- it just does n't make sense .
twenty- two suicides a day for our veterans .
ok ?
it does n't make sense .
and here 's another one .
america has lost 70,000 factories .
now i thought they meant 700 or 7,000 maybe .
it 's 70,000 factories since china entered the world trade organization , another bill and hillary clinton - backed disaster .
think of it though .
think of what 70,000 factories is .
so those are the two numbers .
they just do n't seem to be real .
sad numbers .
sad numbers .
especially the vets , to be honest with you .
we 're living through the greatest jobs theft in the history of our world .
there 's never been anything happened to a country like has been happening to the united states .
our jobs are fleeing .
our companies are being taken .
and leaving .
and leaving .
a trump administration will stop the jobs from leaving america .
and we will stop the jobs from leaving north carolina .
believe me .
if a company wants to fire their workers and leave , as an example north carolina , and move to another country , and then ship their products back into the united states through what will be a very strong border , by the way .
we will make them pay a 35 percent tax on every product that they ship back here .
and here 's what 's going to happen .
they 're not going to leave .
they 're not going to leave .
now your politicians , some of them do n't understand it .
only cut taxes for the middle class .
and by the way , hillary clinton wants to raise your taxes , and you know that .
substantially .
so one of the highest taxes in the world , she wants to raise your taxes .
same old story .
we will unleash the power of american energy including shale , oil , natural gas and clean coal .
our plan will end the epa intrusion into your family farms , and stop double taxation of a family farm at that .
we will cancel billions in global warming payments to the united nations .
billions and billions of dollars .
and we have no idea what they do with that money .
i actually have a pretty good idea .
you 're not going to like it .
and use that -- we 're going to use that money to rebuild the infrastructure of our country .
and we will rebuild our inner cities .
the african - american community , the hispanic community ...   ... have had such lies told to them .
they live -- many , many people living in the inner cities of our country , they 're getting worse and worse .
the crime is unbelievable .
you ca n't walk to the store and get a loaf of bread .
often you get shot .
chicago .
thousands and thousands of shootings since jan. 1 .
you read it .
the murder rate of the united states is the highest it 's been in 45 years .
the dishonest media does n't tell you that stuff because they want you to like obama .
they want you to think obama is doing a good job .
and he 's not .
and he 's not .
and he 's not .
so you live in the inner cities .
you 're african - american .
you 're hispanic .
the schools are no good .
there are no jobs .
and it 's totally unsafe .
and i say i will fix it .
what the hell do you have to lose ?
i 'm going to fix it .
we are all going to fix it .
we 're going to fix it .
we 're going to bring back jobs .
we 're going to bring back safety .
and we 're going to get really good education going .
tremendous potential , folks , in the inner cities , believe me , tremendous potential .
we will become a rich nation again .
but to be a rich nation , we must also be a safe nation .
hillary clinton wants a 550 percent increase in syrian refugees flowing into our country .
unbelievable .
it 's unbelievable .
her plan will import generations of terrorism , extremism and radicalism into your schools and throughout your communities .
and you do n't even know where they 're going .
your government does n't even know where they 're going .
when i 'm elected president , we will suspend the syrian refugee program ...   ... and we will keep radical islamic terrorists the hell out of our country .
have no choice .
we have no choice .
we have no choice .
but we 're going to work because we all have hearts and it 's a big problem , caused to a large extent by obama and hillary clinton .
the migration , caused to a large extent -- isis was caused by them .
they left a big vacuum .
there was no isis when she first served as secretary .
there was no isis .
she created it .
now she stands at the debate , " i will fight isis . "
she 's got no chance .
she 's going to fight nobody .
she wants to go home and go to sleep .
unbelievable .
she 's going to fight isis .
so we 're going to build -- we 're going to build , we are going to build safe havens .
we 're going to have the gulf states who have nothing but money , they 're going to pay for it .
we have $ 20 trillion in debt .
and if it 's ok , i 'm not going to spend .
we have $ 20 trillion in debt .
and we still have to rebuild our country .
you know it 's one thing like when you buy a company and it 's got some debt .
we have $ 20 trillion in debt .
but the country 's a mess .
the roads are bad .
the bridges are bad .
the schools are bad .
the hospitals are bad .
the tunnels are bad .
everything 's bad .
the military needs massive amounts of money .
so we have all this horrible debt .
it 's one thing if we had it and everything 's in tippy top shape .
i like to say .
you know i like the properties .
give me them .
i want them .
give me them .
but we have them and they 're a mess .
and we have $ 20 trillion , which is far too much .
so we 're going to get it down .
and we 're going to rebuild our .
we have so many things we 're going to be doing .
we 're going to be a rich nation again .
a trump administration will also secure and defend the borders of the united states .
and yes , we will build a great wall and mexico will pay for the wall 100 percent .
one hundred percent .
mexico will pay .
if you look at the incredible -- if you look at the incredible deficits we have with mexico , it 's unbelievable .
what we have , the cost of that wall is peanuts , is peanuts compared to the numbers you 're talking about on trade with mexico .
and the numbers with china ?
trade deficit ?
i mean we will have a trade deficit with china of close to $ 500 billion this year .
we are going to lose in worldwide trade of goods , we 're going to lose worldwide close to $ 800 billion .
what are we doing ?
you really ask , who is negotiating these deals ?
where do these people come ?
you know where they come from ?
they 're political hacks .
you 're dealing with the smartest people in the world .
you have chinese people , every -- you have from japan , you have from all these other countries .
they put their smartest and the best .
we put political hacks that do n't know what they 're doing .
so we have an -- and we have the greatest in the world .
we have the greatest business people .
we have the greatest negotiators .
we do n't use them .
we do n't use them .
we use political people .
some of them got their job because they give campaign contributions .
we 're going to get it straightened out , folks , starting tomorrow .
go vote .
go vote .
right ?
my women .
hillary supports totally open borders .
there goes your country .
and strongly supports sanctuary cities like san francisco where kate steinle was murdered violently by an illegal immigrant deported at least five times .
we will cancel all federal funding to sanctuary cities .
we will stop illegal immigration , deport all criminal aliens and dismantle every last criminal gang and cartel threatening our citizens .
we will also repeal the obama - clinton defense sequester , and rebuild our badly depleted military .
there have been few times in our history where we 've needed it more , few times .
north carolina will be at the very center of this effort with brand new advanced fighters flying from seymour johnson air force base .
beautiful .
beautiful .
beautiful , beautiful new fighters from seymour johnson .
and we 're going to have more battalions .
you know the marines are way , way off in terms of numbers .
you know that .
i know .
has there ever been ?
yes , there have been .
but rarely do we have times when we need this strong presence like now .
the world hates us .
the world hates us .
so we 're going to increase -- thank you .
we 're going to increase marine battalions at camp lejeune .
i 've been to camp lejeune ....   they make major new investments .
where i was the other night , right next to it .
i guess like 25,000 or 27,000 people at fort bragg .
great people .
all soldiers are tough .
a couple of them shook my hand .
it was like oy , whoa .
take it easy , fellas .
they are tough cookies .
they are strong .
they do n't know how strong they are .
these are great people .
and new military technologies will be researched and developed right here at the research triangle .
right here .
i 'm honored to have the endorsements of more than 200 top admirals and generals , and 22 medal of honor recipients .
and every day those numbers go up big league .
big league .
and i asked some of the generals and admirals the other night by fort bragg .
i asked them .
i said fellas , let me ask you a question .
they want to take over mosul .
am i getting something wrong ?
whatever happened to the element of surprise for us ?
i 'm talking to admirals now and generals .
that 's what they do .
i do other things .
but you know it 's called like common sense .
you got to say we 've made a lot of right calls .
i said why is it that four months away from going into mosul they 're announcing " we are going into mosul ? "
we 're going into mosul because we want to get the leaders of isis and they 're staying in mosul .
and then three months they 're saying " we are going in , in three months to mosul . "
and then we 're going in , in two months .
and every time i hear , i put my hands , i go like this .
i do n't want to hear this , please .
and as you know , they 've been met with tremendous resistance , much more than they would 've been .
and i guarantee you this .
i ca n't say it with certainty , only about 99.9 percent , ok ?
i ca n't say -- nothing 's 100 percent .
even our victory is n't 100 percent .
but it 's starting to look pretty close , is n't it ?
those numbers .
those numbers .
oh , these guys are unhappy .
look at them .
they 're not happy .
they are unhappy campers .
starting to look good .
starting to look good .
but would n't it be nice if instead of announcing four months ago and there months ago .
then they have last -- two weeks ago they go next week we 're getting ready to raid .
the leaders all left .
they 're gone .
and the other people are putting up much more of a fight .
horrible .
they 're using human shields .
it 's a horrible situation .
i mean it 's hell .
it 's hell .
but why do we   watch what 's going on .
hillary and her failed establishment have trillion dollars on wars in the middle east that we never win .
we just keep fighting and fighting .
it 's like a hose .
the money just keeps pouring out .
we never win .
and now the middle east is in worse shape by far than it 's ever been .
we have the great migration , the whole thing .
they 've dragged -- thank you .
i do n't even want to look .
i 'll get myself .
i do n't want to look .
they 'll make it -- i wo n't even say i love you too because they 're going to make it a major headline if i said that .
world 's most dishonest people .
the world 's really dishonest people .
they dragged us into foreign wars that have made us less safe .
shipped our jobs and wealth all over -- right open at home .
you ever notice we send these incredible troops , so much death , so much injury , in order to create a border for a country that most people have never even heard of .
and yet we do n't protect our own borders .
is n't it an incredible thing ?
that will change starting tomorrow .
because from now on it 's going to be america first , america first .
so just in summing up , to all americans i say it 's time for a real leadership and time for change .
we have to have change .
can you imagine having hillary for four years ?
i 'm being serious about that .
i would n't want to watch the news every night .
i mean look at what she 's done with the e - mails as an example .
i mean did you ever see a mess like this ?
did you ever see -- of course the fbi -- the director was obviously under tremendous pressure .
so they went through 650,000 e - mails in eight days .
right .
so sad what 's going on .
and she still deleted them after getting a subpoena from congress .
i mean that 's a crime .
what happened ?
that 's a crime .
you do n't even need the new stuff .
she should n't be allowed to run .
should n't be allowed to run .
just think about what we can accomplish in the first 100 days of a trump administration .
we 're going to have the biggest tax cuts since ronald reagan .
and hillary is going to raise your taxes substantially .
we 're going to save and protect your social security and medicare .
and hillary is going to cut your social security and really injure medicare .
that 's what 's going to happen .
we will eliminate every unnecessary , job - killing regulation .
we 'll cancel every illegal obama executive order .
by the way , a man that loves this state .
it 's his birthday today .
billy graham , 98 .
the father of franklin .
billy graham .
what a great one , right ?
ninety - eight years old .
he is a fantastic man .
franklin 's a fantastic man .
and it 's so wonderful to have support of people like that .
we 're going to protect   religious liberty ...   ... rebuild our military and take care of our great veterans .
we 're going to take care of our veterans .
we will provide school choice and put an end to common core .
we move our education locally .
we will support the men and women -- these are great people , the men and women of law enforcement .
we 're going to save our second amendment .
and appoint justices to the united states supreme court who will uphold and defend the constitution of the united states .
this sounds so good to me because i started this on june 16th of last year because i could n't stand when i looked at what was going on with our country , i could n't stand it .
i could n't stand it .
coming down the escalator , right , with melania .
coming down that escalator june 16 of last year .
and they were all saying -- there were all the dishonest pundits .
actually a few of them thought i had a hell of a chance if you want to know the -- the smarter ones .
but they were all saying but he 's not involved with -- i 've been involved with politics all my life , on the other side .
but i 've been involved .
we had 17 people -- by the way , one of the great people in here tonight , mike huckabee .
where is mike huckabee ?
he 's such -- is he here someplace ?
he is here .
he is so great .
mike , wherever you are , come on out because you are great .
i just saw him .
but we had 17 people of great talent .
ben carson endorsed us .
mike ...   mike endorsed us .
tremendous -- i mean very talented people .
and one by one by one -- and they used to say -- well i remember we were down to like 13 or 14 .
in one state i got 49 percent .
and one of these clowns said " he has not reached the 50 percent mark . "
i got 49 percent with like 14 people .
how do you get 49 percent with 14 people ?
and they said he has n't reached the 50 percent mark .
they 're very dishonest people .
so we ended up with 17 people , right ?
do n't forget that 's hard because nobody else ever had a field that big or that violent , or that violent .
and we have a couple that did n't endorse and that 's too bad .
you know they signed a pledge .
they did n't honor it .
but ...   but -- no .
but for the most part ...   no .
for the most part they were very honorable .
but it was rough .
they said it was the roughest primary every .
i would say this is the roughest election .
you know the nfl ratings are way down .
you know why ?
because everyone 's watching this .
it 's actually tougher .
it 's actually tougher .
everyone 's watching .
the nfl ratings are way down .
a lot of people say it 's because of this .
so you had 17 people .
you 've came down -- but we 've got -- and this is a tribute to everybody in this room .
we got the highest number of voters in the history of the republican primary system .
so well done .
that 's a long time .
you know , starting with honest abe lincoln , right .
that 's a long time .
i got more than honest abe .
that 's really the only thing i did better than honest abe .
honest abe was pretty -- he was pretty good .
so here 's the beauty .
you have one day until the election .
and it 's not even one day .
it 's a half a day .
to make every dream you 've ever dreamed for your country and for your family to come true .
you have one magnificent chance .
and honestly , in four years it 's over , folks .
there has never been a movement like this .
even these dishonest people in the media say there has never -- bill o'reilly .
he said it 's the single greatest political phenomena that he 's witnessed in his life .
that 's a pretty good statement .
but others have said it .
others have said it .
others have said it .
and it 's not going to happen again .
it wo n't be able to happen again .
four years it 'll never happen .
so you got to get out there and you got to vote .
got to get out .
somebody said what you 've done has never been done before .
it does n't matter if you win or lose .
i said believe me , it matters .
no , they said that .
it 'll be down in the history books .
i said you know what ?
you may be right about that .
but if we do n't win i will consider this the single greatest waste of time , energy .
wow do i -- you need energy for this .
the single greatest waste of time , energy and money .
i have over $ 100 million .
that 's a lot of money that i do n't take in from the special interests because i do n't need it .
that 's nice .
and we have the biggest internet -- you know the small donors ?
the small donors are giving us money at record clips .
i think we had $ 82 million and then we had close to $ 100 million .
and it comes in .
and i think the average was like $ 61 each .
i love those people .
those are people that love this country .
and usually that 's for the democrats .
you know in all fairness , that 's usually for the democrats to do that .
but we 're beating everybody .
nobody 's seen anything like what we 're doing .
so we do n't want to blow it .
we do n't want to waste it .
go vote .
go vote .
because believe me , if we do n't win , all of us , honestly we 've all wasted our time , i 'll be honest .
because nothing 's going to happen .
they may say good things about us as a movement .
wo n't mean a damn thing , folks .
you got to go out .
we got to vote and we got to win .
change .
change .
so you have one magnificent chance to beat the corrupt system that you 're witnessing today , and to deliver justice for every forgotten man and woman and child in this nation .
do not let this opportunity slip away .
we 're fighting for every citizen who believes that government should serve the people , not the donors and not the special interests .
and we 're fighting , we 're fighting to bring us all together as americans .
we 're a very divided country .
people do n't realize we are an unbelievably divided country .
we 're going to come together .
just imagine what our country could accomplish if we started working together as one people under one god , saluting one american flag .
just imagine .
i 'm asking you to dream big because with your vote we are just one day away from the change you 've been waiting for , for your entire life .
because if we win tomorrow , we will be able to make america wealthy again , to make america strong again , to make america safe again , and to make america great again .
god bless you , everybody .
thank you .
god bless you .
thank you , north carolina .
thank you , folks .
thank you .
thank you very much .
oh jon .
jon is such a great actor and such a great person .
he is such a great person .
and he 's really been with me a long time in a lot of different ways .
he 's been incredible , so i just want to thank jon and i hope he makes another movie very quickly because i love his movies .
in particular i wanted to thank our host , tony perkins , for his years of leadership , and we know all about that .
and we all express our support for tony as he deals with the aftermath of the terrible floods in louisiana where two weeks ago i spent some time and i saw some incredible , incredible people .
right .
thank you .
amazing .
amazing people .
one of the greatest privileges of my journey has been the time i 've spent with the evangelical community and the support they gave me in those primaries was absolutely incredible .
i have to tell you .
all across the nation .
a lot of people said , " i wonder if donald will get the evangelicals ? "
i got the evangelicals .
i 'm gon na make it up to you , too .
you watch .
there are no more decent voters , or selfless people , than our christian brothers and sisters here in the united states .
so true .
i 've witnessed that incredible generosity all across this land .
-- gotten to know so many people .
i -- 
  -- during my trip to louisiana where christian volunteers raced to help their fellow citizens in need .
franklin graham is an example .
he brought the most incredible people and equipment to louisiana .
and he did n't want anything for it .
he 's a great man .
it 's that spirit of giving that we will need to rebuild louisiana and to rebuild this country , which is in serious , serious trouble .
yet , our media culture often mocks and demeans people of faith , and you understand that .
all the time i hear from concerned parents how much harder it is for a christian family to raise their children in today 's media environment .
it is right , is n't it ?
it is right .
not even close .
your values of love , charity and faith built this nation .
so how can it be that our media treats people of faith so poorly ?
one of the reasons is that our politicians have really abandoned you to a large extent .
and hillary clinton , you can forget about her .
so let me state this right upfront .
a trump administration , our christian heritage will be cherished , protected , defended like you 've never seen before .
believe me .
i believe and you believe it and you know it .
you know it .
and that includes religious liberty , remember .
remember .
i recently had a chance to visit a church in detroit .
great faith ministries international .
stand up if you 're a member , that 's good .
that was a great -- that was an amazing experience .
and the bishop , what a great guy .
in my remarks , i spoke -- 
  -- about how african american church , and this is all across the country , for centuries have been the conscience of our nation .
their unbreakable faith and spirit overcame some of the most difficult periods in our history , leading us all to a better future .
it 's very true , amazing .
this was such an amazing experience .
this is the power of faith .
it 's the power to heal , it 's the power to unite , it 's the power to make all of us live better lives , all of us .
our nation today is divided .
nobody likes to say it , but we 're living in a very , very divided nation .
it will be our faith in god , in his teachings , in each other that will lead us back to unity .
each of us here today has a role to play in bringing our country together , united in common purpose and in common values .
so let 's talk today about some of the things , and these are great things , that we can do together to create the american future for everybody , not just a certain group of people , but for everybody .
the first thing we have to do is give our churches their voice back , it 's been taken away .
the johnson amendment has blocked our pastors and ministers and others from speaking their minds from their own pulpits .
if they want to talk about christianity , if they want to preach , if they want to talk about politics , they 're unable to do so .
if they want to do it , they take a tremendous risk that they lose their tax - exempt status .
all religious leaders should be able to freely express their thoughts and feelings on religious matters .
and i will repeal the johnson amendment if i am elected your president .
i promise .
so important .
thank you .
that 's so important .
and i must tell you from the heart , this started -- a building of mine in manhattan , i had 50 pastors in a big conference room .
and we actually had 50 pastors , two rabbis , a couple of priests , we were all talking .
and we were there for two hours .
and at the end , it was a love fest .
we all agreed it was like a love fest .
and i said to them -- we were high up in a building on fifth avenue .
and i said to them , i 'd love your support .
and i know when i can get support .
i 'm quite sophisticated .
and i know they wanted to give me their total support , 100 percent , just like i had in the primaries .
and i said , i really would like your support .
and they did n't really know what i was talking about .
and i said , what 's going on here ?
they said , well , sir , we ca n't do that because we would be violating the laws .
and i said , what 's the punishment ?
well , we could lose our tax - exempt status .
which , of course , is a massive penalty .
i said , tell me about this .
and we sat down and they talked about it .
when did it happen ?
1954 or so , lyndon johnson was having problems .
powerful guy .
i actually , as his own   way , have to gain respect for what he was able to do .
can you imagine that this man singlehandedly -- he was having problems with churches .
and there was a church in houston that was giving him a hard time , maybe for a very good reason .
and he put in an amendment that basically stopped our great pastors and ministers and others from talking under the penalty of losing their tax - exempt status .
so we were looking down onto the sidewalk , and there were people walking on the sidewalk .
and i said , so , folks , what you 're telling me is those people walking way , way down there on the sidewalk have really more power than you do because they 're allowed to express their feelings and thoughts openly and without penalty .
and one of the pastors , who i knew very well -- and these are powerful people .
these are strong people with magnificent voices and just -- and magnificent hearts , much more importantly .
they looked at me and they said , that 's actually right , they have more power than we do .
we 're not allowed to express .
and that 's when i said we have to start thinking about this .
and i thought about it .
and then we had a large group of pastors again .
i said , i have thought about it .
if i become president , we are going to knock out the johnson amendment .
we are going to do that .
and it 's not going to be hard .
it 's not going to be hard .
when you -- when you think from the standpoint of political , you have more than men -- let 's say men are 50 percent , women are 50 percent .
you 're much more than 50 percent added together .
and i actually believe that 's one of the reasons why you have n't seen christianity and other religions within the united states going like a rocket ship , like our polls have been going in the last four weeks , a rocket ship .
right ?
i really believe that .
because you 're great people .
the people that you rely on sunday and all during the week , they 've been stopped from talking and speaking by a law and we 're going to get rid of that law -- it 's going to get rid of -- we 're going to get rid of it so fast .
and i 'm so proud to say , honestly i do n't want to take credit -- 
  -- but you had 50 people in that first meeting and many more in the second , i am so proud , i was just telling this to tony   to say , that was my idea .
i figure it 's the only way i 'm getting to heaven so this is going to very ...   the only way .
so we 're going to get rid of it and we 're going to let your great people speak and you 're going to see something happen that 's going to be very , very good , ok ?
so important .
i hope -- which means , you have to get out and vote .
on november 8 , you can not -- you did n't vote four years ago , you did n't vote .
you did n't , well you did , a few of you did .
believe me i know .
i look at the stats .
you did n't vote .
but this time you really have -- and this is your last chance , this is it .
i mean we 'll never have this opportunity again .
so i hope you can get every one of your friends and just get up your family and your friends and get out and vote , ok ?
november 8 .
thank you .
and if you do , we 're going to win by a lot .
that 's not going to even be a close election .
if you do n't , could be a very unhappy november 8 .
we 're also going to repeal and replace disastrous obamacare .
which gives the government control over the lives of every day citizens and the numbers are horrendous .
your premiums are going up by 50 , 60 , 70 percent .
the deductible is so high you never get to use it unless you are going to   a very long and very complex bad period .
very , very long .
it is a disaster .
it 's a disaster and everybody knows that , that it 's going to die of its own weight anyway .
but we 're going to get rid of it and we 're going to replace it with some great , great alternatives .
a much better healthcare at a much lower price .
hillary clinton wants to have completely government run healthcare , which would be a disaster for the liberties and freedoms of all america , this is what she wants , that 's what she 's aiming at .
that 's what obama wanted , he did n't quite there .
but he got this and you see how bad this has been .
one of the biggest issues in this race is going to be the issue of school choice .
and i ca n't possibly emphasize this enough , millions of poor and disadvantaged students are trapped in failing schools .
this education crisis afflicts all communities but none more so than the african american community , none .
the democratic party has run the inner cities of america for 50 , 60 , 70 years , some cases over 100 years .
over 100 years .
their policies and their politics and in particular , the politics of people like hillary clinton have produced only poverty , joblessness and rising crime .
when she was running for the senate in new york state , she said she was gon na produce jobs , jobs , jobs , in upstate new york .
it 's a disaster .
she could have produced jobs .
big thing .
jobs .
we 're gon na bring back jobs .
gon na -- catastrophe .
we 've lost tens of thousands of jobs -- she never did a thing .
it was all talk , no action .
just like what she 's doing right now is all talk and no action .
she 'll talk and talk and nothing will happen , only bad will happen .
but you just have to ask the people in upstate new york -- she won because of them , and she produced absolutely nothing .
jobs left .
it 's today one of the worst , one of the most depressing places in this country .
so just remember that when you hear her talking about jobs .
i know jobs .
she does n't know jobs .
that i can tell you .
i have outlined a new civil rights agenda for our time .
the right to a safe community , a great education and a secure job .
and i say to african - american parents , i say to hispanic - american parents , and i say it with great respect , our inner cities are a disaster .
crime , no jobs , education is the worst , in many cases almost worldwide bad and in many cases actually worldwide bad .
i say with great respect , what do you have to lose ?
it ca n't get any worse .
it ca n't get any worse .
you choose donald trump , i 'm gon na fix the problem .
you 're gon na have safety , you 're gon na have good education , we 're gon na get jobs because we 're gon na bring our jobs back .
mexico 's taken our jobs .
so many other places have taken our jobs .
what china 's doing to us is horrible .
we 'll have jobs .
what have you got to lose ?
i 'm gon na fix it .
i 'm gon na fix it .
school choice is at the center of this civil rights agenda .
and my goal is to provide every single inner city child in american that is trapped in a failing government school the freedom to attend the school of their choice .
competition and the schools will get better and better and better .
and if that means a private school , a religious school or a charter school or a magnet school -- school choice also means that parents can home school their children .
hundred percent .
hillary clinton opposes school choice because she 's controlled totally , totally , like a puppet , by special interests .
her policies will force millions of african - american and hispanic children to remain stuck in failed government schools , leading to higher unemployment and more poverty .
the poverty levels in this country nobody will believe .
nobody will believe .
my plan will break the government monopoly and make schools compete to provide the best services for our children , including every african - american and hispanic child in this country .
every single one of them .
this proposal begins with a $ 20 billion block grant from the federal government to states to pursue school choice programs .
however - that 's good , right ?
however , because 90 percent of education spending is at the state level , i will campaign to get the states to reallocate another $ 110 billion of their education budgets to school choice programs .
if we do this , that would mean $ 12,000 in school choice funds for every disadvantaged student in america .
what a difference this is going to make .
the money will follow the student to the public , private , or religious school that is best for them and their family .
in so many ways you 're going to have a choice .
my administration will partner with the leadership of any inner city , anybody , anybody , in the inner cities of america willing to run a pilot program -- and there will be a lot of them -- to provide school choice to every child in that community .
in baltimore , for instance , that would mean more than $ 15,000 in funds available per student .
as your president , i will be the biggest cheerleader for school choice you 've ever seen .
this means a lot of me because i know it can turn things around .
again , the education ca n't get worse .
common core , we 're going to end it .
we 'll bring in education .
i will fight for every child in this country who deserve better futures .
the african - american community has heard my message that i am going to make the inner city safe again , and i 'm going to bring back jobs , and i 'm going to bring back the great education .
do n't be surprised -- remember this , november eighth .
do n't be surprised , because we have been given a lot of support over the last three or four weeks , if on november eighth i get more african - american and hispanic votes than anyone thought possible about a month ago .
you see what 's going on .
they 're starting -- people are starting to hear about this and they say , wow , wow .
they 're liking it .
and , again , ca n't get any worse .
it 's going to get a lot better , but only if i do .
they ca n't do it .
the -- the democrats they have what they 've done is incredible .
and hillary clinton will be absolutely more of the same , rigid .
it 'll never change .
remember , 100 years , 70 years , 50 , it 's not going to change .
not going to happen .
now let 's talk about another issue that will define the future of this country for generations to come .
the united states supreme court .
earlier this year we lost the great justice antonin scalia .
the next president will not only have to fill this seat , but as many as four others .
it could even be -- i mean we could end up with a total of five judges by one president .
it would be record - setting .
probably be three .
could be four , could even be five .
and you pick the wrong people , you have a country that is no longer your country .
it will be a disaster .
one of the most important issues frankly , other than maybe defense -- because we 're going to build up our military .
it 's so depleted .
we 're going to take care of our vets .
we 're going to protect your second amendment .
so many things .
but one of the most important -- some people think it 's actually the most important -- is the filling of the seats united states supreme court .
you see what 's happening right now .
essentially it 's four and four and you see what -- how bad it is .
we 're going to pick great judges .
i 've already put a list of 11 federalist society highly recommended .
got uniform great on these 11 people .
and we are going to put truly great people -- maybe we use judge scalia as the ultimate example of what we are looking for , ok .
this will determine whether or not we remain a constitutional republic , frankly .
that 's what 's going to happen .
i have pledged to appoint judges who uphold the constitution , to protect your religious liberty and apply the law as written .
we reject judges who rewrite the constitution to impose their own personal views on 300 million - plus americans .
not going to have that .
i 've made public a list of judges , as i said , that will guide my selection process .
hillary clinton has refused to provide such a list , and we brought it up .
let 's see a list .
if you ever saw the list , you would walk out of here not feeling very well .
because she knows the extremist judges she would pick would be rejected by the overwhelming majority of the american public , they 'd be rejected .
clinton 's judicial picks would allow her to completely take over american healthcare , the american economy and americans ' religious liberty .
not to mention your second amendment , which is on very thin ice right now , as you know , because of the fact that we 're four - four .
if they even pick one judge who 's wrong , you can probably , as you know it , you can kiss the second amendment goodbye .
and we do n't want to see that .
another issue in this race of great importance to everyone in this room is the issue , of course , of national security .
just today , it was announced that north korea performed its fifth nuclear test , it 's forth since hillary clinton became secretary of state .
it 's just one more massive failure from a failed secretary of state .
she failed at everything .
her policies have also put iran onto a path of nuclear weapons .
and i have to say , made them overnight an absolute power .
they were dying three years ago .
the sanctions were choking them .
they would have fallen , but obama did n't support people that would have taken over , and i think in this case , probably would have taken over the right way .
they had no support .
but look at what 's happened to iran in such a short period of time .
but remember the ransom payments , remember , it was $ 400 million two weeks ago .
but then they made a mistake .
this is cash .
remember , they said they paid cash because they could n't open a bank account , there was no way of sending it into a checking account ?
all lies , just like obamacare was a big lie , remember ?
you can use your plan , you can use your doctors , 27 times , right ?
twenty- seven times .
use your doctors , use your plan .
it turned out to be a lie , it 's all a lie .
it 's all a big lie .
it 's a rigged system and it 's a lie .
and i 'll tell you what -- i 'll tell you what .
the $ 400 million , for those that have n't been reading the papers over the last two days , turned out to be $ 1.7 billion in cash , cash .
and i actually said -- they said that money 's going to be used for terror .
i said , no they do n't need it for terror , they 've got $ 150 billion .
that 's in addition to the $ 150 billion we gave them back .
i said they do n't need it .
this is going into their swiss accounts and going into their accounts .
they 're not going to use it for terror , they have plenty of money for terror .
think of it , $ 1.7 billion cash .
massive big vats of cash .
you saw them .
cartons .
never saw anything like it .
i 've seen a lot of cash .
never saw anything like this -- $ 1.7 billion .
can you imagine these guys ?
planes get -- they stop .
remember they would n't give back the hostages , they waited there for hours and hours and obama kept saying , " no , no , this has nothing to do . "
even the hostages said they kept us waiting for a certain plane to come in .
not to take them back .
because they were waiting for something .
it was this .
just another lie .
but can you imagine these people sitting there and they see $ 1.7 billion in cash .
oy , oy , oy , they think we 're stupid .
they think we 're stupid .
they wo n't be thinking it for long .
at the same time , isis is hunting down and exterminating what it calls the nation of the cross .
isis is carrying out a genocide against christians in the middle east .
we can not let this evil continue .
ca n't let it .
isis must be destroyed .
have to .
have no choice .
to defeat isis , we must use military warfare , but also cyber warfare , financial warfare and ideological warfare .
it 's a whole different ballgame today than it was 50 years ago and 200 years ago .
different world .
we must also establish a bipartisan goal in the united states and an international goal with our allies of defeating radical islamic terrorism .
words that our president wo n't use and words that hillary clinton wo n't use .
just like we won the cold war by identifying our enemy and building a consensus to guide a long - term strategy , so too must we do the same with islamic terrorism .
by the way , president obama has allowed syrian refugees to pour into our country at unbelievable rates and hillary clinton wants to allow 550 percent more .
but it 's almost impossible to get a christian in from syria .
they take others , but they do n't take christians .
very rare , very rare .
so i said that we need to make safe zones in the region .
we want to take care of people .
but we absolutely can not allow this potential tremendous threat to continue and we have to stop this .
this is going to be potentially a catastrophe for our country .
it 's from within .
this could be the all - time great trojan horse .
this could be it .
you ever notice on the -- you look at the migration trail and you see people with cell phones .
cell phones .
and some of the cell phones have the isis flag printed on them .
and some of them have things far worse than that .
scenes far worse than that .
so it was the failed policies , you have to remember , of hillary clinton and obama that unleashed isis in the first place .
if they did the right thing , you would n't be talking about isis right now .
now she wants to get rid of them , oh we 're going to get rid of them .
she tells them already , there will be no boots on the ground .
now even if you even do n't want boots on the ground , you do n't want to say it .
do n't say it .
now they 're saying oh , i hope she wins , oh boy would they dream of having her as president , can you imagine ?
they dream about it every night , having hillary clinton .
but even if you believe it -- and i can understand that , no boots on the ground , i can understand , you do n't say it .
let them think they 're going to go through hell , do n't say it .
can you imagine the great general douglas macarthur , can you imagine the great general george patton or one of our great generals that we have today , general flynn , who 's here someplace , i love general flynn .
but can you imagine these people saying , i mean they 're basically giving out the strategy .
there will be no boots on the ground .
if you do n't want that , i fully understand .
do n't say it .
do n't say it .
can you imagine macarthur saying , we 're going to fight the enemy and we 're going to move our troops in about a month .
we 're going to hit from behind .
we 're going to hit them from the front but -- and everything they say turns out to be true .
you know i hate to say this because we have a lot of evangelicals in this room , but maybe we should n't be so honest when it comes to military strategy , does that make sense ?
hope i did n't lose your vote for saying that .
just look at what her policies have left us with in iraq , syria and libya .
the problem is hillary clinton is trigger happy .
she really is , she 's trigger happy and yet she says , no boots .
which is sort of -- probably will be boots , you know , probably will turn out to be another disaster .
her tenure has brought us only war and destruction and death .
she 's just too quick to intervene , invade or to push for regime change with people we do n't even know who they are .
and they take over and they 're far worse .
this creates the power vacuums that are filled by terrorists and groups like isis .
my administration on the other hand , will work with any country that is willing to partner with us to defeat isis and halt radical islamic terrorism .
and by the way , that includes russia .
if they want to join us on knocking out isis , that is just fine as far as i 'm concerned .
it 's a very imperfect world and you ca n't always choose your friends .
life , but you can never fail to recognize your enemies and we have some real enemies .
unfortunately for our country , our enemies probably hacked into hillary clinton 's e - mails .
these are the same e - mails she destroyed after receiving a federal subpoena , what 's that ?
using software in order to bleach the e - mail so you can never , ever see then .
she even mysteriously lost 13 different phones before the fbi got them and many were destroyed with a hammer .
did anybody ever hit a hammer -- you know , maybe two or three people .
but they were just released from prison , those two people .
can you believe this ?
destroyed them with a hammer .
the old- fashioned way , i guess .
the other night , in the commander - in - chief forum -- did anybody see that ?
how did i do ?
good .
well , we have a big debate coming up .
who knows what 's going to happen there , but i will say every poll has me winning big league the commander - in - chief .
we had ...   the polls came out after that event and we won big league .
now , we have a debate coming up .
i do n't imagine any of you are going to be watching the debate .
i wo n't , i promise .
hillary clinton answered questions on her e- mails horribly .
that 's why she lost , that 's why she did so poorly , she was terrible .
she was -- honestly , i should n't be saying this .
she was terrible .
she keeps talking about the e - mails , every time she talks about them , she talks about them differently .
it seems each week -- true -- she has like a different answer .
but there can be no answer when she deletes 33,000 e - mails , bleaches them so they can never be recovered , an unheard of practice , hammers them into total silence .
you know what 's happening .
you know what 's happening .
i always say getting away with that will be the single greatest accomplishment of her career .
it 's true .
it 's true .
so her answers were bad .
they were bad .
and a lot of people said it was so totally dishonest .
and you know , she was blaming matt lauer .
i thought matt lauer did a very good job .
i mean , his questions to me were very tough .
but the gentleman who stood up and said , honestly , you should be in prison for what you did .
to me , that was the tough one .
that was the tough -- that was a tough question .
well , sort of a question in the form of a statement , right ?
clinton is unfit to be our president for many reasons .
true .
she 's unfit for many reasons , the biggest of which is her judgment .
it 's just so bad .
it 's time to restore honesty and integrity to our government , we have to do it .
and one more issue -- final issue i wanted to discuss today is the economy and helping those in need .
there is no more charitable group in this country than christians and all of us -- true -- and all of us here today determined to lift suffering americans out of poverty .
we 're going to do it .
with -- a lot of other people are going to help .
as your president , i will pursue a complete reform of our economy to bring back millions of new jobs into our country , millions of new jobs .
we 've lost our jobs like we 're a bunch of babies .
they 've gone to other countries .
they 've gone to mexico .
they 've gone to many other countries .
china 's taking massive advantage of us .
it 's all so easy , believe me .
it 's all so easy .
that includes we will be doing massive tax cuts for working families and for businesses .
it includes , very importantly , the elimination of all needless job - killing regulations .
it includes lifting the restrictions on america energy , which is under siege .
i will also renegotiate nafta .
and if they do n't want to renegotiate it so it becomes a two - way highway , not just a one - way highway out of the united states for our companies and our jobs , we will terminate nafta .
believe me .
we 'll stand up to china and we 're going to fight for every last job .
it 's going to be america first and it 's going to be the american worker first .
crucially , i will also fight for the american family and american family values .
the family must be at the center of any anti - poverty agenda .
has to be .
thank you .
our country just lost one of the great champions for the american family , phyllis schlafly , great woman , really great woman .
we send our thoughts and prayers to her loved ones .
i will be going to her funeral tomorrow in st. louis .
phyllis fought very hard to the very end for a free and prosperous america .
she understood that to be truly united as a country , we ca n't simply turn to government or to politicians .
the bedrock of our unity is the realization that we 're all brothers and sisters created by the same god .
phyllis understood that .
phyllis understood .
and by the way , phyllis endorsed me a long time ago when it was n't necessarily something that was so easy to do .
and she was incredible .
she was so brave .
she endorsed me , and that was not the thing to do at the time .
people said , " trump ? "
she said , " he 's going to win , you do n't understand , he knows how to win , he 's going to win . "
they said , " phyllis , not going to be trump . "
and we went boom , boom , boom .
but i will tell you , phyllis endorsed me at a time when it was n't necessarily the thing to do , even the popular thing to do .
and i will never forget that .
that had a huge impact .
she was a great , great powerful woman with a tremendous heart .
and i look forward to being with her family tomorrow because you really -- that 's a celebration .
she was 92 years old .
we 're all equal and we all come from the same creator .
if we remember that simple fact , then our future is truly limitless .
there is nothing we as americans ca n't do .
there 's a biblical verse that i 've often read and i want to repeat it again because i think it is so important to what we 're trying to achieve right now for our country .
it 's from first john chapter four . "
no one has ever seen god , but if we love one another , god lives in us and his love is made complete in us . "
so true .
so true .
imagine what our country could accomplish if we started working together as one people under one god , saluting one flag .
it 's time to stop quibbling over the smallest words and time to start dreaming about the great adventures that lie ahead for our country .
this is my promise to all of you .
starting in 2017 , we will be one american nation .
it 's time to break our ties with the bitter failures of the past and to embrace a new american future .
have to do it .
together , we will make america believe again , we will make america united again and we will make america great again .
thank you much and god bless you , thank you .
thank you .
thank you very much .
thank you , coach .
boy , oh boy .
he 's something , coach knight .
no games , right ?
with him there 's no games .
thank you , coach .
thank you , general .
what a combination those two are right ?
boy this is a great group .
you know , we set this up about 24 hours ago , because i hear we 're going great in michigan -- we 're gon na win michigan .
we 're doing great in every poll , i mean we 're doing amazing .
we 're winning in ohio .
we 're winning in iowa .
we 're winning in north carolina .
we 're winning in florida .
we 're winning big in texas -- you know , they were saying texas is -- texas is setting new voting records .
we 're winning all over the place , folks .
this is going to be something special .
in eight days we 're going to win the great state of michigan ...   ... and we are going to win back the white house .
one hundred percent .
let me start today by making a very important promise to you .
when i win on november 8th , i am going to bring your jobs back to america .
you know it better than anybody else in this country .
the long nightmare of jobs leaving michigan will be coming to a very rapid end .
we 're going to make michigan the economic envy of the entire world once again , it used to be the economic envy .
the political class in washington has betrayed you .
they 've uprooted your jobs , your communities and they 've shipped your wealth all over the world , to mexico , and all over .
they put up new skyscrapers in beijing , while your factories in michigan were crumbling .
these we 're our politicians .
i will end the theft of american prosperity , believe me .
i will fight for every last michigan job -- you 're going to have plenty of jobs get ready .
because when we win it 's going to be america first .
so , you have to make sure you get in your absentee ballots and get out to the polls on november 8th .
you have to get those ballots in .
anybody send in their ballot , anybody ?
all right , big thing november 8th .
we 'll never have another chance to do this again , you know we 've created a movement , this is like a great movement , that the whole world is talking about .
and honestly you 'll never have this chance , in four years , i do n't care who it is that runs , your never gon na have this chance .
so you have to get out and vote .
vote with all of your heart , vote with all of your soul , because this is it .
show the whole world how much you love michigan and how much you love america by voting .
so that we take back our jobs and we re - build our military and we do so many other things including border , we 've got ta have a border .
i 'm asking for your vote .
we will build the wall , do not worry about it .
do not worry .
we do n't build a wall , bobby knight is going to be very angry at me , so we 're gon na build the wall .
and you know what else , you know who is paying for the wall , right ?
one hundred percent .
they do n't quite know that yet , but they 're going to find out .
no , they 're good .
i met with the president of mexico , a couple of months ago , he was great , the whole thing is going to work out , but we are going to have to have a wall .
we have to stop the poison from blowing in .
you know the poison , the drugs , they 're flowing in , they are poisoning your state .
they are poisoning new hampshire .
new hampshire tells me an -- for a year and a half they have been telling me stories , unbelievable .
but , every state , the poison is pouring in and we 're gon na stop the drugs , we 're gon na stop those drugs fast .
then we are going to work on the people that are so badly addicted .
we 're gon na get them better .
i 'm asking for the vote of republicans , democrats , independents and first time voters who want great jobs , safe neighborhoods and a government that works for the people .
i am asking you so importantly , to believe in america once again .
but to bring back your jobs , we must also must immediately repeal and replace obamacare .
what a disaster .
it 's just been announced that michigan residents are going to experience crushing double - digit premium hikes , congratulations -- congratulations .
in fact a number is so high , i do n't want to give it to you 'cause i want you to have a good time today , ok ?
i do n't want to ruin your day , i 'll just see you sort of slump out of here , no .
by the way , any place more fun to be than a trump rally ?
and honestly , the subject right now is n't so positive because it 's what 's going on with our country .
but we 're going to make it so positive -- we 're going to make it so positive .
in minnesota , where the premium -- i mean , you have to see what happens in minnesota , but the increase is over 60 percent .
the democratic governor has said -- and he 's a big democrat -- the affordable care act is no longer affordable .
he took a little heat for that .
hillary clinton wants to double down on obamacare , make it even more expensive .
in fact , much more expensive than ever before , she 's gon na double down .
in all fairness though folks -- based on what we 're reading -- in all fairness i think right now , she has bigger problems than obamacare .
and they finally have gotten wise to the clintons , perhaps they 've finally gotten wise .
wow .
thank you .
i love you , too .
and i have to give the fbi credit , that was so bad what happened originally , and it took guts for director comey to make the move that he made , in light of the kind of opposition he had , where they 're trying to protect her from criminal prosecution , you know that .
it took a lot of guts , i really disagreed with him , i was not his fan .
but i 'll you what he did , he brought back his reputation -- he brought it back .
he 's got to hang tough , because there 's a lot of -- a lot of people want him to do the wrong thing .
what he did was the right thing .
i 'm asking for your vote so that we can replace obamacare and save the healthcare -- and look , the healthcare in this country , is in such dire straits .
we are going to save healthcare for every family in michigan , for every family in our country .
much less expensive , much better healthcare .
repeal and replace .
we have so many alternatives , so much better , so much less expensive .
real change also means restoring honesty to our government .
as you know , the fbi has re - opened its investigation into hillary clinton and discovered ...   ... and discovered -- you heard this yesterday -- it 's hard to believe -- and discovered another 650,000 e - mails .
she lied under oath when she turned over all of her work related e - mails .
just one more lie out of so many .
and you know , general cartwright , a four- star general , lied one time -- and i think he did it actually for national security purposes .
he lied one time , he may go to jail for five years .
she 's lied so many times and the deletions .
this is the biggest scandal since watergate .
hillary wants to blame everyone else for her mounting legal troubles , but she has brought all of this on herself .
hillary is the one who set up any legal private e - mail server , in a closet , to shield her illegal activity .
hillary is the one who engaged in a corrupt pay - for - play scheme at the state department .
and now there are five fbi probes into the clinton foundation and their pay - for - play activities , very , very deep investigations .
hillary is the one who sent and received classified information on an insecure server , putting the safety of the american people under threat .
that 's what she did .
six - hundred - and - fifty thousand -- you know , what i call that ?
that 's the mother load .
that 's the -- i think you 're gon na find the 33,000 that are missing , the 15,000 that are missing , the bats   that are missing two weeks ago .
you know , they had boxes of e - mails missing two weeks ago ?
i think we hit the mother load , as they say in the good old mining industry .
hillary is the one who lied to congress under oath .
hillary is the one who lied on so many different occasions to the fbi , and they know --they know .
they know hillary 's the one who made 13 phones disappear , some with a hammer .
hillary is the one who destroyed 33,000 e - mails after she got the subpoena , after .
before it 's no good , but after , no ; that 's why something should 've happened then , but that 's ok .
hillary is the one who broke the law over and over and over again .
we can be sure that what is in those e - mails is absolutely devastating and i think we 're gon na find out , by the way , for the first time .
thank you , huma .
thank you , huma .
good job , huma .
thank you , anthony weiner .
and you all saw the statements i made him a year ago -- about him a year ago .
you know , in new york we knew   weiner .
and i made statements that were rough , like how can she be allowed to live with this guy , how can she have access to this important information .
and i was badly criticized , right ?
now , they 're saying oh , trump has good judgment , wow .
got good instincts , i have good instincts .
hillary is not the victim .
the american people are the victims of this corrupt system in every way .
and this is your one chance , right now , november 8th to change it .
hillary is likely to be under investigation for a very long time .
one of her long time supporters , a top democratic pollster , good guy , smart guy , sharp guy , doug schoen is now totally withdrawing his support .
he 's supported their family for years .
he wrote in an article -- he wrote in an article quote , " i 'm a democrat .
i worked for bill clinton .
but i ca n't vote for hillary . "
and this is so important , schoen writes , " i 'm now convinced that we will be facing the very real possibility of a constitutional crisis with many dimensions and deleterious , " and we all know that , " consequences should secretary clinton win the election . "
now , i do n't think that 's gon na happen so hopefully .
that happens , we did a bad job out here , folks .
schoen warns that if hillary is elected , she would be under protracted criminal investigation and probably a criminal trial , i will say .
so we 'd have a criminal trial for a sitting president .
in the meantime , putin -- who she likes to say bad things about -- and all of the other leaders , many of whom she says bad things about , then you wonder why the world hates us .
but all of these people will sit back and they will laugh and they will smile .
the investigation will last for years .
the trial would probably start , nothing will get done , i can tell you your cars will continue to leave michigan .
your car production facilities , like the ford facility , will continue to leave michigan , nothing 's gon na get done .
our country will continue to suffer .
she 's unfit and unqualified to be the president of the united states and her election ...   would mire our government and our country in a constitutional crisis that we can not afford , folks , we have to get back to work , we have to get back to work .
we need to be going to work for the american people , we ca n't do what hillary would like to do and that 's become president .
you ca n't take it , i ca n't take it , nobody can take it .
and by the way , we do not need four more years of obama that i can tell you right now , that , i can tell you .
four more years of isis running wild .
four more years of no borders , four more years of losing all of your jobs , four more years of a depleted military , we 're not building up our military for the great people in our military .
hillary -- that 's right .
hillary clinton 's corruption ... : eight more days !
eight days , you 're right .
is a threat to democracy and the only way to save our democracy is to get our and vote by the millions , by the millions .
do n't leave it to chance .
we 're all hearing about our system is too honorable , it 's to honest -- both   right , they say it 's so honest , it 's so honest that you can name 10 places , so can i. but you hear so much about the honesty .
let 's do this , let 's not worry about it , get out and vote by the millions and we wo n't have to worry about what 's taking place behind the scenes .
remember this , 1.8 million people that are dead are registered to vote .
you know , they talk about oh , that 's a threat to democracy what i 'm saying , 1.8 million people , 2.75 million people are registered to vote in two states .
so they vote here , they go to another state , they vote there .
there 's so many things going on folks .
and obama the other day on television , talk to you about the bedrock of our foundation and this is going to be so .
but the other day , eight years ago when he was running for the first time , he essentially was talking about how corrupt the election system is in chicago .
i saw it .
i said wait a minute , he 's telling us how trump should n't be saying these things and this guy , eight years ago , is on television last night , talking about how corrupt it is and saying i 'm lucky i 'm from chicago .
in other words , its corrupt , it 's corrupt .
he 's lucky he 's the beneficiary of the corruptness .
folks , get out and vote by the millions so they ca n't do anything .
we ca n't let them take it away .
the clinton crime spree ends on november 8th , it 's gon na end on november 8th .
and when we close the chapter on the clintons , we open a bright new chapter , focused on the american people .
so we wanna now be a little uplifting because you know what ?
we have such tremendous potential , tremendous potential in our country .
my contract with the american voter begins with a plan to restore honesty and accountability in our government .
i want the entire corrupt washington establishment to hear and to heed the words we are about to say , get ready .
when we win on november 8th , we are going to washington , d.c. and we are going to drain the swamp , we 're gon na drain the swamp .
and speaking of draining the swamp , donna brazile did it again , wikileaks today .
she gave the questions to a debate to hillary clinton and that was from a couple of weeks ago .
happened again , but this time far worse ; she gave the questions to a debate to hillary clinton .
now , they 're all blaming donna brazile and frankly , i think she just got fired from the network .
she should be fired from the dnc .
by the way , could you imagine if i did that ?
bobby , what would happen to be if i did that ?
electric chair , i think , the electric chair .
if i did that , can you imagine ?
so donna brazile got fired from the network but here 's the real problem , uh oh .
there 's only one .
there 's only one bobby knight .
thank you .
thank you , bobby .
thank you .
what a great place to be .
thank you , bobby .
and you know , we also have the endorsement of a great , great guy , jack nicklaus .
jack nicklaus .
you talk about winners , jack is such a winner , bobby is such a winner .
we have so many endorsements .
we have so many endorsements from such great , great winners .
we love jack .
at the core of our contract is my plan to bring back your jobs .
michigan has lost more than one in four manufacturing jobs since bill clinton signed nafta , a deal strongly supported by hillary clinton .
before nafta went into effect , there were 280,000 auto workers in michigan .
today , that number is only 160 thousand , and believe me , it 's going down and going down fast .
our country has lost -- listen to this -- 70,000 factories , 70,000 , bobby .
do you heard that ?
seventy - thousand .
i thought it was 700 , i thought it was 7,000 -- 70,000 factories since china entered the world trade organization , another bill -- that was another bill and hillary disaster .
we get nothing .
he said what do we get ?
we get -- we get loss and unemployment .
we have nearly $ 800 billion in annual trade deficits with the world , $ 800 billion .
we do all of this trade .
we have a trade deficit of $ 800 million .
we are living through the greatest jobs theft in the history of the world and the people of michigan , perhaps almost more than any other place , know that .
our trade deficit with china grew almost 40 percent during hillary 's tenure as secretary of state .
it 's massive .
her trade deal with south korea , you know all about that one , she was pushing it so hard .
instead of making 100,000 , it killed 100,000 american jobs .
so when you look around michigan and you see the rusted out factories , the empty buildings and the long unemployment lines , remember , hillary clinton did much of this to you .
she was n't there .
and during the debates , you watch the debates -- did i win the debates , by the way ?
the debates .
i love those debates .
but you know , i watch   i 'm going to do this and i 'm going to do that .
i say hillary , you 've been there for 30 years , why did n't you do it ?
she 'd say , " i 'm going to change the tax code so that donald trump ca n't do that . "
well , what she does n't say is all of her donors are doing the same thing .
but i said to her , " i do n't mind if you do that , then change the code , why do n't you do it ? "
nothing gets done .
the reason she 'll never do it is because her donors do n't want it done , ok ?
and i 'll have over $ 100 million in my campaign , which means $ 100 million of people that are n't giving me money .
i will tell you this , on the internet , people -- $ 61 average .
sixty - one dollars .
we 're setting records , setting records .
it 's amazing .
hillary got rich selling your jobs to the same special interests who pushed the jobs out of america , are the people who have given countless millions to her .
she 's not gon na change .
hillary gets rich making america poor .
look at the devastation here .
delphi laid off 3,627 workers .
you know that .
and you know where they moved ?
different places .
most of those jobs went to mexico .
by the way , mexico 's doing very well .
if she 's working for mexico , i think she 's doing a great job .
we 're going to fight for the workers at delphi .
anybody here from delphi ?
a few ?
they do n't want to raise their hand .
this guy had his hand sort of partially up .
are you -- he was like " uh . "
in other words -- do n't worry , you 'll be proud of it very soon .
they got a raw deal and they deserve better .
gm laid off 314 workers at the lake orion assembly plant in 2013 because of imports from the south korean trade deal pushed by hillary .
that was her baby .
lear corporation laid off many people in rochester hills and moved their jobs to south korea .
fte automotive laid off 166 people in auburn hills , place i know well .
their jobs went to mexico .
chrysler laid off 5,300 workers .
those jobs went to mexico , china and india , and numerous other countries .
ford laid off 2,155 workers .
their small car division is out , they 're gone ; they moved to mexico .
now ford is moving a lot of different -- a lot of different production facilities to a lot of different areas .
but when you look at what 's going on in our country , we want them here .
a trump administration will stop the flight of american jobs .
if ford or another company announces they want to move their jobs to mexico or to another country , then i will pick up the phone and if i have to , i 'll do it personally even though some people would say it 's not presidential .
do i care ?
it 's not presidential , sir .
but i have some of the greatest business leaders -- carl icahn .
we have some of the greatest business people in the world endorsing me .
they will do it unbelievably well , believe me .
but we will have -- and we will use our great business people .
we 'll use our great -- we have the greatest negotiators in the world .
we do n't use them .
we use political hacks to make trade deals .
our trade deal with mexico , nafta , is a defective deal .
it was defective almost from the beginning because we have different tax systems .
they 're on a vat system .
we 're on our system .
well , there 's a 17 -- almost a 17 percent difference .
so every deal that we make , we are behind 17 percent before we even start .
people have known that for years and years and years and it 's a defective agreement .
nobody 's ever changed it .
believe me , it 's going to get changed very quickly , ok ?
i will call the executives and i will tell them that if they want to do that , where they 're taking their factories and they 're taking their everything and they 're moving it and they think they 're gon na sell their cars or their air conditioning units back into the country .
we will charge them a 35 percent tax when they try to ship their products back across what will end up being an extremely strong border .
and you know what ?
just the fact that we 're going to do that or we would do that , they 'll never move .
they 're gon na stay in michigan .
nobody ever told them that .
if somebody went to them said , " look , please stay , please stay . "
you know , we 'll go this , that .
then they say , " no , we 're leaving .
we 're going to mexico . "
then you say , " all right , there 's the story .
no more mr. nice guy . "
you make your cars , you make your air -- you know carrier air conditioning .
indianapolis .
great place .
fourteen - hundred people laid off , violently .
i mean ,   people worked there 30 years , they laid them off .
so , all i say is this .
you want to build your plant in mexico , have a great time , but if you think you 're gon na ship your product across the border -- which will be a very strong border , by the way .
you think you 're gon na ship your stuff across the border for no tax , no nothing so we end up with unemployment and end up -- we end up with empty plants and factories and you end up with the money , the jobs and the plants , you can forget it .
and you know what would happen ?
if you said that right up front , nobody 's leaving , folks .
you stop it right away .
the politicians do n't want to say that because most of them are too stupid to even understand it .
but the ones that are n't are taken care of by the special interests and their donors because they want those companies to move because it 's to their benefit .
it used to be that cars were made in flint and you could n't drink the water in mexico .
now the cars are made in the mexico and you ca n't drink the water in flint .
not good .
but we 're gon na turn it all around and we 're going to rebuild flint .
i was to flint recently , and i 'll tell you what , it 's gone down a long way .
and we 're going to help you rebuild detroit .
and mr. gilbert   has done a great job , by the way .
friend of mine .
done a great job .
and we 're going to rebuild michigan and we 're going to keep your jobs and lots of other things .
so i 'd like to share a special message with the african - american community of michigan , which has been so terribly harmed by the policies of the clintons and a lot of the democratic politicians .
look at the city of detroit .
take a look .
it used to be the manufacturing hub of the world .
now , nearly half of detroit residents do n't work , it has the second - highest violent crime rate in the united states and the children are trapped in failing , horrible government schools .
yet as the people of detroit suffer , hillary wants to spend trillions of dollars on government benefits for illegal immigrants and refugees pouring into our country .
i 've outlined a plan for urban renewal , which i believe so strongly in .
it 's called a new deal for black america .
that deal includes a plan to use the money we will save by securing our border and curbing refugee admissions , to invest in communities like flint and detroit .
we 're gon na bring in big numbers of jobs .
tremendous incentives .
it includes a pledge of school choice for african - american children .
my plan also includes a promise to cancel billions and billions of dollars in climate change spending for the united nations .
it 's insane .
a number that hillary wants to actually increase .
and instead , use that money to provide for american infrastructure , including clean air and clean water .
you saw this recently .
we 're gon na to spend billions and billions and billions of dollars for a plan that we do n't even know where the money 's going .
and in the meantime , our companies wo n't be able to compete because they 're being regulated and restricted .
they 're not gon na be able to compete .
and i 'm an environmentalist .
i will tell you , i 've received many environmental awards .
but i want clean air , i want crystal clean water and i want safety .
and we do n't have to give hundreds of billions of dollars away to people that are probably laughing at us and not going to do -- you know where the money 's going .
not gon na happen .
my plan also includes a pledge to reduce violent crime .
every child in this nation has a right to grow up in safety and in peace .
and my plan includes a pledge to restore manufacturing in the united states .
we 're going to start making things again .
hillary and the democratic party have run the inner cities for years and only produced more poverty , more crime , worse education .
the time has come for real change .
i am asking you for the honor of your vote so together , we can turn decades of political failure into generations of lasting access for your children and your grandchildren .
hillary , on the other hand , wants to destroy what 's left of manufacturing in michigan with the trans - pacific partnership .
by the way , a disaster .
it 's a disaster .
a trump administration will stop the trans - pacific partnership .
and by the way , we 're going to have tremendous trade deals , but we 're not gon na have a deal that 's 6,000 pages long , that ties in all of these countries together .
you have to see a bar chart , lines all over the place .
if somebody does something wrong you ca n't do , we 're gon na have single lines going to single -- single different countries .
and if they do n't do good by us , we send them what 's called a letter of termination , 30 days .
and during that 30 days , they 'll call and we 'll probably make a new deal and it 'll be even better .
simple deals , folks .
you have to see this crazy trans - pacific partnership .
and they do n't take care of monetary manipulation , which is the single biggest weapon that foreign countries use to kill us , especially china .
they 're grand masters .
we will renegotiate nafta , and if we do n't get the deal we want , we will terminate nafta and get a much better deal .
we 'll make a much better deal .
we are going to lower taxes on american business from 35 percent to 15 percent .
we are going to massively cut taxes for the middle class .
we will unleash american energy , including shale , oil , natural gas and clean coal .
we 're going to put our miners back to work .
the obama - clinton war on coal is going to cost this state 50,000 jobs at least , and you have a war on your steelworkers too , folks .
your steelworkers are suffering .
we will also work to restore and protect the great lakes .
we are going to become ...   we are going to become a rich nation again , but to be a rich nation , we must also be a safe nation .
hillary clinton wants a 550 percent increase in syrian refugees pouring into this country .
hillary 's immigration plans mean generation of terrorism , extremism and radicalism spreading into our schools , our communities and every other place right here in michigan and all throughout the united states .
when we win , we will suspend the syrian refugee program .
and we will keep radical islamic terrorists the hell out of our country .
we have no choice .
and we 'll build safe havens for them in syria .
we 're going to get the money from the gulf states .
they have plenty of money .
they do n't do their share .
we 'll get the money from the gulf states .
we 'll lead the effort because we all have heart .
we see what 's happening .
but we ca n't do this .
we do n't want to be the great trojan horse of the future .
it 's not gon na happen to us , folks .
you see what 's happening in germany .
you see what 's happening in paris .
people do n't even go to paris anymore .
my friend used to go to paris . "
oh , donald , i love paris .
it 's just so beautiful . "
for years -- i said to him the other day , " how 's paris ? "
he said , " we do n't go there .
are you crazy ? "
no , we 're not going to be the stupid people anymore , folks .
we 're gon na be the smart people .
a trump administration will also secure and defend the borders of the united states .
and yes , we will build a wall and you know that .
we received -- so important .
you have to have it .
i do n't know if you know , hillary wanted a wall .
did you know that ?
and you know why they did n't it , a big fence , wall ?
you know why they did n't build it ?
they could n't get their environmental impact statements .
can you believe it ?
the united states of america wants to put up a wall in ' 06 , 2016 .
hillary was in favor of it .
they could n't get the approval to build the wall .
can you believe this ?
and then you see china in the middle of the south china sea building a massive fortress .
and you know what happened ?
they said sunday evening , let 's do it .
you know when work started ?
monday morning .
i jokingly said to a friend of mine in china , how long did it take you to get the environmental impact statement approved ?
he looked at me and said , you 're kidding , are n't you ?
i said , yes , i 'm kidding .
so they 're building , they 're ripping it up with the biggest excavators you 've ever seen and they 're ripping it up and they 're building -- they 're not supposed to be doing it , by the way .
the only reason they 're doing it is because they have no respect for our president who 's out campaigning all the time .
this guy ought to spend more time in bringing jobs back to michigan and less time -- and less time fighting for somebody who 's under criminal investigation which he should n't be doing .
we 've received the first - ever endorsement from our ice and border patrol officers ; 16,500 border patrol officers .
the first time they 've ever done it because they know we know what we 're doing .
they tell us the border crisis is the worst it 's ever been .
it 's a national emergency .
they also warn that america 's plan under hillary clinton is the most radical proposal -- quote , " radical proposal in u.s. history . "
when i become president , we will end illegal immigration , deport all criminal aliens .
we have people in this country that are serious , serious criminals .
and we will put america first .
you know , we have some very , very rough people , and we want to deport the people while she was secretary of state and they bring these people back to their countries , and the countries very intelligently , they said , no , we do n't want a murder ; no , we do n't want a drug dealer ; we do n't want the head of a gang in los angeles ; they call up the secretary of state 's office .
they said , oh , that 's ok .
bring them back .
so we release them right into our country .
how stupid are we ?
and i promise you -- it 's well - known -- i promise you , whether it 's four years or eight years , we 'll figure that out .
there wo n't be one time -- there wo n't be one time when any of these thugs come back into our country .
not one time .
we will also repeal the obama - clinton defense sequester and rebuild our badly depleted military .
we need a new foreign policy that puts america first and we 're going to have it very , very quickly .
hillary led us to disaster in iraq , in syria , in libya .
then after benghazi , she looked the families of the fallen in the eye and lied .
she blamed their deaths on a video , which was a lie .
remember when she back to bosnia ?
under fire , remember ?
oh , it was under fire , it was so dangerous .
seriously .
under fire .
remember ?
but they had a video clip she landed and these beautiful little girls were handing flowers and they -- she came under fire .
it turned out not to be true .
she apologized .
she apologized .
but you have to ask her , the media -- the most dishonest people , they have to ask her -- they have to ask her --   they have to ask her .
they have to ask her , when donna brazile , who i told you just got fired , when donna brazile gave her the questions to the debate -- asked this question to her , why did n't she report it ?
she accepted those questions .
she accepted those questions to the debate .
she had the questions to the debate .
forget about donna -- i do n't care about donna brazile .
why did n't hillary clinton report that she was given essentially unethically , probably illegally , why did n't she report that she had the questions ?
hillary and our failed washington establishment have spent $ 6 trillion on wars in the middle east and now it 's worse than it 's ever been before .
had obama and others gone to the beach , obama could have gone to the golf course .
we would have been in much better shape .
we should n't have gone into the war , and she thinks i 'm a hawk .
oh , donald trump .
we should n't have gone in .
and we certainly should n't have gotten out the way we got out , because she created a vacuum isis formed .
now she 's i 'm going to get rid of -- she 's going to rid of isis .
she has zero chance .
she is dreaming .
isis is dreaming about her becoming president .
and she also -- you know , she 's going to fix it .
there was no isis when she was secretary of state .
she and obama created it through the vacuum that they created by stupidly the way they got out .
even mosul -- we 're trying to retake mosul for a second time , because we essentially gave it up , so now we 're going in .
and we gave them -- did we give them enough advanced notice ?
four months is enough time , right ?
general , did we give mosul enough advanced notice ?
i think so .
four months .
and i keep saying , whatever happened to the element of surprise , the element of surprise .
and we 're trying to retake mosul a second time .
we essentially gave it up .
did we give them enough advanced notice ?
four months is enough time .
general , did we give mosul enough advanced notice ?
i think so .
four months .
and i keep saying , whatever happened to the element of surprise ?
the element of surprise .
imagine if some of the money had been spent , $ 6 trillion in the middle east , on building new schools and roads and bridges right here in michigan .
now hillary , trapped in her washington bubble , that 's blind to the lessons , wants to start a shooting war in syria in conflict with a nuclear - armed russia that could drag us into a world war iii .
ok , folks .
she -- i will tell you what .
she will get us into world war iii .
she will get us into world war iii .
i will tell you that .
she 's incompetent .
she will get us into world war iii .
the arrogant political class never learns .
they keep repeating the same mistakes over and over again .
they keep telling the same lies .
they keep producing the same failed results .
how can hillary manage this country when she ca n't even manage her e - mails ?
it 's just one disaster after another , one scandal after another , one betrayal after another .
to all americans i say it is now time for new leadership .
all of them .
and just in finishing up , in finishing up , just think about what we can accomplish in the first 100 days of a trump administration .
we are going to have the biggest tax cut since ronald reagan .
hillary is increasing your taxes .
we will eliminate every unnecessary job- killing regulation .
we 're going to cancel every illegal obama executive order .
we will rebuild our military , and we are going to take great care of our fantastic veterans .
it 's about time .
twenty - two veterans a day commits suicide .
can you believe that number ?
twenty - two veterans a day are committing suicide .
they wait on line for seven , eight , nine days when a simple prescription or a simple procedure could solve their problem -- 22 veterans , these are our greatest people , committing suicide a day .
it 's not going to be that way anymore , folks .
we 're going to take care of our veterans , and i have tremendous veteran support .
we are going to totally support the men and women of law enforcement .
we will save the second amendment which is under total siege .
and we will appoint justices to the united states supreme court who will uphold and defend the constitution of the united states .
hillary wants us to think small , wants us to believe things ca n't change and wants our lives to revolve around washington , d.c. i am asking you to dream big , dream big , to push for bold change and to believe in a movement powered by the people and by their love of our country .
i 'm tired of politicians telling americans to defer their dreams to another day when they really mean another decade , or many decades away .
america is tired of incompetence .
america is tired of waiting .
the moment is now .
all we have to do is stop believing in our failed politicians , and start believing in each other .
we have to .
start believing in each other and start believing in the greatness of our country .
there is no challenge too great , no dream outside of our reach .
do n't reach .
do n't let anyone tell you it ca n't be done .
the future lies with the dreamers , not the cynics , not the critics .
hillary has been there for 30 years , and she 's accomplished nothing .
she 's just made things worse .
she is a candidate of yesterday .
we are the movement of the future .
we 're the movement of the future .
some of the greatest political pundits today , bill o'reilly , many others , said this is the single greatest political phenomena of their lifetime .
it is .
and folks , we do n't want to throw it away .
that 's why we have to get out and vote november 8th .
our movement represents all americans from all backgrounds and all walks of life .
we are asking for the votes of republicans , democrats , independents and first - time voters , of which there are so many .
we are asking for the vote of every american who believes truth and justice , not money and power , should rule the day .
we are fighting for every citizen who believes that government should serve the people , not the donors , not the special interests .
we are fighting to unlock the potential of every american community and every american family who hope and pray and yearn for a better day and a better future .
with your vote , we are just eight days away from the change you 've been waiting for , for your entire life .
together we will make america wealthy again .
we will make america strong again .
we will make america safe again .
and we will make america great again .
thank you , everybody .
god bless you .
get out and vote , michigan .
get out and vote november 8th .
thank you , everybody .
god bless you .
well , thank you very much .
and he 's not 68-years - old , he 's actually 95 , right ?
but he 's been mining for 68 years safely .
it 's fantastic .
i thought he looked pretty good at 68 .
he looks really good at 95 , i 'll tell you that .
so i want to thank everybody .
it 's fantastic to be here .
we 've had a tremendous response from the miners .
and you look at west virginia , what happened there during the primaries .
it was a massive landslide for trump .
and it was very interesting because after winning new york , here we are standing on 5th avenue and i said -- and the all   just incredible street of new york .
and for some reason , and it had nothing to do with west virginia , i just said it because i was seeing what was happening with this industry .
and i said in this , you know , really such a different location , that we are going to put the miners back to work .
and i said that during my speech .
and ...   and by the way -- and i meant it .
and then a number of weeks later , i went to west virginia and we had a big , huge building , actually .
and it was packed and there were thousands and thousands of people -- tends of thousands of people outside .
and you 've never seen so many people .
it was like love , like absolute love the way they showed up , the miners .
and you know , we did so well there , it was something i wo n't forget .
i mean , it was really incredible .
and i pulled over some of the folks because afterwards , i was talking to some of the people and some of the mine owners who have been really decimated and really , in many cases , destroyed by regulation and by what they 're doing to the mines .
and you look at all the mines that have been closed up .
but i brought over some of the miners and we were talking after the speech , and i said , " could i ask you like would you ever think of maybe leaving and going into a different industry , going into a different job ? "
and they all said -- and i understood this very well because , you know , my father was in real estate , i went into real estate .
we sort of do that .
they said , " mr. trump , we love mining .
we do n't want to do anything else .
we love mining . "
i so understood that .
it was so incredible .
and they all said it like at the same time .
they want to be miners , but their jobs have been taken away and we 're going to bring them back , folks .
we 're going to bring them back .
the -- the u.s. -- i just took a look at this .
somebody just handed -- the u.s. has lost nearly 200,000 mining jobs since 2014 -- 2014 , and that 's not a long period of time ; 200,000 jobs .
the senator brought up a fact and a couple of the folks brought this up , and it 's a fact that nobody 's heard .
but during times of national problems .
we 're talking about the defense of our country .
having those minds and having that potential energy source available to us is an awfully important thing .
it 's an awfully important thing .
and nobody thinks in terms of that , they do n't think in terms of that .
and i fully -- and i fully understand that .
but it 's been an honor .
we just met with some of the folks .
we 're really representative , i would say .
senator , i would say representatives from every aspect of the business , right ?
and it was amazing .
it was really amazing .
these are great people , they 're great americans .
they love this country .
and if i get in -- if i get in , i mean you know , it 's -- it 's -- if i get in this is what it is , ok ?
and -- and other forms of energy , all forms of energy .
but what they 've done to the minors is incredible and the obama administration .
and you remember and i think you might 've just seen it .
yes , know what they 've done and nobody knows , you know clean call , nobody knows .
while you look at what 's happening with china , the amount of energy they 're producing and what they 're using coal for , tremendous amounts of -- just tremendous .
it 's like incredible .
they 're not cleaning it .
believe me , they 're not cleaning it .
we have a small , a very , very small planet compared to the universe , right ?
and that stuff is going up and they 're not cleaning it .
and here we produce great stuff and we 're not allowed to use it .
and its getting worse and worse .
so they 're gon na be out of business soon .
hillary clinton will be worse than obama .
you know it , she 'll be worse .
do n't forget , when she made the statement , gon na put the minds and essentially gon na put the minds and minors out of business , gon na put them out of business .
and i guess she forgot about west virginia , right ?
she was -- she was going to west virginia .
she forgot about virginia too , in all fairness , you know .
you know , she had -- she had west virginia right after -- a short time after that .
and you remember when she went into west virginia she met with that wonderful family and the man -- the   miner for many years ?
and he was trying to explain to her and she was trying to say well , you know i really wanna keep -- she did n't know , she was groveling .
she was groveling , she did n't know what to say .
i do n't think he was going to be easily convinced , do we agree ?
because she said it just like she said and you know she said it was a mistake that she 's going to raise taxes in the middle class , you saw that one ?
now , maybe she misspoke .
i mean we have to give them a break .
but it did come out awfully loud and clear , i -- i do n't know .
hey look , hopefully it wo n't matter , ok ?
hopefully it 's not gon na matter because she 's not gon na get .
but what i told -- what i told the folks before , we were over at peterbilt   the plant , incredible .
but what i told -- what i told the folks before is -- is that you have to get our and vote .
because the minors to a certain extent they are so down and they 've been treated so badly that they have n't been voting .
they have n't been going out and voting like they can .
and that includes members of their family that have left the mining business , let members of the family -- they 've left coal .
they 've left everything .
and they 've gotten into something else and that 's fine , that 's great .
but they live in virginia and they vote .
and their parents are still in the coal world where they wanna be and that 's where they wanna be .
but everybody has to get out and vote .
if you get out and vote , we 're pretty close in virginia and she 's spending a fortune in ads .
a friend of mine said he ca n't see television without seeing anti - trump ads .
and they 're not even true .
my friend actually said they 're not true .
i said , " i know . "
i could go over those ads one by one and show you the - it 's fraudulent , actually .
but , what are you going to do ?
she 's spending wall street money on ads .
and it 's just one after another , after another .
and this guy kiddingly said , " i just want to see one ivory soap ad .
one . "
just to break it .
and we have n't spent anything yet .
we will be , because we 're doing well .
but we have n't spent anything yet ; we 're holding it .
but it 's really - it 's really a shame that they can say whatever they want to say .
they try and demean and defame .
and then you look at what she 's doing with her e - mails .
33,000 missing e - mails .
yeah , 33,000 .
it 's - it 's very sad .
and then i guess yesterday , 1,000 came out or something - some fairly vast number .
oh , i want to see the ones - the - what i really would like to see the - we have to see the 33,000 .
can you imagine ?
remember , she said i think it was for her wedding - the wedding of chelsea .
and it was for yoga classes .
33,000 e - mails .
it 's a lot of yoga - it 's a lot of yoga .
but a couple of very bad ones came out .
and it - it 's called pay for play .
and some of these were really , really bad and illegal .
but it 's true , it 's illegal .
you 're paying and you 're getting things .
i mean i watched yesterday , because of the apprentice , blagojevich , right , governor blagojevich - 14 years in jail .
and you know some people think ok , some people think it 's crazy .
look at what she 's done - nothing .
she 's running for president .
but it came out to her people , pay for play .
and very big stories today .
the problem is , it 'll be big stories for about two minutes , and then they 're going to drop it because the media is so totally dishonest - so totally ...   if that were me - if that were me , the story that just came out this morning - and really , hidden from some of the major newspapers - hidden .
if that were me , that would be biggest story in the history of the various papers .
they go quadruple spacing , bomb   trump .
but with her , it 's - it 's just - i mean it - it 's - i mean some of them covered it - big league .
but some of them are just refusing to really report the facts .
and i think it 's gon na get worse and worse though because i assume more stuff will come out .
but this was big stuff .
pay for play - it 's illegal .
i mean it 's illegal .
and we 'll see what happens with it , folks .
we 'll see what happens with it .
but it 's very serious stuff .
it 's very , very serious .
i do n't know that it can be any more serious than deleting or getting rid of 33,000 e - mails , and all of the other things - the server - the server , which not allowed to have .
the information gotten off that servers by who knows who , probably many people - many countries , potentially .
secretary of state to put us all in that position .
so i think it 's a very sad thing .
and they give her a pass on everything .
give her a pass .
it 's so sad when i watch that .
and it was point , after point , after point .
and everybody was saying wow , they 're really going to do it .
and then they go , however - as soon as i heard - you know , when you hear the word " however . "
but it 's just -- it 's just so incredible that a thing like that could happen .
so let 's see what happens .
let 's see what happens .
in the meantime , we 're doing very well .
you saw the polls over the last day or two have really tightened up a lot .
i think we 're going to have a great victory .
i really feel it .
one of -- one of the things i suggested is your ballots .
you go and sign -- do it early so you do n't have to -- because on november 8th , we have our big day .
and if you go in an sign , we have some people in the room now that i 've met before that are going to be pushing hard .
but put in your ballots .
they have certain requirements and you live by those requirements perfectly .
make sure they do n't lose your ballot .
make sure they do n't lose your vote , which i 'm sure -- you know , and i just left a great place , north carolina .
and they just had a tremendous loss -- voter id , voter id .
they lost voter id .
how do you lose voter id ?
you mean , you do n't have to show identification ?
you do n't have to show that , hey ?
and then you say -- you know , i 've been talking about the rigged system for a long time .
and i get hammered in the press for talking about it .
oh , i ca n't believe he 'd be talking about the rigged system .
and then in the meantime , voter id , you do n't have to do .
and i 'm sure none of those folks would be voting 10 times during one day , right ?
i 'm sure a thing like that ...   but i get -- and really , a big part of the rigged system is the press itself because they can take a little story , that is n't a story , and make it into a big deal .
it happens so much , happens so much .
and speaking of that , remember this .
we have so many things that we have to protect in this country .
we have to protect our second amendment , which is under siege .
remember that .
remember that .
it 's under siege .
thank you .
thank you .
thank you .
we have to -- you know , i see -- and by the way , we have a lot of unity in the republican party , but nobody talks about it .
if one senator says we 're not voting for trump , never trump , some people were beaten so badly that they , you know , they just ca n't get it .
and i understand that .
i mean , i can see that could happen .
so , you know , they 've won throughout their lives politically , and then they lose an election by a lot to a guy that never ran before .
ok ?
i never ran before .
never thought i 'd be doing it this time , either , but i watch what 's going on and i say , it 's time .
it 's time .
boy is it time , right ?
you know , i look at the iran deal .
how about the $ 400 million in cash ?
how about that ?
how about that ?
the $ 400 million -- do you know what that is ?
does anybody know what that would even look like -- 400 ?
and did you see iran actually finally did do what i thought they were going to do .
they released pictures , because they want to embarrass the united states , just like they took the 10 sailors and they made us look so bad .
they made us look so bad .
it was like a humiliation of our country .
ok ?
this is horrible .
and then we keep going and going .
and you saw what their so - called leader -- somebody would say the supreme leader .
i refuse to use that term .
president obama would say the supreme leader .
what is going on , folks ?
what is going on with our leaders ?
and with our leader , in particular ?
he is grossly incompetent .
ok ?
grossly incompetent .
so -- so their   $ 400 million in cash going , it happens to be the same day as the hostages were released .
the hostages were in the airport for massive amounts of time .
and i guess one of them said they would n't let us go because they were waiting for a certain plane to come in .
and i just ca n't imagine what was on that plane , right ?
we ca n't imagine .
i 'm sure it had nothing to do with the $ 400 million .
but is n't that unbelievable ?
and then he 'll stand up and he 'll say that one thing had nothing to do with the other .
and then practically i guess you could say there 's a one or two percent chance that you know , what he said is right .
but that 's about it .
they would practically -- they 're saying -- they 're waiting for something else and a plane to come in , right ?
and they were at the airport forever .
and they say and president obama said no , this had nothing to do with the hostages .
and you know if you remember with obamacare , he said you can keep your plane , you can keep your doctor .
you have your doctor , you have your plan -- how many times he said it , 28 times or something ?
and many democrats approve that disaster , it 's a disaster .
we 're gon na repeal it and replace it .
but many , many democrats -- many , many democrats would not have -- you know , won by almost nothing , the margin was almost nothing .
and a lot of democrats approved it , they did n't want to approve it .
but you know , with the doctor and the plan and over and over again a lot of pressure put on .
and it 's out of control .
premiums are going up at a rate that nobody has ever seen before .
you know , in texas through blue cross blue shield they just had almost a 50 percent increase .
and they -- the big increase is now going to come on november 1st .
and they 're trying to delay it ' till after the election because it is catastrophic .
it is going to be an increase like never before .
i 'm hearing numbers that i do n't even wanna say because the press will say oh , that 's terrible , he exaggerated .
there 's not gon na be an exaggeration .
its going to be election changing .
and we ca n't let those numbers be released on another date sometime after the election .
because it will show what a total disaster obamacare is , so important .
so i just say to all of the politicians in the room and your great congressman who is a terrific guy -- where is he by the way ?
oh , congressman stand up .
stand up .
vote for him , he 's out guy .
stand up senator , come on senator .
now , we have -- we have great people , here .
so right now they 're swimming uphill but with trump we 'll be just sliding beautifully down .
it 'll be a whole different deal .
it 'll be a whole different deal .
and it can happen quickly .
it can happen -- we discussed that , we had a big meeting and we discussed it .
it 's gon na happen very quickly it does n't need to go through congress and does n't need to go through lots of different things .
epa is very important what they 've done and we want -- everybody agrees ?
we want clean air and we want clean water , do we agree ?
i want .
so i very much appreciate the meeting , it was a great meeting .
i just wanna say that virginia has lost one in three manufacturing jobs since nafta .
now , nafta was signed by bill clinton .
nafta is a disaster .
it 's been a disaster not only for virginia but for virtually every state .
upstate new york , it looks like a war zone .
that 's why i won so much and i go the upstate vote in numbers that nobody 's seen before .
upstate new york , you go to new england , you see the factories , these beautiful old factories that you see they were once thriving .
thousands and thousands of people working and those people now are doing part time jobs .
they 're working two jobs , they 're making less money than they made 18 years ago .
i do n't know if you saw that statistic where people , and people in this room too , but where people are making less money now in real wages than they made 18 years ago and even longer .
and they 've gotten older , gotten older , and they 're working harder , not supposed to be that .
it 's supposed -- hey , of course i 've gotten older and i 'm working harder too to be honest with you .
i did n't need this .
i could have enjoyed myself a lot .
oh , getting older , we 're working -- it 's supposed to be the other way , right ?
we 're getting older and starting to relax .
no , it 's not work , i do n't know , i do n't know that like that -- i love what i 'm doing .
i have been all over this country .
we have the greatest people .
anywhere in the world , the greatest people .
and i have the greatest supporters .
we have the most loyal supporters and the smartest .
you know they always like demean everything , they try to demean supporters , they 're always trying to put a little knock , you know little shots , boom , boom , boom .
we 've got the smartest , we 've got the most loyal , we 've got the hardest working , we have the best people .
they like to demean .
but we have amazing , just amazing people and i 've seen this all over the country and we can start making apple computers in our country , ok folks ?
we can start building , we can start building .
you know we go to china , and you 'd think even the shipping costs , when you just think of it , the shipping costs , i mean how much of a difference , we can -- and you bid it all to different states and you 'll get the good deal from somebody , just keep it in our country .
when they close plants and they move to mexico and then a company builds in mexico , whatever product they 're making and then they think they 're going to sell the product back into the united states .
all of their people have been fired , every single one of them have been fired .
and they 're now using people from another nation to make the same product .
and you know what , they think they 're going to sell it across our border , which by the way will become a very powerful , very strong border , ok it 's no long going to be a piece of swiss cheese .
and they think they 're going to sell it across the border .
no tax , no nothing , sell it to wherever it came from .
let the people that got laid off buy it and now maybe they 're unemployed , maybe they 're two jobs , and they 're making less , right , as we said .
and , not going to happen folks .
and i 've watched for years as our government , which is i guess you could say stupid , but honestly not so stupid .
they 're controlled by special interests .
when you see companies moving over to mexico , and other places ...   they 're controlled by special interests .
they 're controlled by lobbyists , they 're controlled their donors who have big chunks of companies or own the whole company .
because these are n't stupid people , our politicians .
some are but we have a genius right over here , that 's all i care .
some are , but a lot of them are just controlled because that 's the way the system works .
so you think that , you know , like a friend of mine asked me a few weeks , how did a deal like this get approved ?
it 's impossible .
unless -- you know there 's no way , there 's a certain deal that happened with the government .
and he said how is it possible ?
and he 's a little naive and i said well it 's possible because that company has total control over the politicians that have to approve .
now , i spent like over $ 50 million , substantially over 50 million in the primaries , my own money .
i spent a lot of money now in the general election and i 'm spending a lot of money for myself .
we 're also raising a lot of money .
we 're also getting a lot of money .
do n't worry .
you do n't have to give .
do n't give .
we 're going to straighten this place out .
ok ?
we 're going to straighten this place out .
but , you know , we have a lot of small donors -- $ 61 , i think , average .
we raised millions of dollars .
in june , we raised actually $ 51 million , of which like $ 27 million was small donors -- $ 27 million .
and last month , we raised $ 82 million , of which much of it was small -- i love the small donations -- to me , the best .
and so i 'm spending a lot of money from myself .
i 'm raising a lot of money for the republican party .
but the beautiful thing is the people that are giving those small dollar donations -- $ 61 average -- because those people are invested in the campaign .
they want to see -- they get out and vote 100 percent .
they get out there and they vote , and it 's so important .
and a republican generally does n't have that .
you know who had it ?
bernie sanders had it .
he raised a lot of money with that .
and we have a different side of the ledger , but we have the same thing .
i mean , we have a tremendous amount .
people are shocked .
in fact , newspapers that truly hate me put it on the front page .
they could n't believe that .
they actually were very nice about it .
because , you know , the month before , we raised nothing .
i wanted to make sure i got the nomination , if you do n't mind .
ok .
you know .
i was n't going to go wild .
but once we started , we started in june .
and in june , i think we did $ 51 million and then we did $ 82 million , and now we have very good numbers coming in again .
so we 're -- we 're equipped .
we have to get the people out .
we have to get them out to vote .
but we 're equipped .
we 're going to do a job for you folks and you 're going to be really happy in virginia .
ok ?
and i 'm not only talking , by the way , i 'm not only talking about the miners .
i 'm talking about the whole state .
because look , virginia has lost one in three manufacturing jobs , right , since nafta , signed by bill clinton .
a disaster .
did n't hurt him .
it hurt every other president .
that 's where the country emptied out .
without an agreement , even aside   the existing u.s. trade deficit , with tpp .
tpp -- it 's a disaster .
trans - pacific partnership is a disaster .
it will be as bad , if that 's possible .
i think nafta is the worst economic development deal ever signed by any country , anywhere in the world .
that 's how bad it is .
and you know , i said , and it 's part of my platform .
i made a speech the other day , some of you saw it .
i said we 're going to renegotiate nafta .
and they said , well supposedly , they do n't renegotiate .
i said that 's ok , then we 're going out .
we 're out of it .
because it 's sucking our jobs out of the country .
i tell this story because it 's such a perfect story .
i could go out and hire a consulting firm , pay them a million dollars , and they 'll spend months , you know , telling me what 's going on with here and mexico and the different places .
right ?
but i have much better .
i have a friend who builds plants .
i say , how are you doing ?
he said unbelievable .
i said , great , it 's going well inn the united states ?
he 's a u.s. guy .
he loves this country .
he said , no , donald , it 's going unbelievable in mexico .
he said we 're building some of the greatest plants in the world .
he said -- he called it the eighth wonder of the world .
he said mexico is the eighth wonder of the world .
i said , how about here ?
he said , not so good , not so good .
can you believe this ?
he 's an american guys .
he wants to build here .
but just through years and years -- i think he 's the biggest in the world with plants , or just one of them .
but he builds plants .
and he 's really -- he ca n't believe what 's going on in mexico .
now , that 's better than hiring the consulting firm and saying , tell me how we 're doing against mexico .
i mean , i know the answer , because he can give me the answer better than any guy that graduated from the wharton school of finance that you 're paying a lot of money , and he 'll go around and do surveys , right ?
it 's common sense .
and it costs me nothing .
right ?
but that 's what 's happening .
that 's what 's happening .
so not only is it the miners , it 's -- you know , you look at manufacturing jobs are gone .
but nafta 's one of the worst deals ever signed by our country , certainly the worst in terms of economic development , what it 's done to us .
the destruction of manufacturing in virginia was caused by bill clinton 's signing of nafta .
and then she 'll come along .
and she had a very interesting thing because two days ago in the washington post -- i was shocked .
in fact , i had to read the story twice to believe it .
they did a story on -- a big story .
she was a senator form new york and she made tremendous -- you know , tremendous promises of what she was going to do for new york when she became senator .
and she won the race and she was a disaster .
we lost jobs , tremendous numbers of jobs .
she said she 's going to help rebuild upstate new york and all these places where all these jobs were taken because of nafta and bills that her husband signed .
the whole thing .
but she said she was going to do a great job and it was a disaster .
she was going to create i think it was 200,000 jobs , 200,000 jobs .
it was negative .
it went to hell .
it 's all talk .
it 's all talk .
and now , she 's doing the same thing .
she 's going to make a job speech or something tomorrow , a speech on the economy .
look at what she did during her term as senator .
take a look at what happened during her first term .
take a look at what happened .
take a look at the results .
what she said -- of all newspapers , it was the washington post that did it .
it was like the most devastating article .
in fact , i think i 'm going to use it on my stump speech because you ca n't -- it just does n't get any worse .
she promised the world and it went -- went like this .
it went down .
and she got virtually no legislation passed .
she could n't get anything passed .
it was unbelievable .
at the same time , or similar time a little while ago , they had an article about donald trump and what i did for new york and manhattan and the buildings and the revitalization and all of that .
i mean , they gave me a lot of credit for getting it all started and doing great jobs .
and i do n't want to brag about it , but i 'm contrasting that ...   and that 's what we have to do for our country .
we have to renegotiate our trade deals .
we have to bring trade back .
we have to bring jobs back to this country .
we have to bring jobs back to our country .
we 're losing our jobs .
i mean , frankly ...   frankly , any form of energy -- and we 're losing our factories and we 're losing our jobs and we 're losing millions of jobs and we 're losing thousands and thousands of companies .
and they 're leaving and they 're going to other places .
i mean , in particular , in terms of manufacturing , they 're going into mexico .
look at what 's happening with michigan , where ford and others are building these massive car plants in mexico .
folks , they 're going to build cars and under clinton , they 're going to just build them there and let them come roaring in and all those jobs -- thousands of jobs .
over 100,000 jobs gone in michigan -- car jobs .
all car jobs .
and -- and i 'm going in front of michigan .
i think we have a good chance of winning michigan , i think , because i 've been talking about this for years .
and hillary would n't know what to do .
so i just ask people when she makes her speech tomorrow or whenever she 's doing it , she 'll stand at the teleprompter , she 'll spin around a couple of times .
always a very short speech .
then she gets off the stage , she goes back home , she goes to sleep .
when she 's -- when she makes her speech tomorrow -- very limited time .
did you ever notice ?
very limited .
everything 's very limited .
no -- no effort , no time .
great effort , but does n't spend any time .
she 'll make a speech and you 'll see her a little while later .
i mean , take a look during the primaries .
take a look at the whole thing .
when she goes out and she makes her speech on economic development or on trade or on the economy or whatever she 's going to be talking about refer yourself to yesterday .
take a look at the washington post .
take a look at the promises she made as a senator from new york and the jobs she was going to create .
take a look at what happened .
it is a wasteland , what 's happened up there .
our jobs got sucked away from us .
our factories are falling down , just from the rain and the wind , the ice , the snow .
they 're falling down .
these plants are falling down .
and you could envision 30 , 40 years ago , 25 years ago , vibrancy .
and now take a look .
but you have to read this story .
and i think the biggest shock -- if i read the story anywhere else , because i know the story .
i mean , i now she did nothing .
she had three minor bills passed .
one was the naming of a building , and very little stuff .
she did nothing .
but if this were in any other paper , it probably would n't have made such a big impact .
but this in the washington post , one of the most dishonest papers in the world in terms of me , what they say .
you know .
the new york times actually did a story , and this is sort of amazing .
they actually said in way that they 're biased toward me .
they actually said it .
they said we hate him so much .
essentially , they say we hate him so much , we 're going to be biased .
and most people have never seen a story like that .
even i was surprised .
you know , normally you 'd think they would n't want to admit it .
they practically admitted it , but you look at it .
but look at the washington post from two days ago .
look at the story on hillary clinton .
compare that with what she says tomorrow .
we 're never going to let her escape it .
because everything she says is all talk , no action .
it 's all talk .
it 's no action .
and the funny thing is that she put in a pretty unpopular guy , right ?
a pretty unpopular guy .
so you have bernie sanders , who had big -- almost 50 percent of the vote and the whole thing was rigged -- the super delegates and everything else .
but regardless , but he did a good job .
the nice thing about bernie 's people is that they agree with me on one thing -- trade .
because he was so against what was going -- these bad trade deals .
he just bought a $ 600,000 house , so he knows something about what 's going on .
you know , he 's got some sense , right ?
but -- but about trade , we 're in agreement .
now , the difference is i can do something about it .
he would not be able to .
he 'd end it .
i want to have trade with other countries , but i want to make great deals for our country .
i want to make great deals for our country .
but she -- she took a person -- did you see how angry he was at the convention ?
he was so angry because he made a deal .
and he made a deal that he wished , in my opinion , he wished he did n't make .
because his legacy would have been amazing if he did n't make a deal .
it would have been a lot different .
and on top of everything else , instead of appointing someone that is a little bit like , at least representative of that big faction of the party -- 45 percent .
instead of doing that , she appoints tim kaine .
ok ?
tim kaine .
you ca n't get more different .
during tim kaine 's tenure as governor of virginia , from 2006 -- and you all remember , right ? --
it was a disaster -- to 2010 , the unemployment rate of virginia more than doubled .
other than that , he 's doing great .
now , compare that with mike pence of indiana .
he did incredible .
he 's also incredible .
he 's doing great .
and the state 's going great -- aaa bond rating -- doing great .
and i 'll tell you what , mike pence really has been fantastic .
during tim kaine 's tenure as governor , the state of virginia lost 60,000 manufacturing jobs .
during tim kaine 's tenure as governor of virginia , it averaged only 1.1 percent in real gdp growth .
less than a week after tim kaine became governor of virginia , he proposed a nearly $ 4 billion tax increase , including a tax increase on people earning as little as $ 17,000 a year .
so everybody felt the brunt .
and i could go on and on .
it 's -- i could just go on and on talking about his transportation disasters , everything else .
and i watched him the other day and he was saying -- you know , he 's won elections , but they 've always been very close .
he said , " every election i win is very close . "
that 's not a good thing , right ?
in other words , they were so razor thin .
and then i said let me check .
and i called up some friends and i -- you know , when they first picked him , i said , " oh by , that 's going to be tough , " because we 're doing -- we 've got to win virginia .
i want to win virginia .
and -- and what happened is -- so during -- during this period of time , i 'm saying -- call up a friend , a friend calls me , three of four people call me .
i have a lot of property in virginia .
you know , in charlottesville , we have the property on the potomac river -- potomac falls , sterling , loudon county .
we love loudon county .
we have a lot of stuff .
we employ a lot of people in virginia .
it 's a great place .
great -- i do n't know if you know my charlottesville place , but it 's a fantastic place .
it 's now a winery .
it 's one of the largest wineries on the east coast .
we have a lot of employees there .
they 're going great   virginia wine , which has become a very big thing .
and ...   so i have a big -- i have a big stake in virginia .
we have a lot of -- a lot of different property in virginia .
these two places are incredible .
they 're incredible places .
but i figured she was going to pick somebody that was unbelievable .
so i heard she picked somebody from virginia , an ex- governor .
i said , " oh man , that 's going to be tough .
we 've got to beat somebody " -- he raised your taxes by $ 4 billion in his first week .
he had negative growth .
i mean , think of it .
he raised your taxes by $ 4 billion .
it was like a catastrophic governorship .
and i do n't get it .
i do n't get it .
and everybody said to me , yeah , he was n't very popular .
and then i heard him talking how he 's won races and every time , he prides himself on having just won .
so i actually think he 's going to be a negative in virginia , not a positive .
i really do .
i really do .
but you know what ?
i wish him luck .
i wish him luck .
whatever , whatever .
but look , here 's the story , folks .
we have an election which is i think going to be the most -- and i know they say this -- everybody says it every four years .
i thought it actually four years ago .
but this is going to be -- i think it 's our last shot .
i know this .
it is the last shot for the miners .
it is the last for the miners .
that i know .
that i know .
and i 'm not like a neutral for the miners .
i 'm not like , " oh , well he 'll be all right . "
hillary will be a horror show and i 'm going to be an unbelievable positive , but this is the last shot .
every -- the mines will be gone .
the mines will be gone if she gets elected .
i believe -- i honestly believe she 'll be worse than obama and i honestly -- i know that when she made the statement not so long ago about the miners and the mines are going to be gone , that was a statement that she believes .
that was the real truth .
that was -- it was n't sitting down talking to the guy who 's such a good guy .
i 've seen him on other programs and really a good representative in so many ways .
but that 's -- that 's the real hillary and that 's what she 's going to do .
and she 'll probably come in and she 'll probably come down and see you .
and she 'll say oh well , i actually think -- she 's -- believe me , folks .
that 's where she is .
i hope you understand that these politicians can say anything they want and get away with it .
it 's really disgusting , ok ?
it 's really disgusting .
so we 're going to open up , we 're going to do such a good job .
and you know , i understand , you know , i grew up -- my father was a real estate -- i grew up with the carpenters , i grew up with the sheetrockers , i grew up with the plumbers and the policemen and the firemen and the whole thing .
that 's what i grew up with .
people say gee whiz , you 're a rich guy but you get along very well with a lot of carpenters and a lot of electricians .
i said yeah , that 's what i did , you know , i mean that 's what i did .
and these are amazing people .
the miners are amazing people , so .
so i -- i really -- and i say it , it 's up to you .
you 've got to get out and vote .
you just do n't vote , you know ?
i do n't know why .
and i think it 's because you 've been beaten so badly as an industry , just beaten up so badly .
i was talking about it with your congressmen .
just beaten up so badly that you just do n't want to do it .
and i can understand .
you 've got to do it .
we 've got to give it one shot , you know ?
takes you 25 minutes or two minutes or 10 minutes .
you have nothing to lose .
you have absolutely nothing to lose , believe me .
you will be happy .
you will be happy .
you will be absolutely happy .
so just a couple of other things .
immigration .
we 've got to have strong borders or we do n't have a country .
got to have strong borders .
we are going to have a strong border .
we are going to have a strong southern border .
we are taking in drugs and you 're having the problem here big league .
up in new hampshire where i won the primary , i got to know the people so well .
and their number one problem they told me is heroin .
i said heroin ?
just does n't go with the territory .
these beautiful trees and lakes and rivers and so beautiful .
heroin ?
and it is their number one problem .
and now , so many people , their youth is so addicted .
and we 've got to take care of that .
we 've got to stop it from coming in , comes in from the southern border .
and i got the -- you probably heard .
the border patrol agents , 16,500 border patrol agents endorsed donald trump and they 've never done it before for a president .
they 've never done it before in a presidential -- 16,500 .
sheriff joe arpaio of arizona , great guy .
he endorsed donald trump .
he probably knows borders better than anybody in the history of the world , right ?
sheriff joe , he 's a great guy too .
but he endorsed us and we 've got to have borders .
we 've got to stop the drugs from coming in .
we 've got to stop illegal immigration .
you know , illegal immigrants -- and we will build a wall , do n't worry about it , we 're going to build a wall .
going to have to , going to have to .
we 're going to build a wall and mexico 's going to pay for the wall .
they 're going to pay for it .
just so you understand -- look , some of these politicians would get off stage with me and they 'd say you know that you ca n't build a wall .
i said really ?
china just built 2,000 years ago .
china built a wall 2,000 years ago , 13,000 miles .
we have 2,000 miles of which we really need 1,000 miles because you have a lot of natural barriers -- lot of natural barriers .
so you need a 1,000 .
but we have -- 2,000 years ago , a wall was built , the great wall of china .
this is a serious wall .
ok ?
this is a very serious wall .
and we have to build 1,000 and we have caterpillar tractors .
we have caterpillar tractors .
not komatsu .
we have caterpillar .
we do n't .
no , no .
we have caterpillar .
we 're going to start -- remember the old days ?
made in the usa , right ?
remember , they used to have made in the usa .
we do n't have it anymore .
we 're going to have signs just like , you know , they made these signs .
i love them , too .
but we 're going to have signs -- look how beautiful on both sides .
see ?
we cover them both .
you like yellow .
you like black .
yellow , black -- beautiful .
we cover a lot of territory , right ?
what a good looking group of people .
they 'll be so happy in a year from now .
they 'll be so happy .
it 's going to go fast .
but i will say that -- so we have to build the wall .
and we 're going to build the wall .
but , you know , the politicians would tell me , you ca n't build a wall .
really , can you build a wall ?
they do n't know .
i mean , i built 90-story buildings .
building buildings is tough .
building a wall , boy , is that easy .
pre - cast -- pschoom .
and every time they fight me , it gets 10 feet taller , right ?
every single time it gets 10 feet taller .
it goes up .
it goes up , up , up .
the taller it gets , the safer it gets .
no , we 're going to have a wall .
and we 're going to let people come into our country because we want people to come into our country .
but they 're going to come into our country legally -- legally .
and then i said mexico 's going to pay for the wall .
now , we have a trade deficit with mexico of like close to $ 60 billion a year .
think of it .
mexico .
they 're making a fortune .
so these politicians say -- because it 's not their deal .
it 's not their deal .
these politicians say , well , ok , maybe you can build it .
but how are you going to get mexico to pay ?
when you are losing so much money on trade , like we lose to mexico , it 's easy .
the wall is peanuts compared to the kind of numbers we 're talking about , where they 're taking our jobs and building factories .
so easy .
but they do n't know that .
they do n't know , because they do n't have that instinct .
it 's not that they 're bad people .
although in many cases , again , they 're controlled by people that do n't want to see the wall .
there are a lot of people that do n't want to see that wall built .
and those are people that have reason to not want the wall built .
and in many cases , again , they 're representing their special interest groups , their lobbyists .
their donors are representing companies where it 's not to the advantage to have the wall built .
but we 're going to build the wall .
we 're going to stop drugs from coming in .
we 're going to stop all of this illegal immigration .
and i see a lot of military guys in the room .
we have illegal immigrants treated better than our vets in many cases .
and that 's going to stop .
we have vets that are treated so badly , the veterans administration is a disaster .
we 're going to take care of our vets .
our military is depleted .
it 's depleted .
we 're going to build up our military .
we 're using fighters that are 18 years old where they ca n't even get parts .
they have to go to airplane graveyards to get parts for our fighter jets .
two went down last week .
you saw that .
so we 're going to make a lot of changes , folks ; going to make a lot of changes .
so we have , just to sum up , obamacare out .
repeal and replace .
very important .
common core -- we want education local .
we 're getting rid of common core .
we 're getting rid of common core .
and it 's obviously not working .
look at what 's happening with our education .
look at where we 're ranked worldwide .
it 's not working , folks .
we do n't need bureaucrats in washington telling us how to educate our children in virginia , ok ?
so we do n't need it .
bureaucrats that make a lot of money , by the way .
we 're going to have strong borders .
we 're going to make great , great trade deals .
we 're going to bring jobs back .
we 're going to make money .
we 're going to make money for our country .
we need money .
we 're losing a fortune .
we 're losing almost $ 800 billion .
think of it , $ 800 billion a year trade deficits worldwide , $ 800 billion .
it 's going to end , folks .
it 's going to end .
we 're going to have great relationships with these countries and we 're going to trade with these countries , but it 's going to be a two- way street , not a one - way street .
right now , it 's a one - way street .
it 's a one - way street to unemployment .
they 're stripping us .
they 're stripping us of our jobs , they 're stripping us of our money .
they 're taking our manufacturing -- i mean , every time i come to a location , i have statisticians and they give me these numbers .
i do n't even need the statisticians no matter where i go .
i mean , manufacturing way down , always way down .
not going up , it goes down .
keeps going to down .
they 're moving to other places .
they 're moving to other countries .
they 're moving a lot to mexico .
it 's not going to happen anymore , folks .
we 're going to keep our companies and if they want to move , that 's ok , but there is going to be retribution .
it 's going to be -- there are going to be consequences -- going to be consequences .
they want to sell product into our country , they 're going to fire all our people .
they want to sell product into our country , they 're going to have to -- sadly , they 're going to have to pay .
you know , i use the case of carrier .
every single air conditioning unit they make in mexico , they 're going to pay a 35 percent tax .
and you know ?
you know what 's going to happen ?
now , a lot of people do n't like to hear that .
a lot of the conservatives -- you know the conservatives .
you know what 's amazing to me ?
when i say i 'm going to renegotiate nafta and make it into a good deal from a disastrous deal -- now , you always have to be prepared to walk , so there 's a good chance we 'll have to walk .
but i 'm going to make it into a good deal as opposed to a bad deal .
i get bad stories .
they said that 's terrible .
he 's going to -- i 'm like why ?
what 's terrible ?
i want to make it a good deal .
when i say i want to get the nato countries to pay up -- they 're not paying , right ?
they 're not paying .
many of them .
they 're not paying what they 're supposed to be paying .
so what i have -- we 're supposed to protect these countries .
they 're taking advantage of the united states .
and i think nato 's a good thing .
but they 're taking advantage of the united states .
they 're not paying what they 're supposed to be paying .
maybe they 're not being asked properly .
but they 're not paying .
so we protect countries that are n't paying .
they 've got to pay up .
and you know what they -- the money , if you add it all up , you know the kind of numbers we 're talking about in this country ?
i mean , we go from a country that 's really bust to a country that can just be incredible -- incredible .
and then i 'll get people saying i do n't like nato .
i think nato 's wonderful .
it was obsolete .
i said ti was obsolete because it was n't covering terrorism properly .
and they all laughed and they smiled .
they said , " donald trump said it 's obsolete . "
well , i 'm not a great expert on nato , but i have a lot of common sense , said it was obsolete .
and i also said countries are n't paying up , those two things .
but it was obsolete because it was n't covering terrorism .
and then about four months ago , there was a front page story in the wall street journal .
got a lot of publicity .
they smiled and , you know , said , " trump said it 's obsolete about terrorism , " this and that .
a lot of them left the terrorism part out .
then , about three months ago , front page here in the wall street journal .
nato to develop terrorism unit .
wow .
i said , " thank you . "
that 's good .
they gave me a tiny little mention , like about a quarter of a sentence . "
donald trump was unhappy . "
but they gave me like a quarter of a sentence .
that 's ok .
big progress , right ?
big progress .
so we all know what we 're doing .
so here 's the story .
we 're going to start winning again as a country .
we do n't win anymore .
we 're going to take care of our vets .
we 're going to build up our military .
we 're going to do a lot of great things .
we 've got to fix our infrastructure .
we 're going to fix our infrastructure so those peterbilt 's are n't going to be running over potholes and having lots of problems .
right ?
you know what i 'm talking about .
a friend of mine in the trucking business said the roads have never , ever been so bad .
you know that , right ?
that the roads have never , ever been so bad .
he buys beautiful new equipment and he said what these drivers go through with the potholes and the problems and the bad roads , he said , it 's never been like this .
we have to rebuild our infrastructure .
we have to fix our bridges , our tunnels , our highways , our roads , our hospitals , our schools .
we have so much to do .
we 've spent -- we 've spent in the middle east -- it used to be -- thank you -- it used to be -- i 've been saying for years -- $ 2 trillion in iraq .
iraq .
we should n't have been in iraq .
i said do n't go to iraq ; you 're going to destabilize the middle east .
that 's exactly what happened , and a lot of other things happened .
hillary clinton 's policies have been a disaster from the time she got -- look at libya .
what did we get out of libya ?
i mean , that 's been a disaster .
you look at what she 's done .
you look at the bad decisions that she 's made .
you look at the bad judgment .
like bernie sanders said , she 's got bad judgment .
you look at the bad judgment .
and now we 're going to put her in charge of our country ?
we wo n't have a country left .
so i just ask the people of virginia and the people in this room and in particular because we 're in such a mining area , give it one more chance .
i know you 're discouraged .
give it one more chance .
if you 're not feeling good , if you 're so sick you ca n't move , if your wife got angry at you and you do n't want to get out of the house , say i 'm sorry -- i 'm just sorry , charlotte .
i 'm going out to vote for trump .
you have to vote .
give it -- seriously -- give it one more chance .
go out and sign those early ballots .
go out and vote on november 8th .
you can sign the ballot and you do n't even have to , but give it one more chance .
i promise you , you will be happy .
ok , fellows ?
these are tough cookies .
i do n't want to -- i 'm not lying to these guys .
all right .
you 've got to get them out .
give it one more chance .
and we 're going to start winning again as a country .
we 're going to start winning again .
we 're going to win in so many different ways .
we 're going to make america great again .
we 're going to make america first .
and we 're going to make america safe again .
thank you .
thank you , everybody .
thank you , everybody .
thank you .
thank you , everybody .
thank you .
thank you everybody .
thank you very much .
it 's great to be with you this afternoon .
and today we begin a conversation about how to make america safe again .
in the 20th century the united states has defeated fascism , nazism and communism .
now a different threat challenges our world .
radical islamic terrorism .
this summer there 's been an isis attack launched outside the war zones of the middle east - hard to believe --- every 84 hours .
here in america we have seen one brutal attack after another .
thirteen were murdered and 38 wounded in the assault on fort hood .
the boston marathon bombing wounded and maimed 264 people , and ultimately left five dead , including two of our great police officers .
in chattanooga , tennessee , five unarmed marines   - unbelievable people , by the way - were shot and killed in a military recruiting center .
last december , 14 innocent americans were gunned down at an office party in san bernardino .
another 22 were very gravely injured .
in june 49 americans were executed at the pulse night club in orlando .
another 53 were badly injured .
it was the worst mass shooting in our history and the attack by far the worst on the lgbtq community .
and i 'll tell you what .
we can never , ever allow this to happen again .
in europe - thank you - in europe we have seen the same carnage and bloodshed afflicted upon our closest allies .
in january of 2015 a french satirical newspaper , charlie hebdo , was attacked for publishing cartoons of the prophet mohammed .
twelve were killed , including two police officers , and 11 were wounded .
two days later , four were murdered in a jewish delicatessen .
in november of 2015 terrorist went on a shooting rampage in paris that slaughtered 130 people , and wounded another 368 people , some in very , very , very bad shape today .
france is suffering gravely .
and the tourism industry is being massively affected in the most negative way .
in march of this year terrorists detonated a bomb in brussels airport killing 32 and injuring 340 people .
this july in the south of france an islamic terrorist turned his truck into an instrument of mass murder , plowing down and killing 85 men , women and children and wounding 308 people .
terrible .
among the dead were two americans , a texas father and his 11-year - old son .
a few weeks ago in germany a refugee armed with an axe wounded 5 people in a gruesome train attack .
only days ago an isis killer invaded a christian church in normandy , france forced an 85-year - old priest to his knees .
a priest who was beloved , who was beloved ; before cutting his throat and just unthinkable other things .
overseas isis has carried out an absolute atrocity and one after another .
children slaughtered , girls sold into slavery , men and women burned alive , crucifixions , beheadings , and drownings , ethnic minorities targeted for mass execution .
holy sites desecrated .
christians driven from their homes and hunted for extermination .
isis rounding up what it calls ' nation of the cross ' , ' nation of the cross ' in a campaign of absolute and total genocide .
we can not let this evil continue .
thank you .
thank you .
nor can we let the hateful ideology of radical islam , it 's oppression of women , gays , children and non - believers be allowed to reside or spread within our own countries .
we will defeat radical islamic terrorism just as we have defeated every threat we 've faced at every age and before .
but we will not , we will not , remember this , defeat it with closed eyes or silenced voices .
we have a president that does n't want to say the words .
anyone who can not name our enemy is not fit to lead our country .
anyone who can not condemn the hatred , oppression and violence of radical islam lacks the moral clarity to serve as our president .
the rise of isis is the direct result of policy decisions made by president obama and secretary of state clinton .
let 's look back at the middle east at the very beginning of 2009 before the obama - clinton administration took over .
libya was stable .
syria was under control .
egypt was ruled by a secular president and an ally of the united states .
iraq was experiencing a reduction in violence .
the group that would become what we now call isis was close to being extinguished .
iran was being choked off by economic sanctions .
fast forward to today .
what we have - and think of this - and the decisions made by the obama / clinton group have been absolutely disastrous .
libya is in ruins .
our ambassador and three other really brave americans are dead .
and isis has gained a new base of operations .
syria is in the midst of a disastrous civil war .
isis controls large portions of territory .
a refugee crisis now threatens europe and the united states .
in egypt , terrorists have gained a foothold in the sinai desert near the suez canal , one of the most essential waterways of the world .
iraq is in chaos .
and isis is on the loose .
isis has spread across the middle east and into the west .
in 2014 , isis was operating in seven nations .
they were in seven nations .
terrible , but that 's what it was .
today they 're fully operational in 18 countries with aspiring branches in six more for a total of 24 .
and many believe that number is actually 28 to 30 countries .
they do n't even know .
the situation is likely worse than the public has any idea .
a new congressional report reveals that the administration has downplayed the growth of isis with 40 percent of analysts saying they had experience efforts to manipulate their findings in trying to make it look much better than it is .
it 's bad .
at the same time , isis is trying to infiltrate refugee flows into europe and to the united states .
iran , the world 's largest state sponsor of terrorism , is not flush with $ 150 billion in cash released by the united states .
plus if you remember from two weeks ago , another $ 400 million in actual cash that was obviously used for ransom .
worst of all , the nuclear deal puts iran , the number one state sponsor of radical islamic terrorism , on a path to nuclear weapons .
in short , the obama / clinton foreign policy has unleashed isis , destabilized the middle east , and put the nation of iran , which chants , " death to america " , in a dominant position of regional power and in fact aspiring a dominant world power .
it all began in 2009 with what has become known as president obama 's global apology tour .
we all remember .
we all remember .
in a series of speeches , president obama described america as arrogant , dismissive , derisive , and a colonial power .
he was describing us .
he informed other countries that he would be speaking up about america 's past errors .
he pledged that we would no longer be a senior partner that sought to dictate our terms .
he lectured cia officers of the need to acknowledge their mistakes , and described guantanamo bay as a rallying cry for our enemies .
perhaps no speech was more misguided than president obama 's speech to the muslim world , delivered in cairo , egypt , 2009 .
i remember it well .
in winning the cold war , president ronald reagan repeatedly touted the superiority of freedom over communism and called the ussr the evil empire .
yet when president obama delivered his address in cairo , no such moral courage could be found or would be found .
instead of condemning the oppression of women and gays in many muslim nations , and the systematic violations of human rights , or the financing of global terrorism , president obama tried to draw an equivalency between our human rights record - and remember this , our human rights - and theirs .
the records are unbelievable and unmistakable .
his naive words were followed by even more naive actions .
the failure to establish a new status of forces agreement in iraq and the election - driven timetable for withdrawal surrendered our gains in that country and led directly to the rise of isis without question .
the failures in iraq were compounded by hillary clinton 's disaster , total disaster , in libya .
president obama has since said that he regrets , and really regrets , libya and the mistake he made .
he considers it his worst mistake .
according to then - secretary of defense robert gates , the invasion of libya was nearly a split decision , but hillary clinton 's forceful advocacy for the intervention was the deciding factor .
that 's why we went in .
with one episode of bad judgment after another , hillary clinton 's policies launched isis onto the world stage .
yet , as she threw the middle east into violent turmoil , things turned out really to be not so hot for our world and our country .
the middle east in particular .
the clintons made almost $ 60,000 in gross income while she was secretary of state .
it is unbelievable .
incident after incident proves again and again hillary clinton lacks the judgment - as said by bernie sanders - stability and temperament and the moral character to lead our nation .
importantly , she also lacks the mental and physical stamina to take on isis and all of the many adversaries we face .
not only in terrorism , but in trade and every other challenge we must confront to turn our great country around .
it is now time for a new approach .
our current strategy of nation - building and regime - change is a proven , absolute failure .
we have created the vacuums that allow terrorism to grow and thrive .
i was an opponent of the iraq war from the beginning .
a major difference between me and my opponent .
though i was a private citizen whose personal opinions on such matters were really not sought , i nonetheless publicly expressed my private doubts about the invasion .
i was against , believe me .
three months before the invasion i said in an interview with neil cavuto to whom i offer my best wishes for a speedy recovery , that " perhaps we should n't be doing it yet .
and that the economy is a much bigger problem . "
in august of 2004 , very early , right after the conflict , i made a detailed statement to " esquire " magazine in an interview .
here 's the quote in full . "
look at the war in iraq and the mess we 're in .
i would never have handled it that way . "
this was right after the invasion . "
does anybody really believe that iraq is going to be a wonderful democracy where people are going to run down to the voting box and gently put in their ballot and the winner is happily going to go and step up and lead the country ? "
come on .
i then continued , " two minutes after we leave there 's going to be a revolution and the meanest , toughest , smartest most viscous guy , in this case , guy , will take over .
and he 'll have weapons of mass destruction which saddam hussein did not have .
what was the purpose of this whole thing ?
hundreds and hundreds of young people killed .
and what about the people coming back with no arms and no legs ?
not to mention , in all fairness , the other side .
the tremendous damage done .
all those iraqi kids who 've been blown to pieces .
and it turns out that all of the reasons for the war were blatantly wrong .
all of this death and destruction for nothing . "
so i 've been clear for a long time that we should not have gone in .
but i have been just as clear in saying what a catastrophic mistake hillary clinton and president obama made with the reckless way in which they pulled out .
after we had made those hard fought sacrifices and gains we should have never made such a sudden withdrawal on a timetable advertised to our enemies .
they said , we 're moving out , here 's our time , here 's our date .
who would do this but an incompetent president ?
al qaeda in iraq had been decimated .
and obama and clinton gave it new life and allowed it to spread all across the world .
by that same token president obama and hillary clinton should have never attempted to build a democracy in libya , to push for immediate regime change in syria or to support the overthrow of mubarak in egypt .
one more point on this .
i have long said that we should have kept the oil in iraq .
i said it over and over and over again .
another area where my judgment has been proven correct .
i just said it so many times , virtually every time i was interviewed , keep the oil , keep the oil .
according to cnn , isis made as much as $ 500,000 in oil sales in 2014 alone .
that 's before they really got started .
fueling and funding its reign of terror .
if we had controlled the oil like i said we should , we could have prevented the rise of isis in iraq , both by cutting off a major source of funding and through the presence of u.s. forces necessary to safeguard the oil and vital infrastructure products necessary for us to have the oil .
i was saying this constantly and consistently to whomever would listen .
i said , " keep the oil .
keep the oil .
keep the oil .
do n't let somebody else get it . "
if they had listened to me then we would have had the economic benefits of the oil which i wanted to use to help take care of the wounded soldiers and families of those who died in the war .
in addition to which thousands of lives would have been saved .
this proposal by its very nature would have left soldiers in place of our assets .
we would have had soldiers there guarding this valuable supply of oil .
in the old days , when we won a war , to the victor belonged the spoils .
instead , all we got from iraq and our ventures in the middle east , was death , destruction and tremendous financial loss .
but it 's time to put the mistakes of the past behind us and chart a new course .
if i become president , the era of nation - building will be brought to a very swift and decisive end .
thank you .
our new approach - which must be shared by both parties in america , by our allies overseas and by our friends in the middle east - must be to halt the spread of radical islam .
all actions should be oriented around this goal and any country which shares this goal will be our ally .
very important .
some do n't share this goal .
we can not always choose our friends but we can never fail to recognize our enemies .
as president , i will call for an international conference focused on this goal .
we will work side by side with our friends in the middle east , including our greatest ally israel .
we will partner with king abdullah of jordan and the president of egypt , president sisi , and all others who recognize this ideology of death that must be extinguished .
we will also work very closely with nato on this new mission .
i had previously said that nato was obsolete because it failed to deal adequately with terrorism .
since my comments , they have changed their policy and now have a new division focused on terror threats .
very good .
very , very good .
i also believe that we could find common ground with russia in a fight against isis .
would n't that be a good thing ?
would n't that be a good thing ?
they , too , have much at stake in the outcome in syria , and have had their own battles with islamic terrorism just as bad as ours .
they have a big , big problem in russia with isis .
my administration will aggressively pursue joint and coalition military operations to crush and destroy isis .
international cooperation to cut off their funding , expanded intelligence sharing , and cyber warfare to disrupt   and disable their propaganda and recruiting .
their recruiting is taking place right now , and they 're setting records .
it 's got to be stopped .
we can not allow the internet to be used as a recruiting tool and for other purposes by our enemy .
we must shut down their access to this form of communication , and we must do it immediately - immediately .
unlike hilary clinton , who has risked so many lives with her carless of handling of sensitive information , my administration will not telegram exactly military plans and what they are .
and by the way , what 's happened with her 33,000 e - mails is an absolute disgrace to the united states of america .
i 've often said that the great general douglas macarthur and the great general george patton would be in a state of shock if they were alive today to see the way president obama and hillary clinton tried to recklessly announce their every move before it happens .
like they did in iraq , so that the enemy can prepare and adapt .
their enemy says , " thank you . "
the fight will not be limited to isis .
we will decimate al- qaeda .
and we will seek to starve funding for iran - backed hamas and hezbollah .
so important .
we can use existing u.n. security council resolutions to apply new and even stronger sanctions .
military , cyber and financial warfare will all be necessary to dismantle islamic terrorism .
but we must use ideological warfare as well .
very important .
and they use it on us , better than we have ever even thought of using it on them .
but that will change .
just as we won , just as we won the cold war in part by exposing the evils of communism and the virtues of free markets , so too must we take on the ideology of radical islam .
while my opponent accepted millions of dollars in foundation donations from countries where being gay is an offense punishable by prison or death , my administration will speak out against the oppression of women , gays and people of different beliefs .
our administration would be a friend to all moderate muslim reformers in the middle east and will amplify their voices .
this includes speaking out against the horrible practice of honor killings , where women are murdered by their relatives for dressing , marrying or acting in a way that violates fundamentalist teachings .
over 1,000 pakistani girls are estimated to be the victims of honor killings by their relatives each year .
recently a prominent pakistani social media star was strangled to death by her brother on the charge of dishonoring the family .
in his confession , the brother took pride in the murder and said , " girls are born to stay home and follow traditions . "
shockingly , this is a tradition that has reached our own shores .
on such cases , and many , many cases have happened - where one involves an iraqi immigrant who was sentenced to 34 years in jail for running over his own daughter , claiming she had been too westernized .
to defeat islamic terrorism we must also speak our forcefully against a hateful ideology that provides the breeding ground for violence and terrorism to grow .
it 's a breeding ground .
it 's a terrible , terrible breeding ground .
a new immigration policy is needed immediately and as well .
the common thread linking the major islamic terror attacks that have recently occurred on our soil - 9/11 , the fort hood shooting , the boston bombing , the san bernardino attack , the orlando attack - is that they have involved immigrants or the children of immigrants .
clearly , new screening procedures are needed .
a review by the u.s. senate immigration subcommittee has identified 380 foreign - born individuals charged with terrorism or terrorism - related offenses between 9/11 and 2014 , and many more since then , and this year is a record for identification .
it 's gotten worse , far worse .
we also know that isis recruits refugees after their entrance into the country , as we have seen with the somali refugee population in minnesota .
beyond terrorism , as we have also seen in france , foreign populations have brought their anti - semitic attitudes with them .
in cologne , germany on new years , we have seen the reports of sexual violence and assault far greater than anybody knows .
pew polling shows that in many of the countries from which we draw large number of immigrants - extreme views about religion such death penalty -- and for those who are involved -- the death penalty is very , very common if you do n't have the faith that they demand you have .
a trump administration will establish a clear principle that will govern all decisions pertaining to immigration .
and we will be tough .
we will be even extreme .
we should only admit into this country those who share our values and respect our people .
in the cold war , we had an ideological screening test .
the time is overdue to develop a new screening test for the threats we face today .
i call it extreme vetting .
i call it extreme , extreme vetting .
our country has enough problems .
we do n't need more .
these are problems like we have never had before .
in addition to scrape out all members of the sympathizers of terrorist groups , we must also screen out any hostile attitude towards our country or its principles , or who believed sharia law should supplant american law .
those who did not believe in our constitution or who support bigotry and hatred will not be admitted for immigration into our country .
only those who we expect to flourish in our country and to embrace a tolerant american society should be issued visas .
to put these new procedures in place , we will have to temporarily suspend immigration from some of the most dangerous and volatile regions of the world that have a history of exporting terrorism .
not for us .
not for us .
thank you .
as soon as i take office , i will ask the state department and the department of homeland security to identify a list of regions where inadequate screening can not take place .
there are many such regions .
we will stop processing visas from those area until such time as it is deemed safe to resume based on new circumstances or new procedures .
the size of current immigration flows are too large to perform adequate screening .
we admit about 100,000 permanent immigrants from the middle east every year .
beyond that , we admit hundreds of thousands of temporary workers and visitors from the same regions .
hundreds of thousands .
if we do n't control the numbers , we ca n't perform adequate screening .
there 's no way it can take place .
by contrast , my opponent wants to increase - which is unbelievable , no matter who you are , no matter where you come from - wants to increase the flow of syrian refugees by 550 percent over what they are now .
the united states subcommittee on immigration estimates that hillary clinton 's plan would mean roughly 620,000 refugees from all current refugee - sending nations in her first term , assuming no cuts to other refugee programs .
so it could get worse .
this would be additional to all other non - refugee immigration .
unbelievable numbers .
unbelievable numbers .
the subcommittee estimates her plan would impose a lifetime cost of roughly $ 400 billion when you include the cost of healthcare , welfare , housing , schooling , and all other entitlement benefits that are excluded from the state department 's placement figures .
think of this .
four hundred billion dollars .
in short , hillary clinton wants to be america 's angela merkel and you know what a disaster this massive immigration has been to germany and the people of germany .
crime has risen to levels that no one thought they would ever , ever see .
it is a catastrophe .
we have enough problems in our country .
we do n't need more .
lastly , we will need to restore common sense to our security procedures .
another common feature of the past attacks that have occurred on our soil is that warning signs were totally ignored .
the 9/11 hijackers had fraud all over their visa applications .
almost every one of them .
it said , practically , in big bold letters , fraud and nobody saw it .
the russians warned us about the boston bombers here on political asylum and the attackers were even twice interviewed by the fbi .
very sad .
the female san bernardino shooter , on her - her statements and everything that she said , she was here on a fiance visa , which most people have never even heard of , from saudi arabia and she wanted to support very openly jihad online .
these are the people we 're taking in .
a neighbor saw suspicious behavior .
bombs on the floor and other things , but did n't warn authorities because they said they did n't want to be accused of racial profiling .
now , many are dead and many more are gravely wounded .
the shooter in orlando reportedly celebrated in his classroom after 9/11 .
he too was interviewed by the fbi .
his father , a native of afghanistan , supported the oppressive taliban regime and expressed anti - american views very strongly .
and by the way , was just seen sitting behind hillary clinton with a big fat smile on his face all the way through her speech .
he obviously liked what she had to say .
it 's called weakness .
weakness .
it 's called stupidity .
and we 've had it .
the fort hood shooter delivered a presentation to a room full of mental health experts before the attacks in which he threw out one red flag after another .
he even proclaimed that we love death more than you love life .
not good .
these warning signs were ignored because political correctness has replaced common sense in our society .
thank you .
that is why one of my first acts as president will be to establish a commission on radical islam which will include reformist voices in the muslim community who will hopefully work with us .
we want to build bridges and erase divisions .
the goal of the commission will be to identify and explain to the american public the core convictions and beliefs of radical islam , to identify the warning signs of radicalization , and to expose the networks in our society that support radicalization .
this commission will be used to develop new protocols for local police officers , federal investigators , and immigration screeners .
and while i 'm at it , we should give a hand to our great police officers and law enforcement officials .
thank you .
we will also keep open guantanamo bay , and place a renewed emphasis on human intelligence .
drone strikes will remain part of our strategy , but we will also seek to capture high value targets to gain needed information to dismantle their organizations .
foreign combatants will be tried in military commissions .
finally , we will pursue aggressive criminal or immigration charges against anyone who lends material support to terrorism .
there will be consequences for those people .
there will be very serious consequences .
similar to the effort to take down the mafia , this will be the understood mission of every federal investigator and prosecutor in the country .
to accomplish a goal , you must state a mission .
the support networks for radical islam in this country will be stripped out and removed one by one , viciously if necessary .
viciously if necessary .
immigration offices will also have their powers restored .
those -- it 's been taken away .
those who are guests in our country that are preaching hate will be asked to return home immediately , and if they do n't do it , we will return them home .
to make america safe again , we must work together again .
our victory in the cold war relied on a bipartisan and international consensus .
that is what we must have to defeat radical islamic terrorism .
but just like we could n't defeat communism without acknowledging that communism exists , or explaining its horrible evils , we ca n't defeat radical islamic terrorism unless we do the exact same thing .
we have to explain that it exists and explain the difficulties .
we have to have a leader that can do that , and we do n't have that now .
but this also means that we have to promote the exceptional virtues of our own way of life .
we have an exceptional country , and exceptional way of life .
but it 's being tread on by sick , sick people .
and expecting that as newcomers come into our society , they will likewise have respect and do the same .
pride in our institutions , our history , and our values should be taught by parents and teachers , and impressed upon all of those who come into our society and want to join our society .
assimilation is not an act of hostility , but an expression of compassion .
our system of government and our american culture is the best in the world and will produce the best outcomes for all who adopt them .
thank you .
this approach will not only make us safer , but bring us closer together as a country .
renewing the spirit of americanism will help heal the divisions in our country of which there are so many .
we have a divider as president .
we call him the great divider .
it 's the thing he does best .
he will do so by emphasizing what we have in common , not what pulls us apart .
this is my pledge to the american people .
as your president , i will be your single greatest champion .
i will fight to ensure that every american is treated equally , protected equally and honored equally .
we will reject bigotry and hatred and oppression in all of its many ugly forms , and seek a new future built on our common culture and values as one american people .
only this way will we make america great again , and safe again , for everyone .
thank you very much .
god bless you .
thank you .
thank you .
thank you very much .
thank you , everybody .
so we began one hour early because the place is packed , so why should we wait ?
thank you .
it 's great to be in ohio .
i love this state , i do , i love this state where i once worked and had great experience .
and i must tell you , above all , i love the people of ohio .
and i have a very special message for you tonight .
we are going to win ohio .
we are going to win the white house .
and we are going to bring back your jobs that have been taken from your state and every other state in the union .
we 're going to negotiate fair trade deals , and what i mean by fair is great , that put the american worker first .
we 're going to stop the product dumping , all over the place , dumping , and we 're going to stop the unfair foreign subsidies and the currency manipulation , which is a form of cheating .
we are going to stop all forms of cheating .
we 're going to bring our workers back .
we 're going to bring our country back .
we 're going to bring companies back into our country .
they 're going to hire lots of people .
you 're going to get great jobs again .
you 're going to get jobs that pay you a lot more money than you 're making right now , because i know what 's happened to the american worker .
the era of economic surrender , which is what we 've been doing for so long , is over .
a new era of real american greatness is ready to begin if i get elected president .
no state has been hurt worse by the hillary clinton trade policies than the state of ohio .
hillary clinton backed her husband 's nafta , one of the worst deals made in the history of our country , maybe the worst trade deal made ever anywhere in the world .
that 's how bad .
she backed china 's entrance into the world trade organization .
she backed the job - killing trade deal with south korea , and she backed the trans - pacific partnership , which she called the gold standard .
one bad deal after another .
hillary clinton 's donors own her , they own her lock , stock and barrel .
they own her , and she will do whatever they tell her to do .
and when they own companies and they want that company to move to mexico , folks , your jobs are gone .
ok ?
you do n't have a chance .
that 's the way the system works .
ohio and the akron area have lost nearly one - third of the manufacturing jobs since nafta .
one - third , think of that , and getting worse .
and as you stand here tonight , there are companies right now negotiating to leave .
ok ?
you 'll find out about it , but we 'll stop them , just hang in there .
and it wo n't be hard , wo n't be hard .
this region and this state have lost nearly one in four manufacturing jobs since china entered the world trade organization .
our annual trade deficit in goods with the world is now nearly $ 800 billion , is that 's even believable , $ 800 billion .
we have some great negotiators on our side , do n't we ?
this subtracts directly from our growth .
our economy grew only 1.2 percent in the last quarter , that 's a total disaster .
that means there 's no growth and it 's getting worse , not better , it 's getting worse .
this is the legacy of barack hussein obama .
and hillary clinton will be four more years , and it will be worse , in my opinion .
i am promising a new legacy for america .
we are going to create a new american future .
but to do that , we have to stop the trans - pacific partnership .
we have to .
and to do that , you 're going to have to on november 8th elect donald j. trump as your president .
thank you -- november 8th .
our trade deficit with the proposed tpp member countries cost the state of ohio more than 100,000 manufacturing jobs just last year .
think of it , 100,000 jobs .
they 're ripping them out of our country .
imagine how many more jobs would be lost if tpp was actually approved .
hillary clinton , who called the tpp the gold standard , would approve and , by the way , 100 percent , 100 percent approval , she 's going to approve it .
if you remember , her closest friend , terry mcauliffe , confirmed that that 's what she 's going to do with a wink and a nod .
we ca n't let it happen .
we ca n't let it happen .
that will be , in my opinion , as bad , if that 's possible , as bad as nafta .
we will win this election and we will keep america out of tpp , among many , many other things .
we will defend our freedom , our jobs and our economic independence .
it 's going to be america first .
it 's not going to be america last , america seventh , america 5th because we want to take care of some company or take care of another country that 's taking care of our politicians .
i put up my money , folks .
you know what ?
if i do n't make it , i 've wasted a lot of money , time and energy , that i can tell you , a lot .
but i think we 're going to win big .
i actually think there 's something going on .
there 's something going on .
there is something going on , whether it 's here or in pennsylvania or in virginia or florida .
i go to the arenas , i start an hour , i start two hours early , and the places are packed with people outside .
i can start early because they 'll fill up hours before i 'm supposed to be there .
there 's an enthusiasm that 's going on that nobody has ever seen before .
there is something going on .
my economic plan is going to grow this economy , raise your wages , which in many cases have n't gone up in real wage for over 18 years .
you 're making less money now .
many of the people in this room making less money now than you made 18 years ago .
you 're working harder and , in some cases , you have two jobs .
it 's not supposed to work that way , it 's supposed to be the other way .
you 're getting older , you 're working harder , you 're making less .
not going to happen .
we are going to create millions and millions of new jobs .
here are a few of the things we are going to do .
this you will like .
a massive tax cut for working americans and a 15 percent tax rate for small businesses .
look at those people , they 're still pouring in .
i love seeing it , pouring in .
it 's really -- thank you -- it 's beautiful , beautiful , look .
it 's really beautiful .
thank you .
thank you , everybody .
see , to me that means so much .
when you see that scene , look at the doors , pouring in , all filling up , unbelievable , unbelievable .
i do n't know how i explain to them that we started an hour early .
i do n't know .
thank you , everybody .
i appreciate it .
thank you .
we are going to eliminate regulations that kill american jobs , and that includes getting rid of the obama administration 's new anti - energy rules that will lift your energy bills up by more than 40 percent very , very shortly .
these obama - clinton energy restrictions are a tax on the poor , and they devastate low - income , african - american and latino americans .
it is a disaster .
ohio gets 60 percent of its electricity from coal - powered energy .
right ?
hillary clinton says she wants to put a lot of coal miners and coal companies out of business .
exactly , just like she wants to put the steelworkers out of business .
she wants to put a lot of businesses out of business .
we are going to put the miners and the steelworkers back to work .
and we are going to get your energy bills down fast .
we are going to repeal and replace " obamacare , " saving another 2 million jobs over the next decade alone .
another major part of our agenda is law and order .
more than 2,600 people have been shot in chicago alone since the beginning of this year .
this is one of the biggest differences between me and my opponent .
i believe that safety is a right that belongs to all americans -- all americans .
and i want to take this opportunity to thank the law enforcement and police officials that are here with us tonight ...   ... and all across the country , for their service and sacrifice in these very dangerous , especially for them , dangerous and difficult times .
they are terrific , so thank you to law enforcement and police .
working with citizens and police , we will bring safety to communities across this land , but especially to those and these places that have not known safety in a very , very long time .
i want every parent and child in this society , including , so importantly , every african - american and hispanic citizen , to be able to live in a safe , thriving and prosperous community .
it 's time .
this is the new american future that we 're working all together to create .
hillary clinton is the past .
she 's been there forever , she 's done nothing but mistakes .
she 's got bad , bad judgment , mistake after mistake .
we are the future .
another major part of our agenda is immigration security .
we need to protect american jobs .
we need to protect american safety .
we 're going to build a wall , folks .
we 're going to build a wall .
we 're going to build it , do n't worry .
we 're going to build a wall .
that wall will go up so fast your head will spin .
and you 'll say , you know , he meant it .
and you know what else i mean ?
mexico is going to pay for the wall .
low - income workers are hurt the most by my opponent 's policies .
poor hispanic and african - american citizens are the first to lose a job or see a pay cut when we do n't control our borders .
so true .
according to pew research , immigration over the next 50 years will add another 100 million to our population .
we will be much , much more and it 's going to be much , much more under hillary clinton 's radical plans .
she 's got a radical plan .
you know where she got it ?
she got it probably from bernie who took her so far left .
wait until you see what she does to the united states supreme court .
but we 're not going to give her that chance , ok ?
we 're not going to give her that chance .
that 's so unfair to the low - income workers , african - american , latino , all americans , living here today and trying to get a job and get ahead .
hillary clinton 's plan amounts to total and absolute total open borders .
it 's open borders .
i 've met with the families who have lost loved ones to sanctuary cities and violence spilling across our border , parents like my friend jamiel shaw , mary ann mendoza , sabine durden and laura wilkerson .
hillary clinton is either too corrupt or too cowardly to meet with the families of those killed by the policies she and obama support .
hillary clinton has totally has forgotten the first rule of public service .
the job of an elected official is to serve the citizens of the united states .
that 's what the job is .
and if you do n't understand that , then you are not fit to run for the office of president of the united states .
if you are not prepared to put american workers first , then you should not hold or seek public office .
we 're not working for somebody else .
we 're not working for another country .
it 's just that simple .
no issue better illustrates how corrupt my opponent is than her pay - for - play scandals as secretary of state .
as the evidence has become public over the last several months , i have become increasingly shocked by the vast scope of hillary clinton 's criminality .
it 's criminality , everybody knows it , everybody knows it .
our country has gotten so far behind , everybody knows it .
hillary clinton said she turned over all of her work - related e - mails .
she testified that to congress under penalty of perjury .
now we learn about another 15,000 e - mails she failed to turn over and they have just been discovered , i guess today .
and do n't forget , the 33,000 e - mails she 's already deleted .
colin powell just proved again how dishonest hillary clinton is after he busted her for trying to pin the e - mail scandal on him , one more hillary clinton lie .
her foundation took in large payments from major corporations and wealthy individuals , foreign and domestic , and all the while she was secretary of state .
the clinton foundation accepted as much as $ 60 million from middle eastern countries that oppress women , gays and people of different faiths .
the foundation donors included corporations and individuals with significant matters before the state department .
not good .
and then either hillary clinton herself or one of her closest aides took action favorable to these donors .
her actions corrupted and disgraced one of the most important departments of government , indeed one of only four established by the united states constitution itself .
the clintons made the state department into the same kind of pay - for - play operation as the arkansas government was .
now , think of what happened back then .
think about it .
and i love the state of arkansas , we 're winning it big , but i 'll tell you , they know what went on .
they know and they 're not happy .
pay the clinton foundation huge sums of money and throw in some big speaking fees for bill clinton and you got to play , you got to do what you wanted to do .
it 's pretty sad .
this is in front of the state department .
this is in front of the state department .
and long before that , you should have seen what they were doing in arkansas .
same old story , folks .
the amounts involved , the favors done and the significant number of times it was done require an expedited investigation by a special prosecutor immediately , immediately , immediately .
after the fbi and department of justice whitewashed hillary clinton 's e - mail crimes , they certainly can not be trusted to quickly or impartially investigate hillary clinton 's new crimes which happen all the time .
some former prosecutors have even suggested that the coordination between the pay - for - play state department and the corrupt clinton foundation constitute a clear example of rico , racketeering influenced corrupt organization , enterprise .
the justice department is required to appoint an independent special prosecutor because it has proven itself to be really , sadly a political arm of the white house .
nobody has ever seen anything like this before .
the department of justice has acted very unethically , particularly the attorney general 's private , lengthy , 39-minute meeting in the back of an airplane before the department 's decision not to prosecute her for crimes that would have been prosecuted against any other citizen in our country .
if the justice department fails to do so , it will make it even clearer that a second of four primary constitutional departments have been corrupted .
it 's as simple as that .
every major lawyer , you look , every major lawyer is saying the same thing .
they ca n't believe it happened .
they know the facts , they ca n't believe it happened .
the justice department and the fbi , they can not believe what 's going on in this country .
and other countries are talking about it and they ca n't believe what 's happening either .
here 's one example of clinton corruption .
as secretary of state , hillary clinton signed off on a deal allowing russians to take an increased stake in a company called uranium one , giving up control of about 20 percent of america 's uranium supply to the russians .
wonderful deal .
you know what happens to uranium ?
you all know what happens to uranium , and they need it in russia .
clinton 's approval of the deal netted the owners of the uranium company millions and millions of dollars .
in exchange for signing off on the deal , some of the former owners of uranium one gave the clinton foundation millions and millions of dollars in donations .
in addition , bill clinton received over $ 500,000 for a speech to a kremlin - backed investment firm that was a beneficiary of the deal .
here is another example of pay - for - play .
in 2009 , a company called ericsson came under u.s. pressure for selling telecom equipment to several oppressive governments , including sudan , syria and iran .
some these regimes used those technologies to monitor and control their own people .
in june 2011 , hillary clinton 's state department began adding goods and services to a list that might be covered under expanded sanctions on iran and other state sponsors of terrorism .
during that time , ericsson sponsored a speech by bill clinton , paying him $ 750,000 , his highest - paying speech .
in april 2012 , the obama administration issued an executive order imposing sanctions on telecom sales to iran and syria , but those sanctions did not cover ericsson 's work in iran .
a trump administration will end the government corruption .
no one will be above the law .
we will have one set of rules for everyone .
in hillary clinton 's world , we have one set of rules for her and another set of rules for everyone else .
i am fighting for everyone who does n't have a voice .
i will be your voice , believe me .
i just get the feeling we 're going to win in a landslide .
hillary clinton 's campaign is funded by wall street and hedge fund managers .
my campaign is powered by my money , but also by small donations from working people across this country who want their country back .
the average donation last month was about $ 61 , so beautiful to see that .
and that does n't happen often with our republicans , and that 's ok .
but i 'll tell you , so glad to see it .
it 's a movement .
folks , it 's a movement that 's going on .
this is a movement .
this is a movement .
nothing terrifies the ruling class more than when everybody working , and i mean everybody and everyday working people , give $ 5 , $ 10 , $ 15 to a campaign like ours .
they are very concerned .
they could n't believe when they saw the numbers .
it is in fact something very , very special that 's happening because it 's never really happened like this , certainly for the republican party it 's never happened like this before .
we 're going to take government away from the special interests that give her tens of millions of dollars so that she can broadcast absolutely phony adds about me , and we 're going to give it back to the voters .
and by the way , those ads are absolutely phony with the exception of certain little parts of them .
a couple of little things are correct , but we 'll get over it .
come november 8th , we are once again going to have a government that serves you and your family and your country , not the special interests , the donors and the lobbyists .
we are going to rebuild our depleted military , avoid needless foreign wars , build new friendships overseas and remember those three famous words : peace through strength .
we are going to work with our allies to crush , defeat and utterly destroy isis .
we are going to have a new immigration screening test to keep people out of our country who do n't support our tolerant values .
we are going to have extreme vetting .
remember , extreme vetting .
we want people in our country , but we want people that have the ability to love us and respect us .
we are also going to reject the bigotry of hillary clinton , who sees people of color only as votes and not as human beings worthy of a better future .
so true .
that is so true .
the democratic party has run nearly every inner city for 50 years , 60 years , 70 years , and even more than a hundred years .
they have produced only poverty , failing schools and broken homes .
in the last eight years , the african - american labor force participation has declined another 3 percentage points , and it 's dropped another 6 percentage points for teenagers , and that 's already from the most dismal numbers in history .
nearly four in 10 african - american children live in poverty .
african - american home ownership has declined nearly 10 percentage points from record levels .
this is just in the last short while .
also , since 2009 , another 2 million latinos have fallen into poverty .
incomes for latino workers fell by almost another $ 1,000 a year .
again , by terrible standards .
meanwhile , homicides are up nearly 50 percent in washington d.c. and more than 60 percent in baltimore and up all over the place , no matter where you look .
the level of crime in these cities is something no american should consider acceptable .
it should not be considered acceptable .
our government has totally failed our african - american friends , our hispanic friends , and the people of our country , period .
the democrats have failed completely in the inner cities .
for those hurting the most , who have been failed and failed by their politicians , year after year , failure after failure , worse numbers after worse numbers , poverty , rejection , horrible education , no housing , no homes , no ownership , crime at levels that nobody 's seen .
you can go to war zones in countries that we 're fighting and it 's safer than living in some of our inner cities that are run by the democrats .
and i ask you this , i ask you this : crime , all of the problems , to the african - americans , who i employ so many , so many people , to the hispanics , tremendous people , what the hell do you have to lose ?
give me a chance .
i 'll straighten it out .
i 'll straighten it out .
what do you have to lose ?
and you know , i say it and i 'm going to keep saying it .
and some people say , wow , that makes sense , and then some people say , well , that was n't very nice .
look , it is a disaster the way african - americans are living , in many cases , and , in many cases , the way hispanics are living .
and i say it with such a deep - felt feeling .
what do you have to lose ?
i will straighten it out .
i 'll bring jobs back .
we 'll bring spirit back .
we 'll get rid of the crime .
you 'll be able to walk down the street without getting shot .
right now , you walk down the street and you get shot .
look at the statistics .
we 'll straighten it out .
if you keep voting for the same failed politicians , you will keep getting the same results .
they do n't care about you , they just like you once every four years , get your vote and then they say bye - bye .
what do you have to lose ?
and you know what ?
i 'll do a great job .
i 'll do a great job .
but most importantly , i want to talk to you about really what you have to gain .
those hurting in our country have so much to gain by joining our campaign for a new and more inclusive american future .
tax reforms will add millions of new jobs and thousands of small businesses .
my energy reforms will create millions of new jobs and lower the price of your energy bills which right now are going through the roof .
my trade reforms will raise wages , grow jobs and add trillions of dollars in new wealth to our country and to our people .
my immigration reforms will protect your jobs and stop businesses from exploiting visa programs that hurt poor workers and everybody else .
my infrastructure plans will rebuild your roads , your bridges , your tunnels , your airports , which are in terrible shape , the worst shape they 've been in in over 50 years .
my regulatory reform will make it easier for african - american small businesses to thrive and for young children to live out their dreams without crime and without being scared to walk down the street .
my promise of school choice -- you know what the word choice is , it 's called competition -- my promise of the word choice , charter schools and merit pay for teachers will help low - income students in our inner cities .
teachers , one of the most important professions ; no matter what you do , there is nothing so important .
we love our teachers .
we love our teachers .
we 've got to take care of our teachers .
got to take care of our teachers .
hillary clinton discriminates against poor african - american children by opposing school choice , for votes .
she wants the votes .
my government reforms will make your voice heard , not the voice of the special interests .
every insider getting rich off of our broken system is throwing money at hillary clinton .
it 's the powerful protecting the powerful .
excuse me , i used to be there , i know the system very well .
i know the system better than anybody .
it 's insiders fighting for insiders .
but i am fighting for you .
i 'm fighting for you .
every day , you turn on the nightly news , you hear about how some self - interested banker or some washington insider says they oppose the trump campaign .
that 's because i do n't need them , i do n't want them .
i 'm going to do what 's good for you .
or some encrusted old politician says they oppose my campaign , i certainly do n't need them .
or some big - time lobbyist says they oppose donald trump 's campaign , because i do n't want the lobbyists .
i 've had plenty of lobbyists , they do a good job , they get you whatever you want .
i wear their opposition as a badge of honor , believe me , right here .
because it means that i 'm fighting for real change , not just partisan change or change that 's going to make hillary richer .
i am fighting for all of us across the country , and we 're fighting for peaceful regime change in our own country .
that 's what we have to have .
we need it in our own country .
we have got a country that is so divided .
seldom has it ever been so totally divided .
and it 's very , very sad .
thank you .
the media / donor / political complex that 's bled this country dry for years has to be replaced with a new government of , by and for the people .
i will fight to ensure that every american is treated equally , protected equally and honored equally .
and all of these countries that are ripping us off and taking our jobs , all of those countries will start to respect us again , folks .
we will reject bigotry and hatred , we will reject oppression in all of its forms and seek a new future of security , prosperity and opportunity , a future built on our common culture and values as one american people .
i am asking , so importantly , where we have already seen a tremendous amount of time , it does n't mean anything if on november 8th we come in short .
it 'll look good in the history books , a lot of people will say congratulations , you 're not a politician , nobody 's ever done this before .
but you know what ?
it does n't mean anything unless on november 8th we go out and we win .
believe me .
you 've got to get every one of your friends , you 've got to get every one of your family , you 've got to get everybody to go out and watch and go out and vote .
and when i saw watch , you know what i 'm talking about , right ?
you know what i 'm talking about .
i think you 've got to go out and you 've got to watch .
i 'm asking for your vote so that i can be your champion in the white house , and i promise you that 's what i 'm going to be .
to every parent who dreams for their children and to every child who dreams for their future , of which there are so many , i say these words to you tonight : i am with you , i will fight for you , and i will win for you .
together , we will make america strong again .
together , we will make america safe again .
together , we will make america great again .
thank you !
god bless you .
thank you , everybody .
thank you .
thank you .
thank you very much .
and   and leadership on this issue ...   ... so very much .
deeply invested in this long before the campaign began , i can tell you that .
i 'm very grateful to her for her work and efforts , and this proposal which we are going to outlining right way .
and it going to make a lot of people very , very happy , a lot of moms very , very happy .
i want to also take a moment to recognize congresswoman cathy mcmorris rodgers , the chairwoman of the house republican conference ...   ... and a   who 's been such a leader and worked so hard with us .
so , cathy , we want to thank you very much .
we 're joined   by some amazing members of congress in our audience .
congresswoman blackburn   blackburn , marsha .
come on up here .
you worked so hard .
come on .
thank you very much .
and mary jo ann , can you please stand up ?
the   always done a good job .
so our campaign is about ideas .
we 're about solutions to day - to- day problems , problems that .
i 've traveled all over the country in recent weeks offering detailed plans to make life better for you and for your families , so important to me .
i 've outlined detailed proposals of providing school choice , involving our tax and regulatory vote ...   ...   on american energy , rebuilding our military , changing our foreign policy , fixing our immigration , so important ...   ... and keeping our country safe .
thank you .
right now the politicians have locked our country into endless fights about small and petty things .
i 'm here to see the nation , and to imagine what we can accomplish if we work together , trust each other and put the needs of our citizens first for a change .
we must break our ties with the failed and bitter politics and policies of the past , and pursue a future where every american is honored , and i mean really honored and respected .
the average   americans in washington , d.c. that looks down on everyday hardworking people , and that 's what 's happening .
too often those who have power , have disdain for the views , beliefs and attitudes of those who do n't have any political power .
those people must put themselves in the shoes of the radio factory worker , the family worried about security or the mom struggling to afford child care -- child care is such a big problem .
we 're going to solve that problem .
that means we need working mothers to be fairly compensated for their work , and have access to affordable , quality child care for their kids .
we want higher pay , better wages and a growing economy for everyone .
these solutions must update laws passed more than a half a century ago when most women were still not in the labor force , or some of them were n't even close .
today nearly two in three mothers with young children have jobs .
for many families in our country child care is now the single largest expense .
who would think that ?
even more so than housing .
while critical , meaningful policy work has been done in this area , my opponent has no child care plan .
she never will .
they 'll never evolve into a plan .
they 'll never get done anyway . .
many americans are just one crisis away from a disaster .
a sick kid , a lost job , a damaged home .
there is no financial security in our country , especially any more .
but that will change under our pro - family , pro - fatherhood .
it 's pro family .
it 's pro child .
it 's pro worker .
the people we have to take care of .
and this is what i 'm going to be outlining tonight .
before ...   before going any further , i want everyone watching on tv , and there are a lot of people , right now to go to donaldjtrump.com to read the full plan in detail .
the first part of my child care plan allows for every parent or family in america , including adoptive parents and foster parent guardians to deduct their child care expenses from their income taxes .
i see the women who i just met in the front row are very happy about that .
they will finally be able to deduct the average cost of child care for their state from birth through the age of 13 .
because of the way the benefit is capped and structured , our plan will bring relief to working and middle class families .
the deduction also applies to elder care , capped at $ 5,000 deduction per year .
$ 5,000 deduction .
importantly , our policy also supports mothers who choose to stay at home , and honors and recognizes their incredible contributions to their families and to our society .
families with a stay - at - home parent will be able to fully deduct the average cost of child care from their taxes .
wow .
wow .
the congresswomen like the word wow .
makes your life a lot easier right ?
the low - income individuals who are no net income tax liability , we will offer an expanded earned income tax credit , that 's eitc , in the form of a child care rebate .
working parents will get an expanded eitc benefit that equals up to half of their total payroll tax , a major relief for low - income parents .
low - income parents have it tougher than anybody .
this translates to as much as an extra $ 1,200 in eitc benefits for working families .
yes .
our plan will ask every parent in america to open up a dependent care savings account .
families can contribute up to $ 2,000 a year in these accounts completely tax free .
she 's very happy about that .
ivanka 's very happy about this .
crucially , unlike the flexible spending accounts that exist today , these accounts will be available to all americans .
you wo n't have to depend on your employer to provide them .
and we give family employers -- and this is like right way -- that also contribute to a dependent account , each of which is designed and designated for a specific child , including an unborn child .
the money that is put into these accounts can also be spent not only in child care , but also child - enriching activities .
see ?
they 're starting to act up .
after hearing it the first time .
that 's cute .
additionally , the funds in these accounts do not expire at the end of the year .
they do n't revert to employers or to the treasury .
instead the funds rollover so that while only $ 2,000 can be contributed each year , unspent sums can accumulate and create substantial savings , tremendous savings .
these savings can be used by parents to help give their kids school choice , and will thus contribute to the school choice reforms i outlined last week .
a lot of good outlines last week on schools .
i grew really popular , let me tell you .
the funds will remain in the account until the age of 18 .
whatever still remains at that time can be used to help offset the costs of higher education for your child .
for low - income people , the federal government will provide matching funds .
if parents contribute $ 1,000 , the federal government will provide a $ 500 match .
to help low - income families reach   and save money , we will put a box on federal income tax forms allowing these parents to have their earned income tax credit funds directly deposited into their dependent care savings accounts .
pretty simple .
these dependent care savings accounts can also be set up to provide care for elderly dependents .
our plan also includes much needed regulatory reform to incentivize private sector solutions .
the reforms offered by our plan will create a new market for our   child care solutions .
but to make sure these solutions are available -- especially to low- income and rural communities -- we must reduce regulations that favor large institutional care facilities .
you know what i 'm talking about .
special interests .
we will allow the states to make decisions that are right for them .
in this era of sharing economy we want parents to be able to access low - cost , competitive and innovative solutions at the click of a button , including services like nanny sharing .
our plan will also cover care provided by relatives and grandparents .
our plan includes incentives for more employers to offer on site child care as well .
we want the employers to get involved now then start getting involved bigly .
right ?
you will start liking your employer a lot more .
this would also be a good solution for many working parents , and can save them up to 30 minutes in commute time .
that 's a lot .
currently only seven percent of employers provide this service , not very much .
our plan will expand tax deductions for employers , allowing companies to pool resources and provided shared care .
this is , i think , so important .
provide shared child care services and remove needless requirements that have prevented employers from using the credit .
the requirements are so onerous that they never get to use it , even though in many cases they would like to .
finally , our plan offers a crucial safety net for working mothers whose employers do not provide paid maternity leave .
this solution will receive strong bipartisan support .
do you agree with that ?
do you think , when you go to the other side they 'll be ok ? .
look at .
and we 'll be completely self- funding ...    tax - free   fraud and improper payments in the unemployment insurance program .
we can provide six weeks of paid maternity leave to any mother with a newborn child whose employer does not provide the benefit .
this maternity leave will be paid straight out of the unemployment insurance fund .
and again , the safety net will be completely paid for through savings within the program .
we have more reforms and solutions in our child care plan .
and you can review them all on the website .
on thursday i will outline my family economic plan , which is completely paid for , through economic growth and proposed federal budget savings .
it 's going to be something special like this country has n't seen in many , many decades .
together our tax , trade , regulatory and energy policies will add trillions and trillions of dollars in new deficit - growing growth .
these are the kinds of solutions i want to bring to the white house as your president .
it 's time to free ourselves from the baskets that politicians try to put us into and hold ...   ... and instead we can work together ...     thank you very much .
thank you .
and .
while my opponent slanders you as deplorable and irredeemable , i call you hardworking american patriots who ...   

  thank you .
it 's time to end the rule of special interests and to begin the rule of the american people .
that 's what it 's all about ...   it 's time to stop fighting over the smallest words and to start dreaming about the great adventures that lie ahead for our incredible country .
it 's time to start believing in america again .
together .
i promise you , together we will make our country strong again .
we will make our country prosperous again .
we will make our country great again .
greater than ever before .

this is something .
thank you .
wow .
this is great .
wow .
thank you very much , ladies and gentlemen .
thank you .
thank you very much .
i hope everybody way up on the hill -- can you hear me up there ?
can you hear me ?
wow .
amazing .
and we have crowds like this all over our great country .
it 's a movement like nobody 's ever seen before .
and on november 8th , we must get out to complete the movement and then the work begins .
ok ?
and then the work begins .
thank you , everybody , very much .
it 's great to be here in the city of henderson .
i know henderson very well , a lot of friends .
you know , a fabulous , fabulous state that we all love -- this is a special state .
i 've certainly spent a lot of money in this state if it 's not .
and we have right down the road a very successful hotel , trump international , and it 's been great .
really great .
so i want to thank everybody .
in 34 days , we 're going to win this state , and we 're going to win back the white house .
so , how many of you watched the vice presidential debate last night ?
mike pence did an incredible job .
and i 'm getting a lot of credit , because that 's really my first so - called choice .
that was my first hire , as we would say in las vegas .
and i 'll tell you , he 's a good one .
he was phenomenal .
he was cool .
he was smart .
he was -- i mean , you just take a look at him .
he was meant to be doing what he 's doing , and we are very , very proud of governor mike pence .
thank you , mike pence .
mike had the single most decisive victory in the history of vice presidential debates .
i believe that .
and last night , america also got to look first - hand at my judgment , and that was judgment .
you know , you need judgment for people , for deals .
we do n't do deals like the iran deal .
we do n't do deals like that anymore , folks .
we do n't do deals like that -- $ 1.7 billion in cash , and we 're in las vegas .
when you hear $ 1.7 billion , i think this whole state would be filled up to the roof .
whoever heard of things like what 's going on ?
unbelievable .
well , mike laid out big and bold solutions for america .
his opponent talked only of small and petty distractions .
hillary clinton has been there for 30 years and has n't fixed anything .
she goes around -- we 'll do this , we 'll do that , we 'll do this -- all these things .
it 's all wonderful .
the problem is why did n't she do them ?
in fact , she 's just made things worse .
she failed in upstate new york as a senator , promising to create -- in order to get elected -- 200,000 jobs , but manufacturing is down more than 40 percent and the jobs have left .
it 's just the opposite .
she failed overseas , producing only death and destruction .
she unleashed isis , destabilized iraq , syria , libya and put iran on to the path of nuclear weapons .
in less than 10 years now , they will have nuclear weapons .
one of the dumbest deals ever made , whether it 's countries or any kind of a deal you can think of , one of the dumbest deals ever made .
at home , hillary clinton failed latinos and african - americans , producing only more poverty in the inner cities , and you see that .
you see that all -- wherever you go to the inner cities , nothing happens , it never happens , it 's called give me your vote and then they do n't come back .
four years later , they come back .
she 's merely the vessel for the global special interests bleeding our country dry .
they are bleeding our country .
i 'm running to represent americans , and we are going to make america rich again .
we 're not rich .
we 're a debtor nation right now .
i 'm going to end illegal immigration .
stop the massive inflow of refugees , keep jobs from pouring out of our country , renegotiate our totally disastrous trade deals and massively reduce taxes and regulations on our workers and our businesses .
my economic agenda will be very , very simple .
it 's called jobs , jobs , jobs .
our jobs are all leaving .
the problems we face as a country are immense , and it 's going to take bold action to turn things around .
we need change .
we need change .
right now , we owe $ 20 trillion debt , $ 20 trillion dollars .
it doubled under president obama .
our infrastructure is like that of a third world country .
the homicide rate last year experienced the biggest single year increase in more than 45 years .
does anybody know that ?
biggest increase in homicide in 45 years .
our police are underfunded , understaffed and under - supported , and hillary clinton basically accuses our police of all being racists .
our border is wide open , and drugs and criminal cartels are pouring into our country on an hourly basis .
thousands of refugees are being admitted with no way to screen them and are instantly made eligible for welfare and free healthcare , even as our own veterans , our great , great veterans , die while they 're waiting online for medical care that they desperately need .
our veterans will be taken care of like they 've never been taken care of before .
do we have some veterans in the group ?
stand up .
stand up , veterans .
wow .
we have such tremendous support from the veterans group , from law enforcement , veterans groups from all over the country .
we just had the endorsement from the fraternal order of police , which represents massive amounts of police .
almost every police group , almost every veteran group .
and then i saw today -- i left the room and i saw a commercial where it was really a nasty commercial .
totally made up about me with vets .
there 's nobody that loves the vets more or respects the vets more .
they 're spending hundreds of millions of dollars on false commercials , and it 's a disgrace .
so what we 'll do , i guess we 'll sue them .
let 's sue them , right ?
let 's sue them .
it 's unbelievable .
they say , let 's see where 's trump doing well ?
he 's doing well with the vets , oh let 's do a commercial on the vets .
and whatever 's unpopular , they 'll just put it in .
let me tell you .
we 're going to take care of our vets like you 've never been taken care of before .
remember that .
our annual trade deficit with the world is nearly , listen to this , $ 800 billion a year .
you say , who 's negotiating our deals , right ?
we have political hacks negotiating our deals .
and we have the greatest business people in the world in our country .
why are n't we using them ?
$ 800 billion a year in trade .
the federal budget is a total disaster .
our state department , mostly under the watch of crooked hillary clinton , misplaced or lost $ 6 billion .
can you imagine this ?
they lost it .
you know , you lose a couple of bucks .
they lost $ 6 billion in taxpayer funds .
we have the worst so - called recovery by far since the great depression .
we 're a nation totally divided with race riots in the streets .
our college students graduate loaded with debt , only to discover they ca n't find jobs or certainly not the jobs they want or not the jobs they were trained for and worked so hard to get .
those jobs have left .
our allies are n't paying their fair share .
foreign countries like russia and china do not respect us .
do you ever see hillary clinton when she wants to talk tough about putin ?
they say , donald trump loves putin .
i do n't love .
i do n't hate .
we 'll see how it works .
we 'll see .
maybe we 'll have a good relationship .
maybe we 'll have a horrible relationship .
maybe we 'll have a relationship right in the middle .
i can say this .
if we got along with russia and russia went out with us and knocked the hell out of isis , that 's ok with me , folks .
that 's ok with me .
so our taxpayers and us , all of us as citizens , are sending troops and foreign aid all over the world , even as their own cities ca n't provide the most basic services .
we go to some of these middle eastern locations and we 'll build a school and they blow it up , and we build it again , and they blow it up .
but when we want a school here or in brooklyn , new york , or in los angeles or someplace else , we do n't have the funds .
we 've spent $ 6 trillion in the middle east , think of that .
we could have rebuilt our country twice if we knew what the hell we were doing , and we 're not respected at all .
america needs a turnaround , america needs a comeback , america needs a change , and that 's why i 'm running .
thank you .
on november 8th , we 're going to show the whole world that america is back , bigger and better and stronger than ever , ever , ever before ; stronger than ever before .
first , we 're going to repeal and replace the disaster known as obamacare .
president obama said if you like your doctor , you can keep your doctor .
that was a lie .
he promised his plan would reduce premiums by $ 2,500 per person .
that was a lie ; instead they surged to much more than $ 5,000 .
and you know it because you 're all here , you 're all witnesses .
now , it happens .
yesterday , right ?
bill clinton yesterday , they 're so angry at him .
they scolded him yesterday , he was scolded .
did everybody hear what happened yesterday ?
and this is what i 've been saying for years .
so bill clinton torched president obama 's signature legislation .
remember , hillary clinton called obamacare one of the greatest accomplishments of president obama , of the democratic party and of our country itself , right ?
but bill had a different view , he said it 's just a crazy system .
and that 's the way he said it , " it 's the craziest thing in the whole world . "
then he went on to say " well , people out there are busting it , " true , they 're working like hell , they 're busting it .
sometimes 60 hours a week and wind up with their premiums doubled and their coverage cut in half , this is bill clinton , " the people are getting killed " he said , " in this deal and small business people and individuals who make just a bit too much money to get these subsidies , you know what happens , they do n't get anything ; they get nothing . "
clinton added , " it does n't make any sense ; the insurance model just does n't work . "
so , you know , they 're always telling me , oh , if you say something , just apologize .
just apologize .
i think that president obama should apologize for obamacare .
and i think that hillary clinton should apologize for pursuing obamacare and she wants to make it even worse than it is right now .
we 're going to repeal it and we 're going to replace it with much less expensive and much better care .
now this is essential for your great state and my great state .
because obamacare , the majority of the counties in your state have only one insurer to choose from .
did you read that this morning in your good paper ?
good paper .
owned by a great guy .
sheldon !
sheldon , sheldon adelson .
and a great supporter of israel , sheldon adelson .
great supporter .
there 's only one way to stop obamacare : vote for donald j. trump .
very simple .
very simple .
very simple .
it 's a very simple way to do it .
you got to get out there november 8th .
i say kiddingly , but i mean it .
i do n't care how sick you are .
i do n't care if you just came back from the doctor and he gave you the worst possible prognosis , meaning it 's over .
you wo n't be around in two weeks .
does n't matter .
hang out until november 8th .
get out and vote .
and then all we 're going to say is we love you and we will remember you always .
get out and vote .
and do n't let the other sides take this election away from us because this is the last chance we get .
and i see elvis back there .
elvis .
this is the last chance we get .
the deadline to register to vote is october 8th in your state .
so you can do that early , this way you do not have to wait around until november 8th if you are the person seeing the doctor , right ?
no , we have all great , healthy people .
you have to be healthy because obamacare does n't work so you have to have -- you really have no choice .
that 's the only thing good about obamacare is you have to maintain your health , which is good psychologically to think that way , because obamacare will not be there .
it is a disaster .
early voting begins on the 22nd , fixing our trade deals will be the foundation of our economic revival .
china , japan , and europe are printing huge sums of money .
the devaluation of currencies is staggering as to what it represents to our country , our businesses , our citizens , and our jobs .
every time we start making progress , china devalues its currency and we go right back to the drawing board .
because you ca n't compete against that .
it 's cheating .
we are not going to level playing field and our politicians do not understand what is going on .
they really do not get it .
and the ones that do get it are taken care of with political contributions so they close their eyes .
we 're going to do something much different .
and i am spending my own money on my campaign .
i 'll tell you .
i 'm spending a fortune .
one of the very big pundits , very respected , actually very liberal , said you know what you 've done has never been done before .
and it makes no difference if you win or lose this movement will go down in history .
i said , no , you do n't understand .
i like to agree with you .
but if i do n't win , this will be the greatest waste of time , money and energy in my lifetime by a factor of 100 .
because if we do n't win , we ca n't change things .
we ca n't bring back common sense .
we ca n't strengthen our military which is so depleted .
we ca n't save our 2nd amendment , so many different things .
so we have to win .
we have to win .
our jobs are being lost --   -- in massive numbers and we 're not making things relatively speaking in america anymore .
too much is being made in other countries .
when i 'm president , we will start making things in america again .
our nation has lost one - third of it 's manufacturing jobs since bill clinton signed nafta .
you know it was clinton that signed it , a lot of people do n't know that .
one of the worst trade deals in the history of the world .
the deal was also supported very strongly by hillary clinton .
hillary 's korea deal , south korea , cost us another 100,000 jobs .
remember that ?
it was supposed to be a good deal .
it cost us jobs , tremendous numbers of jobs .
and south korea , like almost every other country , is laughing at how stupid we are .
since china entered the world trade organization , another bill and hillary backed deal 70,000 factories , when i saw 70,000 , i said , please go back it ca n't be possible .
ca n't be possible .
i figured maybe 700 , 7,000 .
70,000 factories have shut down or left the united states .
can you believe this ?
70,000 .
that 's 15 factories closing a day on average .
we are living through the greatest job theft in the history of the world .
our jobs are being stolen by countries with much smarter leadership than ours .
not going to happen anymore folks .
not going to happen anymore .
as the factories leave , our money leaves with them .
stores close .
schools suffer .
the tax base erodes .
wages fall and the quality of life totally declines .
real cash wages for many workers today are lower than they were in 1973 .
i usually say 18 years , but it goes back much further .
people think of this , people are working harder today .
they have sometimes two or three jobs , than they were , i 'll just say with   this is 1973 .
eighteen years .
so they made more money 18 years ago , let me tell you .
they 're younger .
they are less experienced .
today , they work harder .
they 're older and they make less money .
now the only thing that i can say to make you feel better , is i 'm also older and i 'm also working the hardest i 've ever worked in my life doing this .
this is the hardest i 've ever worked in my life .
it 's true .
that 's true .
this is work .
although it 's like love , but it 's work .
but we 're getting there , we 're gon na make america great again , it 's gon na be worth it , ok ?
we rebuild other countries at the expense of our own .
skyscrapers going up in beijing while plants and factories crumble in the united states .
companies like carrier , general electric , motorola , mattel , fiat - chrysler and so many others -- i could go by the hundreds -- are moving their jobs to mexico and other countries .
and now ford has announced , two weeks ago , it 's moving all of its small car production to mexico on top of the massive plant that they announced three years ago that 's going to cost $ 2 billion that 's now complete .
and then you wonder why we 're doing well in michigan ?
and ohio ?
because i 've been saying this for five years .
i have n't been saying this for the last two weeks , like hillary , who does n't know what 's happening .
i 've been saying this for five years and the people of michigan know that and the people of ohio know that .
and that 's why we 're way up in ohio and that 's why we 're doing so well in michigan , a state that normally a republican would n't do that well in .
but they 're losing all their jobs to mexico and other places .
we 're going to -- well , you ready for this one folks ?
we 're going to renegotiate nafta --   -- and if we do n't get the deal we want we will withdraw from nafta and start all over again making better deals for our workers .
it 's going to be america first .
it 's america first .
no more like , let 's take care of everybody else except ourselves .
we 're also going to stand up to foreign currency manipulation and apply tariffs and taxes to the countries that cheat .
that way we neutralize , that way our businesses can compete and we wo n't lose our jobs .
we will also stop the trans - pacific partnership , the deal she called the gold standard , hillary clinton said .
and then during the debate she lied , and she said , " i never said that . "
and then they actually fact - checked her and they said , " trump was right . "
finally i 'm right .
finally .
every time i made a statement this character challenged me .
she can say whatever she wants .
say are you going to check that statement ?
so they check the statement .
she called it the gold standard .
let me tell you , tpp will be almost as bad as nafta .
nothing 's like nafta , but it 'll take your jobs our of your state , it 'll take them out of ohio , and michigan , and pennsylvania -- tpp is a disaster .
and they do n't cover currency manipulation .
because our politicians did n't want to put the necessary language into the documents , and the documents are over 5,000 pages long , and nobody from our country practically has even read that .
do n't let it happen .
and if i win , forget it .
and we 're gon na have trade .
but instead of having trade deals with all of these different countries , that 's so complicated , we 'll do trade one on one .
one , one , one , one , one , and if they do n't treat us right , we send them a letter of default .
and by the time letter of default and " now you ca n't do that , " because you 've got to go through " this looks like a jigsaw puzzle . "
the backers of the tpp have donated heavily to hillary clinton and their wish is her command .
she 's an insider fighting only for herself and for her donors .
i 'm an outsider fighting for you , that 's what i 'm doing this fall .
we will stop the foreign cheating , the product dumping and the one sided trade deals .
this stuff will not happen anymore folks ; we 're not going to have a country left .
we 'll lower taxes on american businesses from 35 percent to 15 percent and many small businesses will file as individuals and pay only 12 percent , a massive tax cut .
on top of that , we will have the largest regulatory reform in american history , our regulations are a disaster ; they 're putting businesses out of business .
our tax , trade , energy and regulatory reforms will help us reach 4 percent growth and create at least 25 million new jobs within a decade .
america will become the great jobs magnet of the world .
and i will the greatest jobs president that god ever created , i 'll tell you that that will happen .
that will happen .
factories will come rushing in , our schools and communities will be revitalized , and our poorer citizens will get new jobs and higher pay and new hope for their life .
but to be a rich nation , we must also be a secure nation .
security begins at the border , you understand .
any government that does not protect its own people is a government unworthy and unfit to lead .
countless americans who have died in recent years would be alive today if not for the open border policies of hillary clinton and barack obama .
this includes incredible americans like 21 years sarah root , unbelievable person .
the man who killed arrived at the border , entered federal custody and then was released immediately into the u.s. community under the immigration policies of obama -- clinton .
he was released again and again after crime , and now he 's at large .
sarah graduated from college with a 4.0 grade point index , number one in her class the day before she was viciously killed .
also among the victims of the obama -- clinton open border policies was grant ronnebeck , a 21 year old convenience store clerk from mesa , arizona .
he was murdered by an illegal immigrant gang member , previously convicted of burglary who had also been released from federal custody .
then there 's the case of 90 year old earl olander   who was brutally beaten and left to bleed to death in his home .
the perpetrators were illegal immigrants with criminal records a mile long , but who did not meet the obama administration 's priority for removal .
in california a 64-year - old air force veteran , marilyn farris , was sexually assaulted and beaten to death with a hammer .
her killer had been arrested on multiple occasions , but for whatever reason was never deported .
also in california , my good friend , great guy , jamiel shaw , lost his amazing son at age 17 .
he was viciously shot and killed by an illegal immigrant for no reason whatsoever .
the killer had three gun charges as well as battery of police officers prior to the shooting , but he had not been deported .
they just did not want to do it .
i 'd like to invite up to the stage now some of the families from the incredible remembrance project who are here today and these are amazing , amazing people .
they 've lost their loved ones for no reason .
mike !
come out here , mike .
come out here , mike .
how about - do you want to say something on behalf of your boy ?
thank you .
amazing .
and in story after story and it 's -- this is just a small group of the people , but i tell them every time i 'm with them .
i say , your loved ones will not have died in vain .
you know what i mean .
incredible people , the remembrance .
i will tell you , it 's incredible people .
it 's a tough thing to go through .
there are more than 2 million criminal aliens with criminal convictions in the country right now and more who have committed crimes , you would not believe it .
but who have escaped the law entirely .
when i am president , we are getting them out of our country and were getting them out immediately , quickly fast .
and a lot of the countries from where they came wo n't take them back .
they do n't want them back .
they 're killers , they 're this , they 're that .
we do n't want them back .
and under hillary clinton 's state department she said -- oh , they wo n't take them back , huh ?
under a trump administration i promise you , every single one of them will be taken back gladly .
gladly .
ok ?
gladly .
they do n't want to take them back , so they 're on our streets , killing people .
all americans living lovely   in this country , including millions of wonderful , patriotic , hard - working immigrants are entitled to have their jobs and wages and their security totally protected .
the borders around our nation are for the benefit of all people living here today -- everybody .
and those borders are erased -- it 's often done by the lawful immigrants already here .
and if you look at what 's going on with the borders , and very simply , if they are erased , and if we have no borders , we really have no country .
and that 's really what 's happened .
and i have to tell you i 've been endorsed by the border patrol agents , 16,500 .
by ice , two days ago -- ice .
first time they 've ever endorsed anybody for president .
i was endorsed by sheriff joe .
sheriff joe knows the border .
he knows the border .
we love sheriff joe .
at the same time our country is being infiltrated by terrorists .
just two days ago an immigrant from bangladesh in yet another isis plot .
hundreds of immigrants from high - risk regions have been implicated in terrorism inside the united states since 9/11 .
the terrorists who planted the bombs in new york and new jersey last week , and who carried out the mall stabbing in minnesota two weeks ago , were foreign nationals admitted into our country as was the mall shooter in washington state .
no more folks .
no more .
now the media does n't want to talk about this .
they really do n't .
just like they do n't want to show the crowd .
just like they do n't want to show the crowd .
the never want to show the crowd .
never ever .
did you ever go home and you watch and you hear this roar , it sounds like you 're at ohio state football game -- so you know there 's thousands and thousands .
we were yesterday in arizona .
we had a line that was a mile and a half long trying to get in .
it 's incredible .
we were in colorado the day before .
we had a line -- you would n't believe .
the stadiums we fill up .
the arenas that we fill up .
and they never take the camera off my face .
never .
people say how was the crowd ?
i say did n't you see ?
oh i loved your speech .
but did n't you see the crowd ?
no i heard but they never , ever show the crowd .
and that 's for good reason .
they do n't want to show the crowds .
because nobody 's ever had crowds like this , and it 's not me , it 's you .
this is a movement like never before , remember that .
and believe me the media which is totally dishonest is a big , big part of the problem that our country is having .
these are really dishonest people .
you watch the clinton news network , cnn .
it 's a joke .
it 's actually a joke .
it 's a joke .
and i think most people are starting to understand it .
the good news , their ratings are bing .
the boston bombers were here on asylum .
the san bernardino shooter was here through a fiance visa .
sounds so nice , does n't it ?
a fiance visa .
oh , coming in to get married , from saudi arabia , right ?
came in , probably radicalized him , went out , killed 14 people , that shortly before gave them a party honoring their new child .
shot them .
killed them .
many wounded .
the orlando shooter was the son of a taliban supporter from afghanistan .
i 'm going to keep the terrorists out of our country .
not going to have them .
hillary clinton wants a 550 percent increase in syrian refugees .
she 's for open borders .
remember this , i 'm not running to be president of the world .
i 'm running to be president of the united states and we 're all going to protect each other .
and we are going to make , i say it again , and i 'll say it again and again , we are going to make america first again .
remember that .
america first .
we 're going to make america first .
we 're going to build the wall .
and we 're going to enforce our laws .
and we 're going to keep our people safe .
i have a simple message for the cartels , the gang members , the drug dealers , preying on our citizens , destroying our youth .
your days are numbered .
your reign of crime will very soon come crashing to a very ugly end .
you 're getting the hell out of this country .
we 're also going to end government corruption .
hillary clinton put her e - mails on an illegal secret server open to foreign hackers .
then she bleached and deleted 33,000 e - mails after getting a congressional subpoena .
you ca n't even do that in a private case .
she lied to congress under oath , and her staffers took the fifth amendment and got immunity deals .
now we 've learned that the fbi made a side deal with clinton 's top aides that it was ok for them to destroy their laptops .
do you believe this ?
hillary clinton is the ringleader of a criminal enterprise and the only way to deliver justice is to mail in your ballots .
go out there get them done .
november 8th , get in .
we 're also -- we 're going to end this , folks .
we 're going to end it .
we ca n't let this happen .
we 're like a third world country .
we ca n't let this go on .
i 've never seen anything like it in my life and neither have you .
we 're also going to fix our inner cities .
and help our latino- american citizens and our african - american citizens .
we are going to help .
it 's time .
forty - five percent of african - american youth live in poverty .
58 percent of african - american youth do n't have jobs .
more than 3,000 people have been shot in the city of chicago , obama 's hometown , since the beginning of the year .
that 's since january .
not a long time .
homicides are up nearly 50 percent in washington , d.c. , and more than 60 percent in baltimore .
the democrats , like hillary clinton , have run the inner cities for 50 , 60 , 70 even 100 years unbroken .
they 've produced only more joblessness , failing schools and rising crime .
to those african - americans suffering in our country , i say , what the hell do you have to lose ?
i will fix it .
vote for me .
i 'm going to fix it .
what do you have to lose ?
what do you have to lose ?
nothing to lose .
they come in for your vote .
they get your vote .
then they do nothing .
i 'm also going to fight to help millions of latinos trapped in poverty and to help their children grow up in safety and in peace .
which they 're not doing now .
poor communities will see a massive infusion of new small business come pouring in , with new high - paying beautiful jobs .
i 'm also going to fight to provide school choice to every low income , african - american and latino child in this country .
i want to put every american child on the ladder to success .
that means a great education and a high - paying job that you love .
here is some of the more amazing things we 're going to do for our country starting in 2017 .
we 're going to have the biggest tax cut since ronald reagan and maybe even bigger than that , looks like .
we 're going to eliminate every unnecessary regulation which is choking our businesses and killing our jobs .
she wants to raise your taxes and she wants far more regulation .
we 're going to end education , we 're going to end common core .
we 're bringing our education local .
we 're going to repeal and replace obamacare .
bill clinton 's said we have to do it .
so we 'll have to listen to him .
oh , he 's suffering now .
and all he did is tell the truth .
we 're going to make childcare affordable .
we 're going to save our 2nd amendment , which is under siege .
we are going to support the men and women of law enforcement .
we 're going to rebuild our very depleted military and we are going to take care of our great veterans .
we are going to appoint justices to the united states supreme court who will uphold and defend the constitution of the united states .
this election day , you have one magnificent chance to deliver justice for every forgotten man , woman , and child in this country .
on november 8th , the arrogance of washington , d.c. will come face to face with the righteous verdict of the american voter .
the failed and corrupt political establishment will be replaced with a new government of , by , and for the people .
i am going to fight for every last citizen in this land , and i 'm going to fight to bring us all together as americans .
imagine what our country could accomplish if we stated working together as one people , under one god , saluting one american flag .
can you imagine ?
can you imagine ?
you 're going to look back at this rally for the rest of your life , you 're going to remember this day .
this is a movement like nobody has ever seen before .
even bill o'reilly said it 's the single greatest political phenomena of his lifetime , that 's good .
that 's good .
and many others -- and many that dislike me say the same thing .
we 're going to make history together , you 're going to look back at this election and say this is by far the most important vote that you 've ever cast for anyone at anytime .
a vote for donald trump is a vote for change , and a vote for me is really a vote for you ; you 're voting for you , believe me .
it 's the way i look at it .
you 're voting to believe in yourselves , you 're voting to believe in your country .
all together , we are going to make america wealthy again .
we 're going to make america strong again .
we 're going to make america safe again .
we 're going to make america great again .
i love you , thank you , god bless you .
god bless you , go out and vote november 8th , thank you .
thank you .
god bless you , everyone .
the fact that so many encrusted old political insiders oppose this incredible campaign , this incredible movement , is the best proof you will ever need that we are fighting for real change , not partisan change .
not change for the donors .
we 're fighting for all americans , democrats , republicans , independents , conservatives , liberals .
even liberals who failed us in this corrupt , corrupt , corrupt system .
we 're fighting for everyone who does n't have a voice .
and i will tell you , the campaign contributions coming in are unbelievable .
small donors , $ 61 a pop .
and i 'm spending my money .
i am spending a fortune .
i am spending a lot .
i 'm putting up my money .
and we 're being helped by small donors , and we 're setting records .
and we have done some job .
but i will say if we do n't make it -- despite what they say , if we do n't make it .
they 're all saying it does n't matter .
what you 've done has never been done before .
it 's one of the great phenomena .
let me tell you .
if we do n't make it , it 's the greatest waste of time , energy and money that i can ever think of .
i will tell you , we do n't make it .
but we 're going to make it .
and polls came out today ...   polls came out today where we 're up in ohio .
we 're up in florida .
we 're up in north carolina .
up .
we 're up nationwide .
cnn two days ago , up nationwide .
so i just want to tell you folks we 're going to get it there .
we 've been abused long enough .
as a country we 've been abused long enough .
we 're also fighting for every region of this country .
for every part of florida and every single pat of america , from pensacola -- great place -- to pittsburgh .
from baltimore to baton rouge we 're fighting for ever last city and every last person in the country , everybody .
hillary clinton , and you can see that from those e - mails ...   ... is a very dishonest candidate of the past .
ours is the campaign of the future .
in this future we 're going to pursue new trade policies that put american workers first .
and we 're going to keep our jobs in our country .
we 're not going to let them take our jobs anymore , folks .
we 're not going to let it happen .
it 's been happening long enough .
and the reason they do n't do anything about it is because the special interests and the donors control our politicians .
and they control hillary clinton .
and it 's never , ever going to happen .
take a look at new york state .
when she was a senator from new york state , she campaigned by saying that she was going to bring jobs back to new york state .
new york state is a disaster .
she got elected , she did nothing .
she said see you later in four years .
she got elected .
take a look at what happened to new york state .
the jobs left .
the jobs left .
worse than just about any place in the country .
she did n't do a thing .
it was all talk and no action .
and that 's what 's going to happen here .
she 's all talk .
she 's no action .
believe me , she would n't know a job if it stared her in the face .
i will be ...   i will be the greatest jobs president that god ever created .
that i can tell you .
and by the way , is there any place better , safer or more fun to be than at a trump rally ?
having a good time .
so all the people who got nafta wrong , and by the way , signed by bill clinton perhaps the worst trade deals ever made in the history not of the country , in the history of the world .
there 's never been a deal so bad as nafta .
it 's a one - way highway out of this country for our jobs and for our money .
and we 're going to renegotiate that one very quickly , let me tell you .
and then you look at what 's happening with china .
and they 're trying to give us the trans - pacific partnership now , which will be a total disaster .
that hillary clinton called the gold standard .
barack obama wants it .
he 's pressing it .
it will be , and i say this , nothing can be as bad as nafta but it 's going to be pretty close .
so i just want to tell you we 're not approving the trans - pacific partnership .
just another catastrophe .
our trade deficit with the world , with the world , all this work , our trade deficit with the world is almost $ 800 billion a year .
you think we have good negotiators ?
we 've lost one - third of our manufacturing jobs since bill and hillary clinton gave us nafta .
china is manipulating its currency and taking our jobs .
that 's called cheating .
and believe me , i have great relationships with china , done many deals with china , made a fortune with china , have the largest bank in the world , which is from china , as one of my tenants .
they 're excellent .
and they just renewed their lease .
i ca n't believe it .
but they just .
sell lots of condos to china .
we can do great with china .
and i 'm not blaming china .
i 'm blaming our leaders for being so stupid .
we 're going to stop companies ... 

  ... from leaving our country and keep those jobs right here in pensacola .
but right here in america .
the era of economic surrender is over .
we will also have a very , very strong border .
that stops people and drugs .
and those drugs are poisoning our youth and poisoning our people from illegally pouring into our country .
and we will build a wall .
and mexico will pay for the wall .
we 're losing our jobs , folks .
we 're losing our jobs .
and it 's all so easy .
when a company makes a product and they fire all their people in the united states and they announce they 're moving , as an example , to mexico .
we have to let them know there are consequences when they think they 're going to sell their product back into our country .
very simple .
and when we tell them the consequences are a 35 percent tax to cross a now very strong border , when we become president , and the border patrol agent 16,500 endorsed donald trump .
they 've never done that before .
never done it before for a presidential candidate .
and when these companies that want to leave and then think they 're going to sell their product to us .
no problem .
just come across the suckers .
you know they call us the suckers .
not going to happen .
and let me tell you , when they hear there is a tax to pay to get their product into the country , guess what ?
they 're not going to be leaving , folks , 100 percent .
they 're never leaving .
right now you 're being drained .
as you stand here tonight you have companies from this area and from all areas of the country negotiating deals to move out of the united states .
let me tell you something , when i 'm president that 's not going to happen .
so easy .
so easy .
so easy .
and the reason other people do n't bring it up , including your wonderful politicians and including your so - called leader , if you can call him a leader ...   if you can call him a leader .
is that they 're controlled by their donors and their special interests .
so they do n't want it brought up .
they 'll talk about it , but they 're not going to do anything .
me , i 'm not controlled , folks .
me , i 'm not controlled .
we 're going to take care of that .
we 're going to take care of that situation so quickly and you 're going to be so happy and you 're going to know you 're going to have your company here for a long time , believe me .
in this new future we are going to raise your wages .
you 're going to have competition .
people are going to be looking for employees .
they 're going to be looking .
companies -- companies are going to be looking for people to work in that company .
right now you ca n't get a job .
and all our good jobs are gone .
household incomes are over $ 4,000 less today than they were 16 years ago .
think of it .
my tax , trade , energy , immigration , regulation reform which is a huge problem .
we 'll get your salaries and your wages up , up , up .
remember ...   many people 18 years ago in this room were making more money in wage .
they were making more money than they 're making today .
and today they 're working two jobs .
now they 're getting older and they 're working harder .
it 's supposed to be the other way .
so we 're going to bring your jobs back .
you 're going to have your choice and you 're going to do very well .
and you 're going to say november 8th was a very important day ...   very important day .
thank you very much .
thank you .
thank you , everybody .
wow .
thank you .
thank you very much , ladies and gentlemen .
so , you know , we added this stop about 12 minutes ago , and look at this place .
is this incredible ?
and we do n't need -- we do n't need jay - z or beyonce .
we do n't need jon bon jovi .
we do n't need lady gaga .
all we need is great ideas to make america great again .
that 's all we need .
so , it 's now officially tuesday , november 8th .
did you ever think you 'd be hearing a major speech like at around close to 1 o'clock in the morning ?
are we crazy ?
is this crazy ?
it 's crazy .
but you know , we just left new hampshire , where we 're doing fantastically well .
we 're up in new hampshire .
we 're up in ohio .
we 're up in iowa .
we 're up in north carolina .
we 're doing great there .
we 're up in florida .
we 're doing really , really well in pennsylvania .
i mean , we are doing well .
these people , the world 's most dishonest people , the media , they are not happy .
no , no .
they 're not happy .
they 're saying , " what 's going on ? "
today , we 're going to win the great state of michigan and we are going to win back the white house .
we 're hours away from a once - in - a - lifetime change .
we 're going to have real change , not obama change .
i want to begin tonight by thanking all of you and all of the people in this incredible movement .
you know , it 's a movement like has never happened in this country before .
it 's a movement that nobody 's ever seen before , even these people .
they talk about it .
it 's one of the great political phenomenas , many of them have said it , even some of them who truly , truly dislike me .
they 've said this is one of the great phenomenas .
i mean , look at this place at almost one o'clock in the morning .
so , i love michigan .
and i was the man of the year or something like four or five years ago .
and i came here , and i have so many friends in michigan .
but i came here to get the award .
they asked me to make a speech .
i made a speech , and i talked about how michigan , they 're ripping your auto companies apart .
they 're taking your jobs .
they 're closing your plants .
and they 're moving them to mexico and other places , but mostly to mexico in this case .
and i talked about that .
and everybody liked me in michigan .
i said , " but , you know , we have to do something about it . "
but i was n't a politician .
but i talked about it , and i kept talking about it and talking about it and talking .
and then i see ford moving a big plant , and then ford just two weeks ago announcing their small cars are going to be produced and made entirely in mexico .
and it 's getting worse and worse .
and i developed a great relationship with the people of michigan .
so the reason i 'm here is that i thought new hampshire was going to be my last speech .
and i heard that crooked hillary clinton was coming to michigan .
i said , " let 's follow it up ; let 's follow it up . "
and i said there 's no place i 'd rather be for my last rally , right here in michigan , late at night .
and full of energy and life .
boy , do we have energy and life .
wow .
although this is our last rally of this campaign , it 's almost hard to believe .
we started a year - and - a - half ago .
we started with 17 very talented people -- governors , senators , dr. ben carson -- great guy ; a lot of talented people .
and one by one by one , and most of them have been terrific and give us great support .
ben carson is one of them , as you know .
but -- but who would have thought -- and now we have one flawed candidate left to beat -- one flawed candidate .
it 's going to be the very beginning of a new adventure , because the new adventure we have to win .
we have to go out and vote .
but the new adventure is making america great again .
we 're going to do it .
after we win , i 'm going to be coming back to michigan a lot .
i 'm going to be coming back every time we open a new factory or a new automobile plant .
and we will do it .
and we 'll do a lot of expansion .
we 're going to do a lot of expansion .
i know exactly what to do , folks .
we 're not going to lose your jobs anymore .
we 're not going to lose your jobs anymore .
we are going to bring back the automobile industry to michigan -- bigger and better and stronger than ever before .
you 've been mistreated .
michigan now stands at the crossroads of history .
if we win michigan , we will win this historic election and then we truly will be able to do all of the things we want to do .
they wo n't be taking our jobs any longer .
they wo n't be doing the things they 've been doing to us .
we 'll end up having great health care , strong borders .
we 'll build up our military .
we have no choice .
we have a depleted military .
we 'll be able to do the things we want to do .
when you step into that voting booth today -- it 's now today .
there is one core question for you to consider .
do you want america to be ruled by the corrupt political class ?
or do you want america to be ruled by you , the people ?
that 's what it is -- by the people .
the way it was supposed to have been for a long time .
we 've lost track .
and for michigan , we will bring back your automobile production and we will bring back your industry .
wait until you see what we do for michigan .
i 've been talking about it for a long time .
crooked hillary has not talked about it , folks .
she does n't know where to begin .
she talked about bringing industry back to new york state when she was a new york state senator .
let me tell you , not only did n't it come back , look at up - state new york .
it 's a disaster .
it got worse .
people fled .
companies fled .
it 's a disaster .
the corrupt politicians and their special interests have ruled over this country for a very long time .
today is our independence day .
today , the american working class is going to strike back finally .
real change begins with immediately repealing and replacing the disaster known as obamacare .
it has just been announced that the residents of michigan are going to experience a massive double - digit premium hike , like you would n't believe .
it 's not going to matter that much , honestly , because we 're going to terminate it .
you 're not going to have to worry about it .
ok ?
do n't worry .
now , on the other hand , if something horrible happens tomorrow , get ready to pay a lot more than you 're even paying now .
but that 's not going to happen .
i 'm looking at that fantastic young lady right there .
she 's shaking her head -- " no way , no way . "
not going to happen , right ?
good .
not going to happen .
nah , i do n't think you 're going to have to worry about the premiums .
but with obamacare , premiums are surging .
companies are leaving .
insurers are fleeing .
doctors are quitting .
and deductibles are going right through the roof .
yet hillary clinton wants to double - down on obamacare , making it even more expensive .
and it does n't work .
it 's no good .
i 'm asking for your vote so we can repeal and replace obamacare and save health care for every family in michigan and throughout the united states of america .
we have to do it .
we do n't have a choice .
real change also means restoring honesty to our government .
so the first thing we should do , let 's get rid of hillary .
okay ?
that 's probably the ...   that would be a very good first step .
that 's a good first step .
hillary clinton is the most corrupt person ever to seek the office of the presidency of the united states .
she is being protected by a totally rigged system that i 've been talking about for a long time .
it 's a rigged system .
now it 's up to the american people to deliver justice at the ballot box .
and i do n't have to say do it tomorrow , do it in a week .
you 're going to do it today .
you 'll go to sleep for a couple of hours , right ?
go to sleep .
you go to sleep for a couple of hours .
you wake up .
you cast your vote , then you can go back to sleep or go to work .
you people wo n't go to sleep .
you 'll go back to work .
i know my people .
you 'll get up after about two hours .
you 'll vote .
and you 'll go to work .
i know my michigan people .
i know .
i have so many friends here .
they work .
they do n't stop .
we are finally going to close the history books on the clintons and their lies and schemes and corruption .
we will open a bright new chapter focused on you , the american people .
my contract with the american voter begins with a plan to end government corruption and to take our country back from the special interests .
i want the entire corrupt washington establishment to hear our words , our words when we say -- you know what we 're going to say ?
we 're going to win today and we 're going to washington , d.c. to drain the swamp .
absolutely .
absolutely .
oh , you probably heard me say it : drain the swamp .
oh , this is beautiful .
is n't it too bad that the corrupt media never show the crowds ?
you know , it is like almost one in the morning and we have i think they said 18,000 people here .
every corner -- look at this .
every corner .
and you know what they 'll say ? "
donald trump is speaking before a crowd of people . "
these people are the worst . "
he 's speaking in front of a few thousand people . "
at the core of my contract is my plan to bring back our jobs .
the trade policies of hillary clinton , from nafta to china to korea to the trans - pacific partnership -- which , by the way , is a disaster ... 

  ... have raided your factories , crushed your auto industry and gutted your communities .
you know it .
and she 's not -- look folks , honestly , you could n't give her a shot .
you 're wasting your time .
you 're wasting your time .
she 's not going to be able to do the job .
she 's not going to be able to do the job .
just look at her record .
but forget her record , not going to be able to do the job .
she does n't have a clue .
michigan has lost more than one in four of its manufacturing jobs since nafta , a deal signed by bill clinton and supported by his lovely wife , hillary .
right ?
right ?
by the way , you know who i spotted in the audience ?
mayor rudolph giuliani .
rudy giuliani .
he 's got energy , that guy .
he 's all over the place , going from place to place to place .
got a lot of energy .
a lot of -- a lot of this up here too .
america has lost -- listen to this -- 70,000 factories , 70,000 .
not 700 , not 7,000 , 70,000 factories since china entered the world trade organization , another bill- and hillary - backed disaster .
we are living through the greatest jobs theft in the history of the world .
there 's never been anything like this .
our jobs are being stolen like candy from a baby .
not going to happen anymore , folks .
there are going to be consequences .
there are going to be -- when they fire our people , our great people who have been working for 25 , 30 years at these companies -- they fire our people , there are going to be consequences .
it does n't work that way , not anymore .
and the politicians have been working on this problem for 15 years , for 20 years .
and it 's so simple to solve .
delphi laid off 3,627 workers and moved their jobs to mexico and other countries .
fte automotive laid of 166 workers in auburn hills , beautiful place , and moved their jobs to mexico .
chrysler laid off 5,300 workers and moved their jobs to mexico , china and to other countries .
ford laid off 2,155 workers and moved their jobs to mexico and many other countries .
now ford is moving all of its small car production of mexico .
is n't that wonderful ?
it used to be that cars were made in flint and you could n't drink the water in mexico .
now the cars are made in mexico and you ca n't drink the damn water in flint .
what the hell ?
yes .
unbelievable .
say , is that true though , or what ?
unbelievable .
you know , i have a friend , he 's the biggest in the world at building plants .
that 's what he does , he builds plants .
you say , " build an apartment " and he would n't know what to do .
he builds plants , the biggest plants in the world ; most sophisticated plants , all kinds of plants .
i said , " how are you doing ? "
he 's from this country .
loves this country , loves this whole area , loves you people .
he wants to do them here .
so i said to him , " let me ask you , how are you doing ? "
he said , " unbelievable . "
i said , " oh , that 's good ; that 's good .
where are you doing well ? " "
mexico . "
i said , " what about our country ? " "
not so good , " he said , " donald , you have to see what we 're doing in mexico .
we 're building some of the greatest plants anywhere in the world . "
and i said , " is n't this sad , is n't this pathetic ? "
we 're going to change it around .
i want mexico to build great plants .
but we need to build great plants also .
it 's got to be a two - way street , folks .
got to be a two - way street .
and right now , it 's a one - lane highway right into these other countries .
they take our money .
they take our jobs .
they build their plants .
they build their factories .
we end up with unemployment and drugs .
that 's what we end up with .
not going to happen any longer .
a trump administration will stop the jobs from leaving america and we will stop the jobs from leaving michigan .
that i can tell you 100 percent .
if ford or another company wants to fire their workers in michigan and move to another country and ship their products back into the united states , i will pick up the phone myself if i -- because i love it -- they do n't want me to do that , folks .
i want to do it .
it 's so easy .
i love doing it .
it 's like i 'm a natural .
but i 'll have plenty of great representatives .
but we -- we -- i 'm going to do it every once in a while .
i do n't care , because i love it .
we 'll be calling the executives at ford or whatever company it is , and we 'll tell them very nicely that if they want to move their factory or their plant to another country , they will have to pay a 35 percent tax when they sell their cars or their product back into the united states through what will soon be a very , very powerful border .
so they 'll pay a tax .
and here 's what 's going to happen 100 percent .
nobody 's moving , folks .
they 're not going to move .
they 're not going to move , ok ?
just think of it .
do n't worry about it .
we 'll build a wall .
do n't worry about it .
a trump administration will renegotiate nafta and if we do n't get the deal we want , we will terminate nafta and get a much better deal for our workers and our companies -- 100 percent .
we will also immediately stop the job - killing trans - pacific partnership , which hillary clinton called the " gold standard . "
and she lied .
look , she lied .
during the debate -- by the way , did trump win the debate ?
did trump win the debate ?
and by the way , he 's here .
did mike pence win the debate ?
man , was that an easy -- it was n't easy .
it was n't easy , but he certainly made it look easy , did n't he ?
how good is this guy ?
wow .
honestly , i felt so sorry for tim kaine .
that was like -- that was like a great football team playing your local high school football players .
so hillary lied about it .
she said it was the gold standard .
and we caught her in the lie , and all of that .
but when you think about it , it is the gold standard .
it 's the gold standard for the other countries , not for us -- for the other countries we 're doing business with .
ca n't do it .
hillary will pass the tpp .
she will absolutely pass it , which will destroy the rest of the auto industry .
believe me .
it will -- just mark my words -- it will destroy .
they do n't even talk about currency manipulation in tpp .
and they did n't want to , because it was taken out because some of our politicians wanted it taken out -- the number one weapon .
they wanted it taken out because the special interests take care of our politicians , folks .
but they 're not taking care of me .
i 've spent a fortune on this campaign .
and i 'll tell you , i told this to mike pence .
if we do n't win -- because everyone is saying unbelievable , unbelievable ; it does n't matter if you win or lose ; there 's never been a movement like this .
i said , " let me just tell you , stop right there .
if we do n't win , this will be the single greatest waste of time , energy and money in my life . "
we have to win .
to do what we have to do , we have to win .
we ca n't just have something that looks wonderful in the history books in 30 years .
as part of our plan to bring back jobs , we are going to lower taxes on american business from 35 percent to 15 percent .
we will massively cut taxes for the middle class .
hillary clinton wants to raise your taxes very significantly .
think of it .
we 're the highest - taxed nation in the world , and she wants to raise your taxes .
and we will rebuild our inner cities .
i know so much about detroit .
i know so much about the inner cities .
the african american community , the hispanic community has been treated horribly for a long time .
the politicians and the case of the inner cities -- virtually all democrats , for over 100 years sometimes a chain unbroken .
what they 've done is they come in and they get your vote , and then they say , " see you -- four years , i 'll see you in four years . "
we 're going to fix our inner cities .
right now , they 're so unsafe .
you walk to the store to pick up a loaf of bread , you get shot , you get shot .
you know , in chicago , thousands and thousands of shootings since january 1st .
the inner cities are unbelievably dangerous .
the education is no good , the safety is horrible , and there are no jobs .
and i tell everybody , " what the hell do you have to lose ?
i 'm going to fix it . "
we will fix it .
we will fix it .
vice president mike pence will be involved and he is so enthused about this .
there is such potential .
we have such potential in the -- the people , i 'm talking about the people .
there 's such potential there .
we will fix it , remember that .
we will become a rich nation once again .
but to be a rich nation , we must also be a safe nation .
hillary clinton wants a 550 percent increase in syrian refugees pouring into our country .
and virtually unlimited immigration from the most dangerous regions of the world , including regions overrun and controlled by isis .
her plan will import generations of terrorism , extremism , and radicalism into your schools and throughout your communities .
when i 'm elected president , we will suspend the syrian refugee program .
and we will keep radical islamic terrorists the hell out of our country , 100 percent .
we have no choice .
we have no choice .
but we all have big hearts and we will build safe havens in syria , and we 'll get the gulf states -- they have nothing but money .
they have nothing but money .
we will get them to pay for it .
we owe $ 20 trillion right now .
we 're not going to pay for it .
we 're going to get the gulf states to pay for it .
we 'll manage it .
we 'll take care of people , but they ca n't come into our country .
we have enough problems , ok ?
here in michigan , you 've seen first - hand the problems caused with the refugee program , with large numbers of poorly vetted refugees pouring into your state without your knowledge , without your support , or without your approval .
nobody even knows where people are being placed .
a trump administration will not admit any refugees without the support of the local community where they 're being placed .
a trump administration will also secure and defend the borders of the united states , and yes , we will build a great , great wall .
so , i just want to ask you one question , if you do n't mind , at one in the morning : who is going to pay for the wall ?
a hundred percent .
they do n't know it yet , but they 're going to pay .
now , we 're going to have a great relationship with mexico , but right now it 's a one - way street .
we ca n't have that .
we ca n't have that .
they 're going to build the wall .
hillary supports totally open borders .
there goes your country -- and strongly supports sanctuary cities like san francisco where kate steinle was murdered by an illegal immigrant deported at least five times .
a trump administration will end this nightmare of violence and end it quickly .
we will stop illegal immigration , deport all criminal aliens and dismantle every last criminal gang and cartel threatening our wonderful citizens .
we 're going to do it , easily , quickly .
we will also repeal the obama - clinton defense sequester and rebuild our badly depleted military .
there have n't been many times where we need it more .
i 'm honored to have the endorsement of more than 200 top admirals and generals and 22 medal of honor recipients , and that list just grew a lot larger today .
hillary clinton and our failed establishment have dragged us into foreign wars that have made us less safe , shipped our wealth overseas to other countries and left our borders at home totally wide open .
that will change when we win the presidency .
that will change , that will change .
has to change , it has to change .
from now on , it 's going to be america first , america first .
and just in summing up , to all americans i say , it is time for change .
it is time for leadership .
just think about what we can accomplish in the first 100 days of a trump administration .
we 're going to have the largest tax cut since ronald reagan .
and hillary wants to raise your taxes .
we will eliminate every unnecessary , job - killing regulation .
we 'll cancel every illegal obama executive order .
we will protect religious liberty .
and yesterday , it was billy graham 's 98th birthday , meaning an hour ago .
yesterday , meaning an hour ago .
but he 's a great , great man and his son franklin has been so amazing .
but i wanted to mention billy graham , 98 years old , amazing .
we 're going to rebuild our military and take care of our veterans who have not been taken care of properly .
we are going to take care of our vets .
it 's about time , believe me .
it 's about time .
we 're going to provide school choice and put an end to common core .
we 're bringing education local .
we will support the great men and women of law enforcement .
we will save our second amendment , which is under siege .
and appoint justices to the united states supreme court who will uphold and defend the constitution of the united states .
the election is now .
the election is now .
can you believe it ?
it 's today .
it 's today .
it 's unbelievable .
you can make every dream you 've ever dreamed for your country and your family come true .
you have one magnificent chance to beat this corrupt , rigged system and to deliver justice for every forgotten man and forgotten woman and forgotten child in this nation .
we are fighting for every citizen who believes that government should serve the people , not the donors and not the special interests .
and we are fighting to bring us all together as americans .
we 're living in a divided nation .
we 're living in a very divided nation .
we 're going to be brought together .
just imagine what our country could accomplish if we started working together as one people , under one god , saluting one american flag , right ?
i 'm asking you to dream big , because with your vote , we are just hours away from the change you 've been waiting for your entire life .
so to every parent who dreams for their child , and to every child who dreams for their future , i say these words to you tonight .
i am with you .
i will fight for you .
and i will win for you .
i promise .
to all americans tonight , in all of our cities and in all of our towns , i pledge to you one more time , together we will make america wealthy again .
we will make america strong again .
we will make america safe again .
and we will make america great again .
thank you , everybody .
thank you .
god bless you , everybody .
go to bed .
go to bed right now .
get up and vote .
thank you , everybody .
thank you , michigan .
we love you .
we 'll be back .
let 's win .
thank you .
wow .
wow .
thank you , everybody .
thank you .
it is so great to be back in michigan .
a state i 've come to know and love during this campaign .
you know , we won michigan , and that was a great , big , fat , beautiful victory .
you know that right ?
and i 've been talking about michigan for a long time .
we ca n't let them take your car industry out or your industry out of your state any longer .
not going to happen .
i 'm going to fight so hard for all of you , and i 'm going to bring back the jobs that have been stripped away from you and from our country .
in 39 days , 39 days , can you imagine ?
this started off -- we 're a long ways away .
and some people did n't give us a good chance .
they said , mr. trump , the other day one of the biggest people in that business , the very dishonest press business ...   they said , mr. trump , when you started off , you have to tell me the truth .
did you really think you 'd be here ?
i said , what the hell do you think i 'm doing this for ?
right ?
no , we expected to be here .
and we 're all here together .
it 's a movement .
and believe me , we 're all here together .
we 're going to take our country back .
we 're going to win the state of michigan .
we 're going to win the white house .
and it 's going to be an awfully good november 8th .
that evening is going to be a celebration .
we 're going to take on the special interests , the lobbyists , and the powerful politicians that have stolen your jobs through theft and incompetence .
they 've stolen your wealth .
they 've taken your middle class .
we 're going to take on the arrogant , corrupt corporate media that have enabled the global theft of american prosperity .
a theft that has left behind crumbling schools , roads , bridges , and a totally depleted military .
we have the greatest people in the world in our military .
we 're going to rebuild our military .
this is when we need it .
it 's time , by the way , to rebuild detroit .
we 're going to rebuild detroit .
it 's time to rebuild michigan and we 're not letting them take your jobs out of michigan any longer .
and it 's time to rebuild the united states of america .
we 're going to do it .
our country is going to be greater than ever before .
we 're going to be the smart country again .
hillary clinton has made a living raking in donations from special interests that have raided our factories and ripped the jobs right out of michigan and every other state .
that 's how she gets rich , by taking your jobs and your money away from you and away from your state .
that 's why hillary clinton , if she ever got the chance , would 100 percent approve the trans - pacific partnership .
the deal she lied about the other night , when i said she called it the gold standard .
she said no .
guess what ?
she called it the gold standard .
and lester holt did n't correct her .
i wonder why .
the trans - pacific partnership will economically devastate michigan , new hampshire , north carolina , pennsylvania , wisconsin , and so many other states all across this country .
it will be devastating also for ohio .
hillary clinton 's donors want the tpp , and their wish will be her command .
that 's what it is .
the special interests pay her for speeches .
and she 's not a good speaker .
not a good speaker .
they pay her a lot of money .
you know , we have thousands of people here today .
there are thousands and thousands of people outside trying to get in .
thousands .
and they 're coming .
and , in fact , i was going to ask you , should we hold it up for a couple of hours , let everyone pour in ?
you know , they 're all checked .
the answer is no , right ?
thank you .
no , they 'll get in .
they pay her foundation .
they pay her husband .
in return , they get your jobs .
like i 've been saying all week , when it comes to hillary clinton , all you have to do is remember these words : follow the money .
that 's good .
that 's become very popular , i will say .
hillary clinton praised or pushed tpp on 45 separate occasions .
her close associate and confidante , governor terry mcauliffe , said she 'd pass it , do n't worry .
her husband talks it up .
everyone knows she 's for it , because she does n't believe in protecting american jobs or american sovereignty .
she does n't believe it .
hillary clinton only believes in protecting her special interests and her donors .
of the 262 companies that lobbied for the passage of tpp , 82 , or nearly 1 in 3 , donated between $ 21 million and $ 67 million to the clinton foundation .
think about it .
nine companies that lobbied for the passage of tpp paid hillary clinton $ 2.7 million for paid speeches .
who would want to hear hillary clintons peak and pay her $ 200,000 , $ 300,000 , $ 400,000 , $ 500,000 ?
who ?
you think so ?
you know , so we 're going to have $ 20,000 people here easy , including outside much more than that .
if she came here tomorrow , if she got 500 people , seriously , i think it would be a shock .
right ?
it would be a shock .
three tpp member countries gave between $ 6 million and $ 15 million .
think of that .
at least four lobbyists who are actively lobbying for tpp passage have raised more than $ 800,000 for her campaign .
on november 8th , we are going to end clinton corruption .
we 've had enough .
and we 're going to do something that has been a long , long time in coming .
we are going to put america first .
we are going to put america first .
hillary clinton is an insider fighting only for herself and for her donors .
i 'm an outsider fighting for you .
we have a movement like they 've never seen in this country before .
the corrupt media , which is totally corrupt -- these people back there , totally corrupt ...   working along with the political establishment and the establishment is panicking , because they know this is awfully tough to stop what 's happening right now , folks .
awfully tough .
the news anchors and the donors and the lobbyists who are used to getting their way are trying to do everything they can to help crooked hillary clinton and cling to their power and their prestige and their money .
the arrogant political class does n't believe in protecting jobs and wages for americans .
you know , we have many people in the audience -- and all over the country -- that made more money in real wages 18 and 20 years ago than they 're making now .
and now because of obamacare and other reasons , they 're being forced to work two jobs , sometimes three jobs .
so they 're getting older .
they 're working harder .
and they 're being paid less .
not good .
the only thing i can say is that i 'm getting older and i 'm working harder , also , ok ?
so ...   i 'm putting myself in your category .
it 's true .
thank you .
oh , that 's so true , though , is n't it ?
the special interests do n't believe in secure borders and strong walls .
the washington and wall street insiders do n't believe in hiring more police , producing more american energy , or giving school choice to poor children trapped in failing schools .
and we are , by the way , going to end common core and bring education local .
for decades , we 've talked about the corruption and incompetence and failures of our leaders .
in 2016 -- it 's a long awaited chance to deliver the change that you 've been waiting for , for a long time , and to hold our politicians accountable .
if you do this one simple thing , you can deliver justice for every single person who has been wronged by the system .
on november 8th , show up and vote .
show up and vote , folks .
show up and vote .
if you are so sick , if you get the worst report you could possibly get for the doctor , if the doctor says , " i 'm sorry , jim , i 'm sorry , alice , i 'm sorry , whoever it is , you 're not going to make it , you 're not going to make it , you 'll be gone by the end of november , " i do n't give a damn .
show up and vote on november 8th .
no , we do n't want that to happen .
we do n't want that to happen .
when you cast that ballot , just picture a wall street boardroom filled with the special interests who have been bleeding your country and your city and every place else , and imagine the look on their faces when you tell them you 're fired .
fired .
and we 're going to tell millions and millions of unemployed americans my favorite two words : you 're hired .
when we get it going , folks , millions of jobs are going to come pouring back into our country .
we 're going to reverse the trend .
right now , we have a superhighway .
it goes in one direction : out of our country .
our jobs are gone .
our money 's gone .
our wealth is gone .
we owe $ 20 trillion .
obama has doubled the debt , doubled it , in his term in office , $ 20 trillion .
and we have n't done anything .
our roads are bad .
our schools are bad .
our airports are bad .
our hospitals are bad .
our bridges , our tunnels , they 're all falling apart .
you know , it 's one thing if we would have spent the money and fixed our country .
we 've spent $ 6 trillion in the middle east .
we could have rebuilt our country twice .
now the media does n't want to talk about hillary clinton and her corruption .
so we 're going to spell it out for them today .
the large corporations who support terrible trade deals that ship your jobs overseas and out of our country , they 're donating to hillary clinton .
follow the money .
the wall street investors who have rigged the regulations against the middle class , they 're donating to hillary clinton .
follow the money .
the wealthy donors who want to shut down american energy , they 're donating to hillary clinton .
follow the money .
the special interests who want open borders are donating to hillary clinton .
definitely follow the money .
in her campaign for president , hillary clinton has received $ 100 million in contributions from wall street and hedge funds .
and by the way ...   by the way , i 'm spending a lot of money on my campaign .
and why is n't she spending some money on hers ?
i 'm spending $ 100 million .
you know what i 'm spending ?
i think i 'll be over $ 100 million .
but you know what 's nice ?
when they call me and they say , " mr. president , you have to do this , you have to do that , " i 'll say , " i do n't have to do anything for anybody ! "
the only one that i 'm working for is you .
that 's the only one .
you watch .
so many things are done adverse to the country , and i 've spent a tremendous -- tens and tens of millions of dollars on the primaries and now on the general election .
and i 'm very proud to have done it , i will tell you .
and i do n't know to this extent if it 's ever been done before .
certainly not recently .
but i 'm very proud to have done it , because we 're going to maintain our independence .
we have millions and millions of dollars coming in from small donors , average -- like $ 61 a shot .
and that 's really helping to fund the campaign , also .
but these are people who are investing in our country .
these are great , great people .
they 're investing in our country .
so hillary and bill were paid $ 150 million for speeches since bill clinton left the oval office , $ 150 million .
did they get their money 's worth ?
well , maybe they did .
not from the speech .
the same groups are paying bill and hillary for their speeches , these were the groups that were lobbying in many cases the federal government .
i 'm shocked .
twenty - two groups paid bill clinton for speeches , lobbied the state department , while hillary was secretary of state .
shocking .
favors and access were granted to those who wrote checks .
she put the office of secretary of state up for sale and she never , ever got the chance , and she will get the chance if we do n't get out to vote .
she will get the chance .
and we ca n't let that happen .
because if she gets the chance , she will put the oval office up for sale like she always does .
remember , folks , she 's been doing this for 30 years and she -- she just does n't produce .
she deleted and bleached 33,000 e - mails after a congressional subpoena .
you ca n't do that .
after the subpoena .
how about this ?
you get a federal subpoena , you get a subpoena from congress , i mean , how high can it get ?
to give your e - mails , to give your papers , to give everything .
it is n't before you get the subpoena .
this is after you get the subpoena .
and after you get the subpoena , you delete and bleach , a process nobody ever heard of -- who heard of that in this room ?
did anybody ever hear of it ?
they call it bleaching .
they call it acid washing .
and a lot of people do n't do it , because it 's supposed to be very expensive .
but nobody heard of it .
so she gets the subpoena .
she does n't like it .
she says , in my opinion , or somebody does , but she says , " delete all of my e - mails !
delete them ! "
and then she said , and by the way , is there another process where they can never find them ?
yes , ma'am , we can bleach them .
then bleach them .
because i do n't want anybody to see the wedding and the yoga classes , right ?
she said there were wedding and yoga class tweets .
i give five for the wedding and three for the yoga class , but what about the rest ?
in addition , she got rid of 13 phones that were missing or gone .
and several were destroyed by a hammer .
whoever destroyed your phone with a hammer ?
is there anybody ?
there 's one person -- what business are you in ?
foreign enemies with easy access to hack -- and , believe me , she 's vulnerable , and she makes us vulnerable , because foreign enemies -- you look at her server , and they 're probably hacking her all over the place .
unfortunately , maybe we 'll find out at a later date .
lies to congress under oath .
she lies to congress .
how many times did she lie to congress ?
and then the media protects her , and they do n't talk about that .
and if i 'm a little bit off , " trump lies , lies . "
she lied to congress so many times .
and how about her people and representatives taking the fifth amendment and her ringleaders getting immunity deals , five deals , five ?
five immunity deals .
we call them now the fbi immunity five .
so listen to this .
listen to this .
here 's my question for hillary clinton .
can you promise that not one of the five people who were granted criminal immunity will ever be allowed to serve in a clinton administration if that ever happens ?
oh , would that be bad .
let 's see what happens .
and here 's the demand i 'm making today to president obama .
mr. president , will you pledge not to issue a pardon to hillary clinton and her coconspirators for their many crimes against our country and against society itself ?
will you make that pledge ?
no one is above the law .
clinton and her cronies will say anything , do anything , lie about anything to keep their grip on power , to keep their control over our country .
remember the clinton pardon of fugitive -- and this was a serious fugitive -- marc rich in exchange for unknown and undisclosed amounts of money ?
you remember that ?
marc rich .
famous marc rich .
people could n't believe it .
the american people have had it with years or decades of clinton corruption and scandals .
always the same thing .
whitewater , the cattle .
remember the cattle ?
i think she had the greatest return on a cattle investment in the history of the cattle world .
guys that did it all their lives , they said , wow , she must know a lot about cattle .
the people of this country are tired of the lies .
they 're tired of trivial politics .
they 're tired of being talked down to , looked down upon , and treated like second - class citizens .
this will finally be the year that the american people say , " enough is enough . "
hillary clinton has been a disaster for so many communities , but especially for the african - american communities .
i do n't think african - americans are going to come out and vote for clinton .
they 're too smart , and they know they are being used .
they 're tired of them .
they also know from tremendous past experience that she 'll do nothing for them once the election is over .
she never does , and that will never change .
many of them will not forget her calling young african - american men super predators .
super predator .
to the african - american community , let me ask you this question .
are you better off than you were eight years ago ?
no .
if not , why not give donald trump a chance ?
i will fix it .
i will bring back jobs .
i 'll bring back your education , which is a total disaster in the inner cities .
and i 'm going to bring back safe neighborhoods .
if you keep voting for the same people , you will keep getting the exact same results .
look at what the democrats have done to detroit .
half of detroit residents are unable to work .
nearly 40 percent of the city lives in poverty .
it 's the second - most dangerous city in america according to the fbi .
this is the legacy of the policies embraced by crooked hillary clinton .
a trump administration will bring prosperity to all of our people .
my economic agenda can be summed up with three very beautiful words : jobs , jobs , jobs .
we 're bringing our jobs back .
we 're going to pass the biggest tax cut since ronald reagan .
and by the way , hillary clinton is going to raise your taxes .
every wasteful and unnecessary regulation will be immediately eliminated .
they 're choking our businesses and stopping our jobs .
we will unleash the power of american energy .
the catastrophe known as obamacare will be repealed and replaced .
and the disastrous trade deals , like nafta , signed by bill clinton , that have caused so much pain in michigan and ohio and pennsylvania and everywhere in this country will be renegotiated and we 'll be bring back your auto manufacturing business like you 've never , ever seen it before .
michigan has lost more than 1 in 3 of its manufacturing jobs since the twin disasters of nafta and china 's entrance into the wto , another bill clinton disaster .
before nafta went into effect , there were 280,000 autoworkers in michigan .
today , that number is only 160,000 , and believe me , it 's going down and going down fast .
and after the election , if somebody else should win , you 're going to see really big reductions in those numbers .
i can promise you that , because that 's what they 're going to do .
and i 've been talking about michigan .
i was honored here years ago -- and we set the all - time record years ago , long before i ever thought i was going to be doing this -- whoever thought i was going to run for office ?
i was going to be a politician .
ca n't believe -- somebody said , donald , you 're a politician .
i said , please , i do n't want to hear that .
but whoever thought ?
but long before i thought about doing this , i was honored in michigan , and i talked about your car industries moving out .
and had i run for office then and won , you would have double and triple the number of workers in your car industry , your automobile industry .
i 'll guarantee you that .
but we 'll get them back anyway .
ford just announced that it 's moving its small car production to mexico .
so it used to be that the cars were made in flint and you could n't drink the water in mexico .
today , the cars are made in mexico and you ca n't drink the water in flint .
that 's what 's happened to our country .
hillary clinton also gave us the job - killing trade deal with south korea , which has been a disaster .
it 's cost our country another 100,000 jobs .
and hillary opposed the korea deal when she was running for president in 2007 .
she campaigned right here in michigan and said the korean deal will hurt the united states auto industry , increase our trade deficit , cost us good middle - class jobs , and make america less competitive .
she pledged to you to reject the deal , but she lied , as always .
she lied .
once installed as secretary of state , she supported it and called it a cutting - edge transaction .
same thing 's going to happen with tpp .
do n't give her the chance , folks .
you 're going to lose all your jobs .
do n't forget , when she ran for the senate in new york state , she said she was going to bring back jobs in upstate new york .
it was a total lie .
we lost more and more jobs , and today it 's a total disaster .
she rammed it through as she always tries to do .
her donors were happy .
they were all extremely friendly to her .
they helped her out .
everybody was satisfied except for the workers of our country .
we lost our jobs .
the u.s. trade deficit with korea for the top 10 products that michigan exports to korea grew 54 percent as exports fell and imports rose .
so it was an exact opposite of what she said .
and she probably knew it , although i personally think she 's incompetent .
she might not have known it .
do n't forget , she has a distinction .
she failed her bar exam in washington , d.c. remember that .
that 's a big distinction .
this is what hillary clinton did for your state .
according to the economic policy institute , michigan ranks first for jobs lost as a share of workforce due to the trade deficit with tpp members .
ok ?
just imagine how many more jobs will be lost if the tpp actually gets approved , as hillary clinton wants to make sure it happens .
hillary clinton is merely a vessel for the special interests trying to strip this country of its wealth , its jobs , and its status as a sovereign nation .
she even supports the disastrous surrender of america 's control of the internet , which is happening now .
how about obama ?
how about obama ?
wants to give the internet , let it be given to the world .
what a bunch of people we have representing us .
what a bunch of people .
see how nice i 'm doing ?
you know ?
a year ago , i would have said something vicious and they would have said , " donald trump uses foul language . "
what a group we have .
how about where obama on the worst deal that i 've ever seen negotiated , the iran deal , started by hillary clinton , by the way , which will give them nuclear weapons in less than 10 years , and it 's an easy path , but how about where he gave them $ 400 million in cash ?
and then it turned out to be wrong .
it was $ 1.7 billion in cash .
can you believe it ?
you know what that is ?
it 's take that corner of the room and stack the cash to the ceiling .
nobody 's seen that .
has anybody ever seen $ 1.7 billion in cash ?
what a bunch of losers we have .
hillary clinton 's website says she supports the decision to give away the internet to a global community of stakeholders .
is n't that nice ?
we come up with the internet , and they want to give it away .
is n't that wonderful ?
someone needs to inform hillary clinton it 's not the job of our leaders to represent the global community .
it 's the job of our leaders to represent american citizens .
we invent the internet .
let 's just give it away , folks .
let 's just give it away .
but it really is -- honestly , is it hard to believe or what ?
forget about running for office .
forget about voting .
forget about politics .
can you believe the things they do ?
$ 400 million , oh , turns out to be $ 1.7 billion , in cash .
the internet .
how about last week where they were going to deport 800 people ?
now they have a reason they were going to deport them .
right ?
so they were going to deport 800 people .
and guess what ?
something went wrong .
and instead of deporting them , they became citizens of the united states of america .
only in america .
don king , who supported me , big don , he goes , only in america can that happen .
but they were wrong .
but there was a mistake .
there was a mistake .
it turned out that the 800 person number was wrong .
it looks like it 's now going to be close to 1,800 .
and then i said , ok , they made a big mistake .
let 's turn it around and let 's deport them .
and they said , but that would n't be constitutional .
can you believe these people ?
can you ?
can you believe these people ?
america losing control of the internet to foreign entities is just one more way obama - clinton have sold out the citizens of this country .
somebody 's benefiting by that deal , because nobody can be so stupid to make a deal like that .
somebody is benefiting by that deal .
hillary clinton is a globalist who will never protect the freedom and jobs of the american people .
i 'm not running to be president of the world .
i 'm running to be president of the united states of america .
have you ever wondered why it is that all things that the american people want never , ever seem to happen ?
the reason is simple .
it 's because the financial interests who control our politics and our media , which is one of the most dishonest groups of people ever in this country ...   like , for instance , look at this massive crowd .
they do n't show the crowd , folks .
i go home .
my wife said , oh , were there many people ?
i say thousands .
she goes , really ?
i did n't see them .
i did n't see them .
they do n't show them .
hey , cameras , why do n't you span the room and show the room , cameras ?
span the room .
they wo n't do it .
they wo n't do it .
they never do it .
they never do it .
they 're dishonest people .
dishonest people .
i remember during the primaries -- i remember during the primaries when bernie sanders was doing well , he made a terrible deal .
he sold out to the devil , you know that ?
and now people do n't even want to show up for bernie .
he sold out .
he should have never made that deal .
he should have gone down .
he would have been an american hero .
he sold out to hillary clinton .
he sold out to the devil , and his people do n't want anything to do with him .
he had an event the other day .
almost nobody showed up .
but i remember when he was hot and he was getting big crowds .
and i had an event at the same time a little different location .
i had 17,000 people .
he had 3,000 people .
and the media reported it .
and they said , donald trump had a rally tonight .
and then he started falling asleep , 17,000 .
then they reported on bernie sanders .
bernie sanders had a massive crowd of 3,000 people tonight , 3,000 people .
you know what 3,000 people is ?
it 's like a little piece of that corner of the room .
so for him -- it 's true .
so for crazy bernie , they had a little -- for me , they do n't want to report it .
but that 's ok , because we understand what 's happening .
just as long as you know how dishonest these people are .
and boy were they dishonest on the debate .
man .
they were -- there 's never been dishonesty .
and by the way , by the way , it was just announced by the commission that holds the debate that donald trump 's microphone was defective , as i 've been saying .
i mean , working that microphone was a hell of a lot more difficult than working crooked hillary clinton .
that i can tell you .
they just announced -- it just came out a little while ago , that the microphone in the audience , the big room , was defective .
and it was not -- it was difficult .
and , you know , when you have a situation like that , and you know it 's bad , and you think you have 100 million people watching , what do you do , stop the show ?
please fix it .
it was bad .
i wonder why it was bad .
think of that .
i wonder why it was bad .
it was so bad .
hillary clinton has been there for 30 years and has never done anything for you or your family , and she never will .
just look how badly she messed up the iran deal .
and just today , we learned that on the same day as the hostages were released , the united states signed an agreement lifting sanctions on two iranian banks involved in financing iran 's missile program .
and you know where they want those missiles to eventually land , do n't you , folks ?
huh ?
right here .
right here .
right here in this country .
that 's where they want them to land .
and they 're taunting us with the boats .
they 're taunting us with the 10 sailors they captured .
they 're taunting us by flying right next to our airplanes .
so we give them all this money , $ 150 billion back .
we give them the deal of a lifetime .
and instead of saying thank you , they feel emboldened .
that wo n't happen with us , folks .
so just think of what i said before , the way she failed upstate new york , the way she promised all those jobs that never happened .
our campaign is taking on big business .
we 're taking on big media .
and it 's not pleasant .
i have never , ever in my life received stories like i receive now .
i mean , it is called the greatest pile - on in the history of america .
even journalists that do n't like me say it 's the craziest thing they 've ever seen .
but i 'm doing it -- i 'm doing it everybody .
who knows ?
i 'm doing it for everybody .
doing it for you .
our campaign is about breaking up the special interest monopoly in washington , d.c. we 're trying to disrupt the collusion between the wealthy donors , the large corporations , and the media executives .
they 're all part of the same corrupt political establishment .
and they nod along when hillary clinton slanders you as deplorable and irredeemable .
you 're deplorable and irredeemable , she says .
see , she does n't know you like i know you .
you are the smartest people .
we 're the strongest people .
we 're the most loyal people ever to be involved in a campaign .
i call you hardworking american patriots .
and together , we are going to save this country .
and we 're not going to have a second chance , folks .
if we do n't do it on november 8th , it 's not going to happen .
i do n't believe -- if we have to have barack obama but worse for four more years , i honestly believe our country can never recovery .
and remember , supreme court judges .
remember that .
but together , we can accomplish anything we want .
but that means you need to show up on november 8th .
we have 39 days until the election .
you have 39 days to make every dream you ever dreamed for your country come true .
do not let this opportunity slip away .
get out and vote and make sure everything is on the up - and - up .
make sure everything is on the up - and - up .
you 've been reading the same stories as i 've been reading .
so go to your place and vote and go pick some other place and go sit there with your friends and make sure it 's on the up - and - up .
because you know what ?
that 's a big , big problem in this country , and nobody wants to talk about it .
nobody has the guts to talk about it .
so go and watch these polling places .
make sure it 's on the up - and - up .
please .
that would be one hell of a way to lose , i 'll tell you right now .
you have one magnificent chance to deliver justice .
for every forgotten man , woman and child in this nation -- and there are a lot -- the arrogance of washington , d.c. , will soon come face - to - face with the righteous verdict of the american voter .
november 8th , we 're going to show the whole world that america is back , bigger and better and stronger than ever before .
in summing up , here are just some of the great things that will happen for your country .
we 're going to lower your taxes substantially .
she 's going to raise your taxes .
we 're going to eliminate every unnecessary regulation .
she is going to add regulation .
we 're going to repeal and replace job- killing obamacare .
we 're going to make childcare affordable .
we 're bringing childcare into the picture .
my daughter , ivanka , wants it , and i want it .
we 're going to bring manufacturing jobs -- we 're going to bring those automobile jobs back to michigan , and i mean back fast .
we 're going to eliminate common core .
we 're going to bring education local .
we will end illegal immigration .
we will keep ... 

  we will build the wall .
and who 's going to pay for the wall ?
one hundred percent .
mexico 's going to pay for the wall .
they just do n't know it yet .
but trust me , they 're going to pay for it .
we have such a trade deficit with mexico .
i was in mexico .
i really like the president .
i love the country .
i love the people in mexico .
i have so many mexicans that work for me .
they 're friends of mine .
these are great people .
but their leaders are so much smarter than our leaders .
we have a trade deficit that is massive with mexico .
the wall is a tiny fraction of what we 're talking about .
so when people say , how are they going to do it ?
i say look at the trade deficit .
look at the cost of the wall .
and even the politicians that have no clue what 's happening , they say , oh , now i get it .
but they could never produce it .
so we 're going to have the wall .
and we 're going to stop drugs from pouring into our country and poisoning our youth .
we 're going to keep radical islamic terrorists the hell out of our country .
we are going to save the second amendment , which is under siege .
we are going to take care of our inner cities , our african- american communities , our hispanic communities .
we 're going to make them good again .
we 're going to make them safe again .
we are going to support the men and women of law enforcement .
and we 're going to appoint justices to the supreme court of the united states who will uphold and defend the constitution of the united states .
we will rebuild our roads , our bridges , our tunnels , our highways .
we will rebuild so beautifully our airports , our schools , and our hospitals .
american cars made right here in michigan will travel the roads .
american planes will soar the skies .
and american ships will patrol the sea .
american steel will send new skyscrapers into the clouds .
and we will take care of our steelworkers .
and we will take care of our miners .
we 'll going to take care of our miners and our steelworkers .
american hands will rebuild this nation .
and american energy mined from american sources will power this nation again .
american workers , many of you in this room , will be hired to do the job .
and these will be great jobs .
we will put new american steel into the spine of our country .
i will fight for every neglected part of this nation , and i will fight to bring us all together as americans .
imagine what our country could accomplish if we started working together as one people under one god saluting one american flag .
to the people of michigan , i promise you this .
you get out , and you vote on november 8th for donald j. trump for president , you 'll be voting for yourselves , because our movement will be complete phase one .
phase two is we will make america wealthy and rich again .
got to do it .
we will make america strong again .
we will make america safe again .
and we will make america great again .
thank you .
god bless you , everybody .
god bless you .
thank you .
thank you .
thank you .
thank you very much .
thank you , folks .
thank you , folks .
it 's great to be right here in florida , which we love .
in 26 days , we are going to win this great , great state and we are going to win the white house .
our movement is about replacing a failed and corrupt -- now , when i say " corrupt , " i 'm talking about totally corrupt -- political establishment , with a new government controlled by you , the american people .
there is nothing the political establishment will not do -- no lie that they wo n't tell , to hold their prestige and power at your expense .
and that 's what 's been happening .
the washington establishment and the financial and media corporations that fund it exist for only one reason : to protect and enrich itself .
the establishment has trillions of dollars at stake in this election .
as an example , just one single trade deal they 'd like to pass involves trillions of dollars , controlled by many countries , corporations and lobbyists .
for those who control the levers of power in washington , and for the global special interests , they partner with these people that do n't have your good in mind .
our campaign represents a true existential threat like they have n't seen before .
this is not simply another four - year election .
this is a crossroads in the history of our civilization that will determine whether or not we the people reclaim control over our government .
the political establishment that is trying to stop us is the same group responsible for our disastrous trade deals , massive illegal immigration and economic and foreign policies that have bled our country dry .
the political establishment has brought about the destruction of our factories , and our jobs , as they flee to mexico , china and other countries all around the world .
our just - announced job numbers are anemic .
our gross domestic product , or gdp , is barely above 1 percent .
and going down .
workers in the united states are making less than they were almost 20 years ago , and yet they are working harder .
but so am i working harder , that i can tell you .
it 's a global power structure that is responsible for the economic decisions that have robbed our working class , stripped our country of its wealth and put that money into the pockets of a handful of large corporations and political entities .
just look at what this corrupt establishment has done to our cities like detroit ; flint , michigan ; and rural towns in pennsylvania , ohio , north carolina and all across our country .
take a look at what 's going on .
they stripped away these town bare .
and raided the wealth for themselves and taken our jobs away out of our country never to return unless i 'm elected president .
the clinton machine is at the center of this power structure .
we 've seen this first hand in the wikileaks documents , in which hillary clinton meets in secret with international banks to plot the destruction of u.s. sovereignty in order to enrich these global financial powers , her special interest friends and her donors .
so true .
honestly , she should be locked up .
should be locked up .
and likewise the e - mails show that the clinton machine is so closely and irrevocably tied to the media organizations that she -- that she -- listen to this -- is given the questions and answers in advance of her debate performance with bernie sanders .
hillary clinton is also given approval and veto power over quotes written about her in the new york times .
they definitely do not do that to me , that i can tell you .
and the e - mails show the reporters collaborate and conspire directly with the clinton campaign on helping her win the election all over .
with their control over our government at stake , with trillions of dollars on the line , the clinton machine is determined to achieve the destruction of our campaign , not gon na to happen .
which has now become a great , great movement , the likes of which our country has never seen before , never ever .
they 've never seen a movement like this in our country before .
yesterday in florida , massive crowds , people lined up outside of big arenas , not able to get in .
never happened before .
it 's one of the phenomenas -- it 's one of the great political phenomenas .
the most powerful weapon deployed by the clintons is the corporate media , the press .
let 's be clear on one thing , the corporate media in our country is no longer involved in journalism .
they 're a political special interest no different than any lobbyist or other financial entity with a total political agenda , and the agenda is not for you , it 's for themselves .
and their agenda is to elect crooked hillary clinton at any cost , at any price , no matter how many lives they destroy .
for them it 's a war , and for them nothing at all is out of bounds .
this is a struggle for the survival of our nation , believe me .
and this will be our last chance to save it on november 8th , remember that .
this election will determine whether we are a free nation or whether we have only the illusion of democracy , but are in fact controlled by a small handful of global special interests rigging the system , and our system is rigged .
this is reality , you know it , they know it , i know it , and pretty much the whole world knows it .
the establishment and their media enablers will control over this nation through means that are very well known .
anyone who challenges their control is deemed a sexist , a racist , a xenophobe , and morally deformed .
they will attack you , they will slander you , they will seek to destroy your career and your family , they will seek to destroy everything about you , including your reputation .
they will lie , lie , lie , and then again they will do worse than that , they will do whatever is necessary .
the clintons are criminals , remember that .
they 're criminals .
this is well documented , and the establishment that protects them has engaged in a massive coverup of widespread criminal activity at the state department and the clinton foundation in order to keep the clintons in power .
never in history have we seen such a coverup as this , one that includes the total destruction of 33,000 e - mails ; 13 iphones , some by hammer ; laptops ; missing boxes of evidence ; and many , many other things .
people who are capable of such crimes against our nation are capable of anything .
and so now we address the slander and libels that was just last night thrown at me by the clinton machine and the new york times and other media outlets , as part of a concerted , coordinated and vicious attack .
it 's not coincidence that these attacks come at the exact same moment , and all together at the same time as wikileaks releases documents exposing the massive international corruption of the clinton machine , including 2,000 more e - mails just this morning .
these vicious claims about me of inappropriate conduct with women are totally and absolutely false .
and the clintons know it , and they know it very well .
these claims are all fabricated .
they 're pure fiction and they 're outright lies .
these events never , ever happened and the people said them meekly fully understand .
you take a look at these people , you study these people , and you 'll understand also .
the claims are preposterous , ludicrous , and defy truth , common sense and logic .
we already have substantial evidence to dispute these lies , and it will be made public in an appropriate way and at an appropriate time very soon .
these lies come from outlets whose past stories and past claims have already been discredited .
the media outlets did not even attempt to confirm the most basic facts because even a simple investigation would have shown that these were nothing more than false smears .
six months ago , the failing new york times wrote a massive story attacking me , and the central witness they used said the story was false ; that she was quoted inaccurately .
she said that i was a great guy .
she had great courage , i 'll be honest with you .
she was an amazing person .
and never made those remarks -- that i was a great guy , and never made the remarks .
and when i read the story , i was sort of surprised -- how could she say that ?
and she did n't say it .
we demanded a retraction but , they refused to print it , just like they refused to pin the comments from another source who praised me in her book , or the words of another wonderful woman who said really nice things about me .
they put other statements that she did n't say , they misrepresented .
the story was a fraud and a big embarrassment to the new york times and it was a big front page story .
front page , center , color picture , a disgrace .
they were very embarrassed , it will be part of the lawsuit we are preparing against them .
now , today the same two discredited writers , who should 've been fired from the new york times for what the did , tell another totally fabricated and false story , that supposedly took place on an airplane more than 30 years ago .
another ridiculous tale , no witnesses , no nothing .
then , there was a writer from people magazine , who wrote a story on melania and myself on our first anniversary .
the story was beautiful , it was beautiful , it was lovely .
but , last night we hear that after 12 years -- this took place 12 years ago , this story -- a new claim that i made inappropriate advances during the interview to this writer ...   and i asked very simple question , why was n't it part of the story that appeared 20 , or 12 years ago ?
why was n't it a part of the story ?
why did n't they make it part of the story ?
i was one of the biggest stars on television with the apprentice and i would 've been one of the biggest stories of the year .
think of it , she 's doing this story on melania , who was pregnant at the time .
and donald trump , our one year anniversary and she said i made inappropriate advances , and by the way , the area was a public area , people all over the place .
take a look , you take a look .
look at her , look at her words .
you tell me , what you think .
i do n't think so -- i do n't think so .
but , it is amazing , doing a story -- a love story -- on how great we are together -- and by the way , we 're stronger today than we ever were before which is good , but ...   it 's a love story -- it 's a love story on our one year .
and if i did that , she would 've added that it would 've been the headline .
and who would 've done that if you 're doing this and you 're one of the tops shows on television .
these people are horrible people , they 're horrible , horrible liars .
and interestingly , it happens to appear 26 days before our very important election , is n't that amazing ?
this invented account has already been debunked by eyewitnesses who were there -- they were there .
the very witness identified by the author has said the story is totally false .
by the way , this is a room that everybody can see in .
it 's got glass walls .
it 's at mar - a - lago ; it 's got glass walls .
can you believe this ?
why was n't it in the story , biggest story of the year .
this weekend the new york times published a full - page hit piece with another claim from an individual who has been totally discredited based on the many , many , many e - mails and letters she has sent to our office over the years , looking for work , donald is great , wanting go to my rallies .
but , the new york times -- and this was full op - ed piece -- refused to use the evidence that we presented -- refused to use it .
if they used it , if they would have looked , they would have said , there 's no story here .
others in the media , which almost surprises me because they 're dishonest also , were presented with the story by this woman numerous times , and they got very excited .
but , after seeing the evidence that we immediately give them , all of them refused to write the story .
there was no story .
the times , though , did n't want to see it , they just wrote the story .
and this was a full page opposite the editorials .
this is part of a concerted effort , led by the new york times and others .
now the new york times is fighting desperately for its relevance and its financial survival .
and it probably wo n't even be around in a few years , based on its financial outlook .
which would n't be a bad thing , if you want to know the truth .
but , as it winds down its years and is becoming more and more problematic , it 's gotten more and more vicious , more and more vile .
and even the other mainstream media is talking about the single greatest pile on in history , and all between now and november 8th .
and you have to see the stories they 've written , it 's one after another , after another , and facts mean nothing , third - rate journalism .
the great editors of the past from the new york times and others , ladies and gentlemen , are spinning in their grave .
i will not allow the clinton machine to turn our campaign into a discussion of their slanders and lies , but , will remain focused on the issues facing the american people .
thank you , thank you .
but , let me state this as clearly as i can , these attacks are orchestrated by the clintons and their media allies .
the only thing hillary clinton has going for herself is the press , without the press , she is absolutely zero .
and you saw that the other night in the debate , where some people said she made virtually a fool of herself .
this is not presidential material , believe me .
what they say is false and slanderous in virtually every respect .
we are now less than a month from the most election of our lifetime .
indeed one of the most important elections in the history of our country .
and the polls are showing us in a dead heat .
do n't believe what you say .
the new , highly respected rasmussen poll just came out this morning .
just released .
shows up nationally 2 points ahead , trump .
beautiful .
just came out .
so now the clinton machine has put forward a small handful of people out of tens of thousands of people over the years that i 've met , that i 've worked with , that i 've employed , in order to make wild and false allegations that fail to meet even the most basic test of common sense .
not even common sense .
again , this is nothing more than an attempt to destroy our movement and for the clintons to keep their corrupt control over our government .
when i declared my candidacy , i knew what bad shape our country was in .
and believe me all you have to do is look at world events .
all you have to do is look at the $ 1.7 billion that we sent to iran in cash .
in cash .
all you have to do is see the way isis was created in the vacuum left by hillary clinton and barack obama out of iraq .
all you have to do , all you have to do , is look at the 800 people that were very , very not good for our nation .
they were going to be deported .
lo and behold , instead of being deported , they were made citizens of the united states .
just recently .
and lo and behold , sadly , the 800 people is wrong .
it turned out to be close to 1,800 people .
our president is incompetent .
all he wants to do is campaign , and the last thing he wants to happen is to have donald trump terminate obamacare and do all of the other things that are destroying ...   he 's led a very divided nation and it 's only gotten worse .
and the last thing our country needs is four more years of barack obama , believe me .
i 've seen first hand the corruption and the sickness that has taken over our politics .
you 've seen it and i 've seen it and we 're all watching together .
they knew they would throw every lie they could at me and my family and my loved ones .
they knew they would stop at nothing to try to stop me .
but i never knew , as bad as it would be , i never knew it would be this vile , that it would be this bad , that it would be this vicious .
nevertheless , i take all of these slings and arrows gladly for you .
i take them for our movement so that we can have our country back .
our great civilization , here in america and across the civilized world has come upon a moment of reckoning .
we 've seen it in the united kingdom , where they voted to liberate themselves from global government and global trade deal , and global immigration deals that have destroyed their sovereignty and have destroyed many of those nations .
but , the central base of world political power is right here in america , and it is our corrupt political establishment that is the greatest power behind the efforts at radical globalization and the disenfranchisement of working people .
their financial resources are virtually unlimited , their political resources are unlimited , their media resources are unmatched , and most importantly , the depths of their immorality is absolutely unlimited .
they will allow radical islamic terrorists to enter our country by the thousands .
they will allow the great trojan horse -- and i do n't want people looking back in a hundred years and 200 years and have that story be told about us because we were led by inept , incompetent and corrupt people like barack obama and like hillary clinton .
we do n't want to be part of that history .
and by the way , president obama should stop campaigning and start working on creating jobs , start working on getting our gdp up , start working on strengthening our borders .
the corrupt political establishment is a machine , it has no soul .
i knew these false attacks would come .
i knew this day would arrive , it 's only a question of when .
and i knew the american people would rise above it and vote for the future they deserve .
the only thing that can stop this corrupt machine is you .
the only force strong enough to save our country is us .
the only people brave enough to vote out this corrupt establishment is you , the american people   we are going to have a policy , america first .
they control incredibly , the department of justice .
and they even secretly meet with the attorney general of the united states .
in the back of her airplane , while on the runway -- remember he was there -- he was going to play golf .
there 's the attorney general .
let me go say hello -- plane 's on the runway .
let me go say hello to the attorney general .
he never got to play golf , i understand .
and it was arizona , a place i love , but , the weather was about a hundred and some odd degrees -- he 's not gon na play .
he was never there to play golf , folks , do n't be foolish .
they met for 39 minutes and most likely it was to discuss her re- appointment , in a clinton administration , as the attorney general , just prior to making a decision over whether or not to prosecute hillary clinton .
ok ?
that 's what happened , that 's called real life and that 's pretty sad .
they met for 39 minutes .
remember he said , we talked golf , and we talked about our grandchildren .
three minutes for the grandchildren , two minutes for the golf , then they sat there and they twiddled their thumbs .
now i believe they talked about her remaining in her position under a crooked hillary clinton administration .
that 's what i believe -- that 's what i believe folks .
that 's what i believe and i think that 's what most people in this room believe .
likewise they 've essentially corrupted the director of the fbi to the point at which stories are already saying that the great -- and they are truly great -- men and women who work for the fbi are embarrassed and ashamed of what he 's done to one of our truly great institutions , the fbi itself .
hillary clinton is guilty , of all the things that director comey stated at his press conference and congressional hearings , and far more .
he stated many things , but it 's far more and he knows that .
and yet , after reading all of these items , where she 's so guilty , he let her off the hook .
while other lives , including general petraeus and many others , have been destroyed for doing far , far less .
this is a conspiracy against you the american people and we can not let this happen or continue .
this is our moment of reckoning as a society and as a civilization itself .
i did n't need to do this , folks , believe me -- believe me .
i built a great company , and i had a wonderful life .
i could have enjoyed the fruits and benefits of years of successful business deals and businesses for myself and my family .
instead of going through this absolute horror show of lies , deceptions , malicious attacks -- who would have thought ?
i 'm doing it because this country has given me so much , and i feel so strongly that it 's my turn to give back to the country that i love .
many of my friends and many political experts warned me that this campaign would be a journey to hell .
said that .
but they 're wrong .
it will be a journey to heaven , because we will help so many people that are so desperately in need of help .
in my former life i was in insider , as much as anybody else .
and i knew what it 's like , and i still know what it 's like to be an insider .
it 's not bad , it 's not bad .
now i 'm being punished for leaving the special club and revealing to you the terrible things that are going on having to do with our country .
because i used to be part of the club , i 'm the only one that can fix it .
i 'm doing this for the people and for the movement , and we will take back this country for you and we will make america great again .
the corrupt establishment knows that we are a great threat to their criminal enterprise .
they know that if we win their power is gone , and it 's returned to you , the people , will be .
the dark clouds hanging over our government can be lifted and replaced with a bright future .
but , it all depends on whether we let the corrupt media decide our future , or whether we let the american people decide our future .
if this clinton campaign of destruction is allowed to work , then no other highly success -- and this is so true -- i mean i 've seen this so many times , and i 've heard this all of my life -- i 've heard it all of my life .
if we let this happen , then no other highly- successful person , which is what our country needs -- it needs a certain thinking .
when you look at our trade deals that are so bad .
when you look , as an example , on trade , we 're going to lose almost $ 800 billion this year , trade deficit , almost $ 800 billion .
our debt has doubled in seven and a half years to almost $ 20 trillion , under obama .
no other successful person , after watching this , and no other very successful person will ever again , ever -- and who can blame them ?
even me , i 'd say , you 're right -- will ever again run for office .
i 've heard it for years , if you 're very successful you ca n't run for high office , especially for president .
i said , i do n't care , i do n't care .
i 've done so many deals , i 've done so well .
it 's a certain mindset that we need in our country , at least for a period of time , we have to straighten our country out .
i will not lie to you .
these false attacks are absolutely hurtful .
to be lied about , to be slandered , to be smeared so publicly , and before your family that you love , is very painful .
what is going on is egregious beyond any words .
people that know the story , people that see the story , people that know the facts , they ca n't even believe it .
it 's reprehensible beyond description , it 's totally corrupt .
but , i also know that it 's not about me , it 's about all of you and it 's about our country , i know that , i fully understand that .
that 's why i got involved .
it 's about all of us together as a country .
it 's a movement the likes of which we have never in history in this country seen before , never in history .
even the pundits , even the media -- that truly dislikes donald trump for their own reasons -- will admit this is a movement the likes of which people have never seen before .
and it 's a movement about the veterans who need medical care .
the mothers who 've lost their beloved children to terrorism and to crime .
it 's about the inner cities and the border towns who desperately need our help .
it 's about the millions of jobless people in america .
it 's about the american workers who ca n't get jobs because our jobs have left for mexico and so many other countries .
this election is about the people being crushed by obamacare .
and it 's about defeating isis and appointing a supreme court and a supreme court justice -- it could be four or five -- who will defend and protect our constitution .
this election is also about , so importantly to me , african- american and hispanic - american people whose communities have been plunged into crime , poverty and failing schools by the policies of crooked hillary clinton .
believe me , she 's crooked .
they 've robbed these citizens of their future and , if we win , i will give them their hope , their jobs , their education .
i will give them their security back .
the inner cities , education is almost worthless , it 's horrible .
we 're going to have common core ended .
we 're going to bring education local .
but , you look at the inner cities and you see bad education , no jobs , no safety .
you walk to the grocery store with your child and you get shot .
you walk outside to look and see what 's happening , and you get shot .
in chicago 3,000 people have been shot since january 1st .
we 're not going to let that happen .
our inner cities are almost at an all - time low , run by the democrats for sometimes more than a hundred years , chain unbroken .
so they have no jobs , they have horrible education , they have no safety or security , and i say to the african - american community , what the hell do you have to lose ?
i will fix it -- i will fix it , i will make it good , i 'll bring back our jobs .
we 'll have good education , we 'll have great safety in the inner city .
and we will help the hispanic - american people , who have been treated so badly and so unfairly in our nation , we will help them .
i will deliver like you 've never seen before , i deliver .
whether people like donald trump or not , they all say he delivers .
vote for donald trump .
you 're going to see something and you 'll be so happy , you 'll be so thrilled .
this election is about every man , woman and child in our country who deserves to live in safety , prosperity and peace , so true .
we will rise above the lies , the smears , the ludicrous slanders from ludicrous and very , very dishonest reporters .
we will vote for the country we want ; we will vote for the future we want ; we will vote for the politics we want ; and we will vote to put this corrupt government cartel out of business and out of business immediately .
we will vote for the special interests and say lots of luck but , you 're being voted out of power .
they 've betrayed our workers , they 've betrayed our borders and , most of all , they 've betrayed our freedoms .
we will save our sovereign rights as a nation .
we will end the politics of profit ; we will end the rule of special interests ; we will end the raiding of our jobs by other countries ; we will end the total disenfranchisement of the american voter and the american worker .
our independence day is at hand , and it arrives finally on november 8th .
join me in taking back our country and creating a bright , glorious , and prosperous new future for our people .
we will make america great again , and it will happen quickly .
god bless you .
god bless you .
thank you .
thank you .
thank you very much .
what a great honor , what a great crowd .
we 're having a lot of fun .
a lot of very , very big poll numbers coming down over the last few days .
you 've seen it .
big .
in six days , we 're going to win the great state of florida and we are going to win the white house .
we 're going to win it .
it 's feeling like it already , is n't it ?
we 've got to be nice and cool .
nice and cool .
right ?
stay on point , donald .
stay on point .
no sidetracks , donald , nice and easy , nice .
because i 've been watching hillary the last few days , she 's totally unhinged .
we do n't want any of that .
she has become unhinged .
you 've got to make sure to vote and to vote early if you can on november 8th .
and i think -- who has voted already ?
whoa !
well , anybody that wants to leave right now to vote is ok .
i 'm only kidding .
you 'll vote tomorrow .
the new l.a. times poll , highly respected , has us up six points nationwide .
and i have some more really interesting and great breaking news to share with everyone here today .
no , it 's not that .
but that will be that .
it 's just been announced that in the month of october we 've raised over $ 100 million in small donations .
i do n't think that 's ever been done .
has that ever been done before ?
that sounds more like a democrat thing , not a republican thing , right ?
that 's a great honor .
that means there are a lot of people out there that want us to really get this done .
and i 've contributed a tremendous amount of money , but when we have those small dollars , $ 61 and $ 52 and $ 17 , when that money comes in and then we raise around $ 100 million that 's a tremendous compliment to everybody here .
it really is .
it really is .
these are donations from everyday patriotic americans who love their country and want a better future for their children , who are going to have it .
our movement is about borders and is about bringing back our jobs .
you know about that from this area .
it 's about reducing taxes and raising incomes .
our movement 's about defeating isis .
we have no choice .
we have no choice .
we want to rebuild our country .
but they 're chopping off heads , they 're drowning people in steel cages .
we have no choice .
and keeping our country safe from radical islamic terrorism .
it 's a movement about restoring respect for america and for the american flag .
we 're disrespected right now all over the world .
but that will change very , very quickly .
it really will .
it really will .
we 'll get along with a lot of countries that right now we do not get along with and that frankly take advantage of us .
from now on , it will be america first , folks .
america first .
finally , it 's a movement about taking our government back .
thank you .
thank you .
there 's an amazing love for our country .
i see it all over this great land .
thank you .
i love you , too .
thank you .
it 's a movement about taking our government back from the donors , the lobbyists and the special interests and giving that power back to the people .
and in case you did n't know , i 've been on the other side for a long time .
and i saw where the country was going .
it was headed in the wrong direction .
and i love this country and i just said we 're going to have to do it .
it 's not easy .
it 's not easy .
i have to put up with some of the most dishonest people in the world , the media .
they never show crowds like that .
look at that , it goes all the way back .
they never show crowds .
they do n't show crowds .
but i guarantee you one thing , folks .
i guarantee you one thing .
if we had a small crowd , if for some reason a little small group of people showed up , it would be the biggest story out there .
that i can tell you .
these are really dishonest people .
and they are not happy with what 's going -- this was not in their game plan , folks .
they are not happy .
dishonest media , among the most dishonest people .
and i was sad to see the new york times lost 97 percent , down profits 97 percent .
ninety - seven percent down and then they tell you who they want for president , right ?
we know better .
real change begins with immediately repealing and replacing " obamacare . "
it 's just been announced that the residents of florida , hate to tell you this , are going to experience massive , double - digit premium hikes .
i know what those hikes are .
should i tell you ?
let 's keep it -- i want you to leave happy tonight knowing that we 're going to make america great again , ok ?
and in the very near future , it 's going to be gone , " obamacare , " so do n't worry .
but i wo n't tell you what the number is .
you 're not going to be happy when you hear the number .
in the great state of arizona , premiums are going up more than 116 percent .
i just left arizona , great people , unbelievable place .
their premiums are going up more than 116 percent .
all of the counties in the florida panhandle will have only one single " obamacare " insurer to choose from next year .
good luck with that negotiation .
not so lucky .
do n't worry , do n't worry , it 's going to be gone fast .
but think of it .
now , do you know how much they 're going to make ?
this is what they dream of .
they all wanted to be on , they 're all gone , they 're all gone , you 're going to have one to deal with .
it 's a disaster .
in minnesota where the premium increase will be close to 60 percent , the democratic governor has said , and he 's gotten a lot of heat for saying this , the affordable care act is no longer affordable .
that was last week .
premiums are surging , companies are leaving , insurers are fleeing , doctors are quitting and deductibles are going through the roof .
other than that , it 's actually quite good .
what a shame .
and i said it from the -- i 've said a lot of things from the beginning , you have to say .
you know , they said about hillary she 's got bad instincts , right ?
you know who said that ?
podesta .
i would fire podesta so fast .
i mean , the way he talks about her , you know , whether true , not true , who cares ?
he speaks so badly about her .
of course , he did n't know that there was a thing called wikileaks , right ?
he did n't know about that .
but he said she 's got bad instincts and she does have bad , very bad instincts .
and bernie sanders , what did he say ?
got bad judgment , she 's got bad judgment .
she 's got bad instincts , she 's got bad judgment .
that 's not going to be your president .
if we do n't get rid of " obamacare , " it will destroy american health care forever , yet hillary clinton wants to double - down on " obamacare , " making it much more expensive than it already is .
i 'm asking for your vote so we can replace " obamacare " and save health care for every family in florida and the united states .
real change also means restoring honesty to government .
do you think hillary 's going to restore honesty to government ?
i do n't know .
i do n't think so , folks .
as you know , the fbi has reopened its criminal investigation into hillary clinton .
all right .
is your sound turned back up ?
you know what they do , they turn the sound down when you 're doing that .
are you guys back ?
did you put your sound back up ?
hillary wants to blame everyone else for her mounting legal troubles , but she has no one to blame but herself .
hillary is the one who set up an illegal private e - mail server to shield her criminal activity .
hillary is the one who endangered national security for you , your family by sending classified information on an insecure server .
hillary is the one who lied so many times to congress and to the fbi .
hillary is the one who made 13 phones disappear , some with a hammer , and who destroyed 33,000 e - mails after receiving a congressional subpoena .
that 's after , after .
unbelievable .
but i have a feeling those 650,000 -- 650,000 e - mails -- i have a feeling those e - mails are going to be -- whoa , there are going to be some beauties in there .
can you imagine ?
she 's been deleting all the time , deleting , and then they say , yeah , we have a problem .
what ?
they just found 650,000 e - mails .
now , you ca n't have 650,000 for the wedding and for the yoga , right ?
you ca n't , it 's too many .
no , that 's a big number .
you know , when you hear that many e- mails , then you wonder why she never gets anything done .
i guess that 's part of the reason .
hillary is the one who accepted debate questions given to her by donna brazile ...   ... in advance of a debate , and now it 's turned out to be two debates with bernie sanders .
can you imagine bernie sanders ?
if that happened to me , it probably did , although we won the debates anyway .
i do n't think it matters .
i do n't think it matters .
but can you imagine that bernie sanders keeps supporting her ?
i think eventually he 's going to say i ca n't do it .
i mean , honestly , if somebody got the debate questions on me and i found out about it , and they only found out about it through this whole deal with wikileaks , but if somebody found out that for me , i would never want to be speaking with that person again .
i would imagine it 's only a question of time , hopefully before the election , that bernie sanders says that 's one of the most dishonest acts because hillary never reported it as a breach .
she got the questions and she never reported it .
and they do n't say that , these people .
all they do is talk about donna brazile .
who cares about donna brazile ?
who cares about her ?
it 's not donna brazile .
she was dishonest .
by the way , did you see her on television the other night trying to answer that one ?
that was called choking .
let me out of the studio , please .
oh boy , oh boy , oh boy , what a country .
but we 're going to make it respected again , we 're going to make it great again , i 'm telling you .
but hopefully at some point , bernie sanders will do the right thing .
and some of his people have told me , how can he continue to support her when she cheated -- when she cheated -- on the debates .
hillary clinton is the most corrupt person ever to seek the presidency .
and if she were elected , it would create an unprecedented constitutional crisis .
you know what 's going to happen .
and in all fairness , we went through it with the husband , he was impeached .
his law license was taken .
you know , he ca n't represent you .
if you want a lawyer , you ca n't even use him , his license was taken away .
folks , do we want to go through this again ?
and do we want for more years of obama ?
that 's what it 's going to be .
you know what that means ?
isis running around all over the place , higher taxes , no borders , a depleted military .
no , we 're going to change it around .
hillary is likely to be under investigation for many years , probably concluding in criminal trials .
and through wikileaks today , it 's just been shown that this is , as i 've been saying , a rigged system with more collusion , possibly illegal , between the justice department , the clinton campaign and the state department .
right ?
you saw that , just came out .
the e - mails show that the assistant attorney general , who is involved in the investigation , has been feeding information directly to john podesta , who he knows very well , and the clinton campaign .
folks , folks , it 's a rigged system , ok ?
it 's a rigged system .
then they say , oh , is n't that terrible when donald trump , you know , like -- it 's a rigged system .
my contract with the american voter begins with a plan to end government corruption .
it includes a ban on foreign lobbyists raising money for american elections .
i think we can keep them out .
we have enough problems with our elections , let 's keep them out .
my plan also includes a constitutional amendment to impose term limits on all members of congress .
i want the entire corruption washington establishment to hear and heed the words we all have to say -- we all .
and by the way , folks , i 'm a messenger , i 'm just a messenger .
this is a movement like they 've never seen .
by the way , i have been an effective messenger , in all fairness , but that also .
but i 'm a messenger , i 'm a messenger .
when we win on november 8th , we are going to washington , d.c. and we are going to drain the swamp .
believe me .
i told people , you know , over the last week- and - a - half ago that came out .
i said i ca n't say that , that is so hokey .
i said i 'm not going to say it .
anyway , so a week - and - a - half ago i said it .
the place went crazy .
i said , whoa .
then i said it at the next meeting , we had a tremendous rally someplace , and i said it .
and the place went totally crazy .
and then i said it again , same thing , and then i said to myself , boy , i 'm glad i thought of that expression , that 's a great expression .
i tell this story .
frank sinatra , frank sinatra did n't like " my way . "
he did n't like " my way , " but he sang it and the place went nuts .
then he did it again and again and again , then it became number one .
and you know what ?
he decided he loves that song very much .
at the core of my contract is my plan to bring back our jobs .
florida has lost one in four of its manufacturing jobs since nafta , a deal signed by bill clinton and supported by hillary clinton .
here 's a fact that 's so hard to even fathom .
america has lost 70,000 factories since china entered the world trade organization , another bill and hillary - backed deal .
and i have to say about china , i do a lot of business with china , i do a lot of business with china .
we can do great with china .
and i do n't disrespect them , i 'm not angry at them because they 've taken advantage of our country , i 'm angry at our leaders for allowing them to do it .
our leaders have allowed them to manipulate their currency , devalue their currency .
they 're masters , they 're grand masters .
nobody 's ever done it like china .
others do it .
japan does it brilliantly also , but nobody 's ever done to us what china has .
and we have -- the biggest bank in the world is a tenant of mine in manhattan , it 's a china bank .
it 's the number - one bank in the world .
and i do business with china in the bank of america building in san francisco through china and so many things .
and dealing with china is fine .
but you have to have people that are knowing what they 're doing because what china has done to our country , they have taken our money , they have taken our jobs , they make our product and we owe them $ 1.6 trillion .
that 's sort of amazing , right ?
they take our money and we owe them .
so that 'll all change .
and you know the amazing thing ?
now in the south china sea they 're building a massive , massive fortress , probably like nobody 's ever seen , right in the middle of the sea .
and i do n't think they asked for environmental impact statements , do you ?
do you think they went through the two - year review period ?
you know what they went through ?
about a 15-minute review period .
but they 're building right in the middle of the south china sea .
they should n't be doing that .
and we treat them very well because we let them do all these things that we could stop very easily .
and by the way , we have tremendous power , but we do n't know how to use it .
so we 're going to get along better with china .
we 're going to get along better with mexico , what mexico is doing to us , between the border and the kind of trade deficits we have with mexico .
and by the way , so many other countries .
we 're going to be the smart people again .
we 're going to be the smart people again .
we 're living through the greatest jobs theft in the history of the world , we really are .
a trump administration will stop the jobs from leaving america and we will stop the jobs from leaving florida .
the theft of american prosperity will end .
they 're taking away our wealth .
a trump administration will renegotiate nafta and we will stand up to product dumping , unfair subsidies and currency manipulation .
and we 'll win , we 'll win .
it wo n't even be hard .
we will end the foreign cheating and protect every last american job .
we will also immediately stop the job - killing trans - pacific partnership that hillary clinton would love .
that 'll be the end of your jobs completely .
that 's a disaster , certainly the way it 's structured is a total disaster .
as part of our plan to bring back jobs , we 're going to lower taxes on american business from 35 percent to 15 percent .
we will also cancel billions in global warming payments to the united nations .
and we will use that money for american , and it 's so important , for american environmental infrastructure .
we want , folks , we want clean air , crystal , we want clean water , crystal .
i want crystal- clean water , clean air .
we want safety .
beyond that , that 's what we want .
the rest of the world , they take our money , they laugh at us .
our businesses can no longer compete because some of the restrictions .
we want clean air , we want clean water , we want safety .
we spend billions and billions of dollars .
and we 'll be replacing , unless you do n't want to do it , the 3- mile bridge .
do you want to do that ?
do you care ?
because if you do n't care , let 's save the money , ok ?
should we do it or not ?
tell me , should we do it ?
well , you 're more excited about building the wall , that i can see .
and we will unleash the power of american energy , including shale , oil , natural gas and clean coal .
we 're going to put our miners back to work .
and we 're going to put our steelworkers back to work .
we will become a rich nation again .
but to be a rich nation , we must also be a safe nation .
hillary clinton wants a 550 percent increase in syrian refugees ...   ... and virtually unlimited immigration from the most dangerous places in the world to come into our country .
her plan would mean generations of terrorism , radicalism and extremism spreading in your schools and throughout your communities .
when i 'm elected president , we will suspend the syrian refugee program .
and we will keep radical islamic terrorists the hell out of our country , i can tell you that .
we 've got enough problems .
we have enough problems .
and you know what ?
we all have a heart and we see what 's going on , the world is unbelievable what 's happening .
and we 'll build safe havens and we 'll get the money from the gulf states , they have so much money they do n't know what to do with it and they have n't exactly been putting up .
so we 'll get the money from -- we owe $ 20 trillion .
if you do n't mind , i 'm going to low - key it a little bit , ok ?
does that sound ok to everybody ?
but we 'll get the money to the area .
we 'll get it over there .
and we 'll build safe havens .
i think he 's on our side , that guy , right ?
i always say , friend or foe ?
usually it 's friend , other than the ones that the clintons hired , the thugs , right , for $ 1,500 apiece .
$ 1,500 and a cell phone , go and try and beat up as many people as you can .
remember that , around chicago ?
and then they 're blaming me , donald trump 's rallies are very , very violent .
and you hardly heard about that story .
and honestly , those people should be prosecuted .
you had policemen walking out with gashes in their head .
those people should be prosecuted because we have the friendliest rallies , we have such love at our rallies .
those people should be prosecuted .
did you see the guy who was in charge of that program ?
visited the white house , like , 344 times .
did you see that ?
he visited the white house , i think it was 344 times , right ?
but he said , yeah , but i only saw the president 44 times .
oh , well , that 's ok .
so i 'm sure the president did n't know anything about the violence , right ?
and he 's got to stop campaigning for crooked hillary .
he 's got to go back , go to the office and he 's got to produce jobs and he 's got to help the military build up .
i mean , depleted .
he 's got to look at the borders .
i mean , this guy , all he wants to do is campaign for hillary , it 's unbelievable .
i think he may be hurting her more .
look , the bottom line is nobody wants four more years of obama .
a trump administration will also secure and defend the borders of the united states .
and yes , we will build what ?
we 're going to build the wall .
and here 's a little quiz .
i 'm sure you 're never going to be able to guess this .
who is going to pay for the wall ?
how did you guess ?
they do n't know it yet , but they 're paying for the wall .
we received the first - ever endorsement from our ice and border patrol officers , a tremendous number of people , first time they 've ever done it .
the immigration officers warned that hillary 's plan is the most radical immigration proposal in u.s. history and that it will " lead to the loss of thousands and thousands of lives . "
that 's a quote .
as secretary of state , hillary clinton allowed many , many people , the most dangerous and violent criminals , aliens , to go free because their home countries intelligently said we do n't want them back and we 're not going to take them back .
so our guys would be over , they 'd bring them there , they 'd say we do n't want them , we 're not taking them , get out .
and she 'd accept them back and then put them on the streets .
and you know what 's happened , you know what 's happened .
i promise you this , whether it 's four years or eight years , not once , when we bring criminals back to a country , not once will that country say take them back .
not once , believe me .
not once .
hillary wants totally open borders , there goes your country , and has pledged mass amnesty in her first 100 days .
very unfair to all of the people that want to come in .
and by the way , i want people to come in .
i want tremendous numbers of people to come in .
and we 're going to have that big , beautiful door in the wall .
but you know what ?
they have to come in through a process , they have to come in legally .
they have to come in legally .
and we 'll have merit involved , too .
would n't it be nice if we went a little bit on the merit system , we take people that are really going to help us grow our country ?
would n't that be nice ?
somebody said you ca n't say that , that 's not politically correct .
well , i just said it , folks .
hillary strongly supports sanctuary cities , like san francisco ...   ... where incredible kate steinle was murdered by an illegal immigrant who had been deported as least five times .
a trump administration will cancel all federal funding to sanctuary cities .
we will end illegal immigration , keep the drugs from pouring into our communities and deport all criminal aliens from our country .
we will also fully eliminate the obama - clinton defense cuts and completely rebuild our badly depleted military , which we desperately need .
that includes brand - new , modern aircraft for pensacola naval air station .
would n't that be nice for your great , young pilots ?
i watched a documentary a couple of months ago and i saw that .
it was a documentary on how old our aircraft is , our fighter craft .
and they ca n't get parts , they do n't make parts anymore .
these are fighters that we 're currently using .
these great , great people that fly these planes , they ca n't get parts because they do n't make them anymore .
they get the parts from the museums , they get the parts from the airplane graveyards .
and i said , this the united states ?
the enemy has plans that are far better than ours , so we 're going to change all of that .
so get ready , get ready , pensacola .
and we will always ensure that the blue angels -- i love the blue angels ...   ... continue to inspire our nation , the blue angels .
i mean , those guys are serious fliers .
i never quite -- when the wings are that -- i never quite got it , but they have great talent , no different than anything else .
they 're great , they 're blessed with great , great talent .
we will also build the 350-ship navy that our country has been asking for and our admirals have been asking for .
and we 'll have an active duty army of 540,000 troops .
our military policy will be based on three very important words : peace through strength .
we do n't want to use it .
we want to have it , we do n't want to use it .
we do have to get rid of isis , folks , but we do n't want to use it other than that .
i 'm honored to have the endorsement of more than 200 top admirals and generals and 22 medal of honor recipients , and a lot more coming .
a lot more coming .
our new foreign policy will put america first .
hillary brought death and disaster to iraq , syria and libya .
she empowered iran and she unleashed isis .
you ever notice where she says we will fight isis , during the debates ?
you know , then she walks out , and not good , not good .
she left , was n't good .
but she 's going to fight isis ; she 's the one that let it start .
so isis started as nothing , then obama called it the junior varsity , you remember , and now it 's in 32 countries .
and she 's going to stop it ?
next , hillary wants to start a shooting war in the syrian conflict with a nuclear - armed opponent named russia , that could seriously lead over syria to world war iii .
and putin does not like her and she is just not respected .
that was quite funny .
the woman screams , " we do n't like her either ! "
who said that ?
that 's pretty cool .
who said it ?
you ?
you look so innocent , i ca n't believe it .
wow , we do n't like her either .
no , we need strength .
hillary and our failed washington establishment have spent $ 6 trillion on wars in the middle east , wars that we never win , wars that just cause death destruction .
we never win .
we do n't win anymore .
we do n't win with wars .
we do n't win with trade .
we do n't win .
we 're going to start winning again like you have n't won in a long time .
and now the middle east , after spending this $ 6 trillion -- $ 6 trillion , we could have rebuilt our country twice -- and now the middle east is in worse shape than it 's ever been before .
it 's a mess .
i mean , it 's not even , it 's not even , it 's far worse than it ever was .
they 've dragged us into these endless foreign wars that have made us much less safe .
they 've left our borders wide open at home and they 've shipped our jobs and wealth to other countries .
to all americans i say it 's time immediately for new leadership , it is .
and just in closing , think , think we 're all leaders , we 're all doing this together .
thank you .
thank you .
thank you very much .
it 's a great honor to be with you tonight , i have to tell you .
this is a great area .
this is an amazing area .
somebody said , oh , that 's trump all the way , that whole area .
i love this area .
this is an amazing area .
they did a poll of your area and i 'll tell you we are through the roof .
in fact , i have to be honest , my geniuses said , mr. trump , sir , do n't come there , everyone 's voting for you there .
you do n't need to go there , you 've got their vote .
i said that 's why i want to go there .
do n't you want to reward people for being your friend , right ?
do n't go there ?
i want to go here .
it 's true .
see , people forget , you know , it 's one of those things .
i want to be here .
this is -- i think you people are amazing .
you built this country , folks .
you built this country .
just think about what we can accomplish in the first 100 days of a trump administration .
we 're going to massively cut taxes for the working and middle - class americans .
hillary is going to raise your taxes substantially , by the way .
it 's right there .
we will eliminate every unnecessary job - killing regulation .
we will cancel illegal and , you know , it 's crazy , the illegal obama executive orders .
they 're all over the place .
they 're pretty bad .
we will rebuild our military and take care of our great veterans .
we are going to provide school choice and put an end to common core , bring our education local .
we will support the great men and women of law enforcement .
i met a lot of them backstage .
we 'll save our second amendment which is totally under siege .
got to get out and vote , that 's a big thing .
the national rifle association gave me their earliest endorsement that they 've ever given .
and wayne and chris and all of the people there , i want to tell you folks , people can dispute , people can argue , but they love this country .
the national rifle association , and i know the top people , they love this country , they really do .
they love the country , so just remember that .
when people go after them and , you know , so often , but they really do have a great love .
and i want to appoint and we 're going to appoint justices to the united states supreme court who will uphold and defend the constitution of the united states .
the time has come to cut our ties with the failed , petty policies of the past .
hillary clinton has been there for 30 years and she 's accomplished nothing .
she 's just made things worse .
during our debate , she complained about my taxes .
i said , hillary , you were there , change it , but she wo n't do that because all of her donors do the same thing as i do , so she 's never going to do it .
so i felt very strongly , i said , hillary , you 've been there for years , change it .
she 's not going to change it .
she does n't do anything .
she complains , she complains .
she 's the candidate of yesterday , we are the movement of the future .
we 're asking for the votes of republicans , democrats , independents and first - time voters of which we have a lot of them , i 'm telling you .
we have a lot .
all you have to do is look at those long , beautiful lines all over florida and you 're going to see a lot of them have hats that have a little phrase , right ?
what does that phrase say ? "
make america great . "
those lines are long and there 's -- by the way , last poll has us up four , but i think they really know it 's much higher than that , you know .
they do n't even have to poll now , all they have to do is look at the lines , right ?
they do n't want to do that .
we 're asking all americans to join this incredible movement .
we 're fighting for every citizen who believes that government should serve the people , not the donors and not the special interests .
we 're fighting to unlock the potential of every american community and every american family who hopes and prays and yearns for a much better future .
we 're going to bring back our jobs , folks .
we 're going to bring back our jobs .
i 'm asking you to dream big because with your vote we are just , do you believe this , six days away .
six days .
six days .
i started this in june , june 16th of last year .
it seemed like it would take forever .
of course , you know , the pundits all said donald trump has no chance , he 's got no experience at this .
well , every once in a while some of them that knew us , they 'd say be careful what you wish for .
a couple of them said it , i wo n't mention their names , but i was complimented .
they said be careful .
and then one by one , right , one by one by one by one .
and then we have some great people .
ben carson has been so incredible .
so many , chris christie has been great .
but we have great support .
mike huckabee , i watched him on television the other day , he 's been so great .
no , no , we have great support .
we have great support .
but one by one , now we 're only left with one person , crooked hillary clinton .
we 're going to win .
we 're going to win .
so we 're just six days away from the change you 've been waiting for your entire life .
together we will make america wealthy again , we will make america strong again , we will make america safe again , and ... 

  that 's right , we will make america great again !
thank you , god bless you , everybody .
god bless you !
thank you .
what a beautiful crowd .
thank you .
thank you .
what a group .
thank you .
so , you know , outside we have a lot of people trying to get in .
and downstairs , there 's a room and it is loaded with people .
it 's almost this size .
and we 're really -- we 're really doing a job .
so important to win the state of pennsylvania .
we 're going to bring your jobs back .
we 're not going to let your jobs be taken from you .
we are not going to let your jobs leave , folks .
we 're not going to let it happen .
they 're not going to mexico .
they 're not going anywhere else .
your companies are going to stay , we 're going to make them happy , we 're cutting their taxes , we 're cutting your taxes .
hillary ...   hillary , you probably saw yesterday , she proposed one of the biggest tax increases that anybody has ever seen .
we 're already the highest - taxed nation just about , but in terms of industrialized nations we 're the highest - taxed nation anywhere in the world , folks .
and she wants to tax us more .
so we 're going to be lowering your taxes very substantially .
we 're going to be simplifying the whole deal .
you wo n't need h&amp;r block anymore , believe me .
you 're not going to need them .
middle - income people , the taxes are coming way down , they 're coming way down .
and many people that are n't earning enough money , but they 're out there really trying , they have no tax to pay .
and it 's going to be a very , very simplified procedure .
so i want to thank everybody for being here .
we 're going to talk a little bit about security .
i have something new with me tonight , pretty new anyway , it 's like one - day old .
it 's called charts .
look .
charts .
charts .
do you believe it ?
so we 'll get into that .
but i want to introduce a few people .
and we have a man who has been somebody that i 've known for a long time , somebody that i 've respected for a long , long time .
and he 's your congressman , right ?
do you know your congressman ?
you better know your congressman .
so bill shuster is right here someplace .
come on up here , bill .
and you know , it 's interesting , i 'm looking about bill , defeat isis with bill , change washington and fix the rigged system with bill -- and me , too , by the way .
i might even be more important to this than bill , i do n't know , but he 's going to help .
we want to secure our country .
we 're going to end obamacare .
we 're going to rebuild our infrastructure .
we 're going to do all of these things .
also , i want to introduce a woman who has been of incredible assistance to me , just incredible .
the people love her .
and come on up here , please .
come , come , judy ward , everybody .
judy ?
bill , say something real quick .
thank you .
thank you , judy .
thank you , bill , very much .
so what bill has been saying is a little bit -- a little bit bad because we 're talking about voter id all over the country .
they 're approving in some cases , in some cases they 're not .
and you know , i went to school in philadelphia .
i went to the wharton school of finance in philadelphia , so i know the state very well .
my kids went to school here , two of them , and we love -- we love the state .
but we have to be very , very careful about our day because we 're going to have tremendous voter turnout .
we 're going to have unbelievable turnout .
but we do n't want to see people voting five times , folks .
we do n't want to see it .
and i 've heard some stories about certain parts of the state .
and we have to be very careful .
i do n't even know , maybe you should go down and volunteer or do something .
but without voter id , there 's no way you 're going to be able to check it properly .
we have a lot of law enforcement people working that day .
we 're hiring a lot of people , we 're putting a lot of law enforcement .
and by the way , speaking of law enforcement , do we love our police , right ?
we love our police .
just met your chief .
he 's like central casting .
you can put him in a movie right now .
but we love our police .
and i will tell you that i just -- and i ca n't say it any more strongly , we 're going to bring your jobs back , we 're going to bring so much back .
we 're going to make our country great again .
we 're going to make america great again .
but ...   but it 's a tough process because , you know , i 've been talking about a rigged system for a long time .
and i 'll tell you , whatever you can do .
i know you 're going to go out , i know this part of pennsylvania is phenomenal .
i just left erie county .
erie has been , i do n't know , i guess you 've heard and bill has heard and everybody has heard what went on there .
we had 10,000 -- at least 10,000 people .
and they 're going to go out and vote and you 're going to go out and vote .
we 're going to have -- i guess they call it the big t. maybe that 's lucky .
have you heard about the t ?
they say that t is good .
i wonder what that means .
but i really -- i really say , look , november 8th , such a big day , you have to turn out .
we 're bringing your jobs back .
we 're going to renegotiate trade deals .
nafta signed by bill clinton is a disaster .
it 's a disaster .
i watched hillary clinton yesterday .
she gave her short little speech reading a teleprompter on taxes are going to be raised .
can you believe it ?
she 's got a massive $ 1.3 trillion , massive increase in taxes , massive increase in regulation .
now , speaking of regulation -- before i speak of regulation , reince , i want to thank you .
where is reince ?
what a great guy .
reince , get over here .
right , what a -- he has done -- thank you very much .
reince has done such an amazing job and they portrayed him slightly inaccurately .
reince , come here for a second , please .
the head of the republican national committee has done such a great job .
we 're friends , we work together , we work with a lot of other people .
and i have to say , we have great unification .
now , every once in a while , you read about somebody that wants to be a rebel , they get a little free publicity for themselves .
but the way we have gotten along .
and i 've raised -- i 've put in a lot of money into the republican national committee , i 've spent a lot of time and put in a lot of money .
and i will tell you ...   and i 'm spending money on my own campaign .
you know , i went through the whole primary system , i paid for it and i 'm going through this .
and i 'm spending for me , but we 're raising a lot of money for the republicans .
and honestly , i just want to thank this man because it is not an easy job .
he has done an incredible job .
thank you , man .
thank you , reince , i appreciate it .
they like to portray it a little bit differently in the press .
these guys are the most dishonest people , the most .
and i 'll let you know -- hey , you know what ?
we have a great relationship , we have just about from the beginning .
when i first came out , i 'm not sure reince believed too much .
so , you know , i understand .
but if i did n't have a good relationship , guess what ?
you and they would be the first to know .
and i would call and i would tell them and i would tell you .
but we 've had a special relationship .
but somebody has to call us , so they write stories .
like , for instance , they wrote the story about the founder , right ?
barack obama , the founder .
oh , that 's sort of nice .
do we like it ?
turn him off .
we like him better the other way .
what was that ?
they did n't pay their electric bill , i guess , right ?
but you know , you talk about -- barack obama has done such a poor job with isis that i have been , for numerous days , sarcastically saying that he is the founder of isis , right ?
you 've heard that .
and then i say they really like him a lot .
do n't forget , when he took over , i think there was -- there were eight countries , seven countries .
now i understand they 're in 28 countries .
they 're rampant all over the world , probably they 're rampant here , too , because we 're taking in so many people we have no idea who they are .
so i say -- so i 've been saying and i 'll keep saying because it 's true , but somewhat sarcastically , i 've been saying he 's the founder of isis .
and i say she 's a close second .
and then i say -- but they cut it off in   media , the dishonest media , they cut that off because that , you know , shows a little sarcasm .
and i say they 're going to give hillary clinton the most improved player for letting isis exist .
look , if it were n't for them , you probably would n't even have isis .
of course , he calls it isil , isil .
you know -- and there are reasons to call it isil , there actually are .
geographically , there are reasons to call it isil , but he 's the only one .
and i honestly believe he calls it isil to make people angry because he is the great divider .
and let me tell you , folks , he is a terrible , terrible president .
he has done a terrible , terrible job .
he is grossly incompetent and we have to make a change .
and hillary clinton is four more years of obama .
that 's what she is .
four more years of isis , four more years of high taxes .
think of it , wants to raise your taxes .
and i do n't think you 're going to put up with it .
four more years of -- well , i guess there wo n't be any e - mail scandal by that time .
can you imagine ?
thirty - three thousand e - mails wiped out .
think of it , 33,000 e - mails wiped out .
it 's a very sad thing , folks .
well , we 're going to get back to it .
listen , so i just went and i visited one of your companies , a great company , an amazing family , six generations , really seven because i actually met the seventh generation , you know what that is ?
you know how long ?
andrew jackson was president .
andrew jackson , 1835 .
and you probably -- most of you know   that 's right .
you know mike .
everyone knows mike .
so mike mclanahan , an amazing guy .
i met his son , i met his kids , his grandkids , i met everybody , i met his employees .
and they 're devastated because after all of these years , from 1835 to now , they 're really having a hard time because of obama and his ridiculous policies .
and george sidney works with mike and the family , and they said things to me that i thought were incredible .
and i said , " i know you do n't do this for a living and you probably have never done this before , but if you could come up on the stage , we have a small group of about 9,000 people , if you could come up " -- and lots of television , look at all those people .
oh , they 're so terrible .
they are so dishonest .
for instance -- for instance -- so , as you know , right downstairs and next door we have a room like this with just about as many people .
they 're not going to cover that .
they 're not going to show these massive crowds .
they 're not going to say that in the history of this building , which i guess is 15 years old , this is the biggest crowd they 've ever had by far , by far .
they 're not going to say that .
they 're not going to say that .
so 1835 .
i would like to have george and mike just come up for a minute and explain the company quickly , how it started , where they are right now and what regulations and horrible , horrible policy has done to these great people .
ok , come on up .
thank you .
so congressman shuster , we just created two stars .
and you know , it was so amazing , though .
i looked and i love that stuff , i love plants , i love all of it .
and i looked at the plant and you can see it 's amazing , the age , but the cleanliness , the loving care that 's given to the plant .
i 've seen plants that are n't so good .
the care and the -- i looked at a piece of steel , as big a piece of steel -- i 've seen big steel , but as big a piece of steel beam as i 've ever seen .
and i was talking to him about it .
how do you get this in ?
how do you truck it in ?
what do you do ?
do you splice it ?
what are you doing ?
and it was just fascinating .
but i saw that , you know , so many years , so many years .
and i said , so , how 's business ?
they said it 's catastrophic , it 's a disaster , ca n't go on much longer .
and i said , what 's the problem ?
is it regulation ?
well , it 's really tax and regulation .
but i 've found over the years , because i 've met so many people , same position , incredible people .
the difference here is 1835 .
that 's a long time .
that 's one that 's really out there .
andrew jackson was president .
you know , usually you 'll hear , like , ronald reagan was president .
that was a long time ago .
but andrew jackson ?
so that was a long time ago .
but when i see the love in that plant .
and i met all the employees .
and one of them was there 31 years .
one of them there 21 years and 15 years , great people , and you know , it 's just a question of time .
much smaller than it used to be , the dollar is killing them , killing them .
it 's not so much the dollar , it 's that other countries are absolutely -- you know , what they 're doing .
well , it 's china and it is china , but it 's others , and the devaluation of their currencies .
the devaluation of their currencies is absolutely killing our companies , killing them .
and we let these people get away with murder .
and we 're the piggy bank .
remember , they come in , they dump their product .
next is going to be steel , you watch .
first of all , they 're killing your coal , they 're totally killing your coal , and that 's one of mike 's problems also .
because the stuff they make for coal , i mean , they do n't need it anymore because the mines are all being closed and the miners do n't have jobs and they want to have jobs .
you know , i was in west virginia where i had a tremendous victory , i got a massive vote .
and hillary clinton a few weeks before that , she did n't know people were listening , and she said we 're going to put the mines and the miners out of business , all right ?
and then , do you remember , she went to west virginia and she sat around the round table with that beautiful miner and his family -- that beautiful miner and his family , and in very , very sad terms he was explaining how they want to be miners , right ?
and she was trying to say she was only kidding , essentially .
she was trying to -- yeah , she was lying .
hey , look , look , has anybody lied as much as hillary clinton ?
has anybody ?
you look at the fbi director and you see what went on with the e - mails , you see how she got away with that .
i think that that will go down in her career as her single greatest achievement , how she got out of that mess .
but she 's not out of it yet .
let 's see what happens .
let 's see what happens .
honestly , it 's disgraceful .
and you know who 's more disgraceful , in my opinion ?
the media , because -- because they do n't put her -- they do n't put her to the task .
they do n't put her to the task .
they do n't do anything .
they follow me and i 'm on all the time .
i do get much better ratings than her , in all fairness , though .
but the media concept is that do n't put her on because if you do n't watch her , she 'll be ok .
right ?
right ?
and then she goes out and she talks that she short - circuited , short - circuited -- the mind short - circuited .
she was asked a question on fox by chris wallace and the answer was so bad .
i was watching , which is hard to watch because it 's pretty boring to be honest , but she said she 's short - circuited .
and i said to myself , man , that 's a bad one , oh , she 's going to have problems .
wait until you see tomorrow .
nothing .
what do you see the next day ?
nothing .
and i said to a friend of mine , can you imagine if i said that about myself ?
i would be all over every paper anywhere in the world , right ?
it 's like i told you about , you know , sarcastically -- i mean , you ought to see these news organizations yesterday when i said obama , right ?
did you see that ?
that obama is the founder of isis , he 's the mvp , they 're going to be giving him the mvp award and she 's right there next to him .
and you had to see .
and they left the mvp stuff out because then you 'd know .
but you had to hear , did he mean it ?
what does it mean ?
we have nine panelists tonight ...   we have one -- we have one panelist representing donald trump , we have eight panelists plus the moderator and plus another few moderators .
come on , folks , get in here .
it is so ridiculous what 's going on , the pile - on .
a man that 's been doing this for 45 years said it 's the single- greatest pile - on of a candidate that he 's ever seen .
every day , every single day , story after story after story .
and i think they 're going to be good stories .
you know , i do good work .
i 've built one of the great companies of this country .
i built this -- i did one of the great jobs , some of the great assets in the world .
very low debt , tremendous cash flow , that 's why i can do this stuff , believe me .
you think it 's cheap ?
it 's not cheap .
and by the way , in the primaries , i spent about $ 51 million , something like that , and -- which believe it or not was about the lowest amount of money for the majors , right ?
and i came in first in a landslide .
others spent much more than that , one spent many times more than that and came in toward the bottom of the pack .
and i said to myself , is n't that what you want for a president , right ?
do n't you want -- you spend the least and you come in first .
spend the least and come in first , would n't that be nice ?
and that 's what we have to do .
that 's what we have to do .
but hillary clinton will be so bad for our country , will be so bad for our country .
and here 's the thing , the press does n't go after her .
so she has n't had a news conference in approximately -- in fact , her statement and a couple of other bad statements were made -- oh , do n't worry about it .
go home .
go home .
like , go home .
so she 's going home to mommy .
go home to mommy .
go home .
go home .
and you know the nice part ?
her mother is voting for donald trump .
it 's great .
so it 's an amazing thing that 's happening .
but they do n't show her .
so she has n't had a news conference in , what , 255 days , something like that .
the little one that she had , she tried to pretend .
they were all her friends and they were asking -- and she gave such bad answers .
but i just said , man , look at these answers .
wow .
i do n't want anybody to be hurt , but i said she 's really going to be hurt by those answers .
and what happened ?
nothing .
although now , i will tell you , it was a little delayed reflex , but short - circuit really is catching on now very belatedly , because we do n't want a president that 's going to short - circuit .
we have bigger problems than that .
we have big problems in this country , we do n't need that .
so she wants to raise your taxes ; i 'm going to lower your taxes .
she wants to raise your regulations , and you heard mike and george talking about regulations , they 're putting them out of business .
and we 're going to do such a massive decrease of regulation so that our small businesses can thrive and grow and start .
ca n't even start a small business .
so we have -- we have lots of things that we 're going to be working on .
but i 'll tell you , big is we 're going to bring our companies back , big .
and for this area , honestly , we 've got to bring our companies back .
our companies have gone to mexico .
i tell it now , for the last month i tell this .
this is so inexpensive , because normally , you 'd go out , you 'd hire a big firm or you 'd hire the harvard guys or the wharton guys and they 'd charge you a lot of money , they do a report and they come back in six months , they 'd charge you a million dollars .
and you would n't know anything .
most of the reports you 'd just take them and throw them .
but a friend of mine builds plants , right ?
and he 's just about the biggest in the world , maybe he is the biggest in the world , but he builds massive plants .
and i said to him , how are you doing ?
he said really well .
i said , where ?
he said , " donald , you have to see what we 're doing in mexico .
we are building some of the great plants anywhere in the world , car plants , computer plants , anything . "
i said , really ?
he said it 's the eighth wonder of the world , mexico .
and he wants to build here .
he 's an american guy , he 's a u.s. guy , he wants to build here .
so i said , how 's the united states doing ?
he goes just like this , meh .
how stupid are we ?
how stupid are we to allow this ?
our companies are moving to mexico .
as we talk today , and i said this before in erie because we had a crowd that was massive in erie -- and somebody said it 's , like , a democrat area .
i do n't think so , i 'll tell you i do n't think so .
we had this massive crowd of people .
but i said it to them .
we ca n't let our companies go without consequence .
we ca n't let our companies be stripped out of our country , open up a plant somewhere because of a nafta agreement that was signed by bill clinton , with a wife that wo n't be -- she wo n't be able to do a damn thing about it .
there have to be consequences when they leave and they fire all their people .
and the consequences when they make their product and they want to sell it through what will soon be a very , very strong , powerful border , they 're going to pay a 35 percent tax on that product .
and they 're not going to leave , they wo n't leave .
do n't worry about it , folks .
they wo n't be leaving .
they wo n't be leaving .
so in this area , because it 's been hit so hard and the coal has been hit so hard -- you know , in erie they have general electric and they 're stopping with the big locomotives .
it 's way down because the coal is way down .
it 's way , way down , tremendous unemployment .
well , all of that 's going to stop .
so we 're going to open our minds , we 're going to work with our steelworkers and our miners and all of our people .
and you know , look , my whole theme of what we 're doing is very simple .
he 's got it on his cap .
there are hundreds of people that have it on their caps .
it 's called make america great again .
america first , make america great again .
now , believe me , the jobs are coming back , folks .
that 's going to be so easy .
a friend of mine said , why did n't somebody else think of that ?
and honestly , they do n't think of it because they 're politicians .
and other than bill , who would understand that immediately , right ?
bill has no doubt , and judy , and he is , bill is a business guy .
but these are politicians that , number one , are controlled by special interests and lobbyists , right , and donors .
and a lot of times they do n't want it because they own companies that want to move across the border , there are a lot of reasons .
a friend of mine recently said , donald , how could a certain deal have been made a month ago ?
he said it does n't make sense , it 's so bad for the country .
he said , boy , those politicians are stupid .
i said , no , they 're not stupid .
they 're getting massive campaign contributions .
they 're getting massive donations .
is n't it nice that i do what i do and i just spend a lot of money ?
i 'll tell you , i hope i win .
i 'm going to feel very , very foolish if i do n't win .
but when they call me because they need help in moving their company out of the united states and firing a lot of people , folks , i could n't care less .
they did n't give me anything , i could n't care less .
we 're going to keep our companies and we 're going to bring new jobs back in .
and they 're going to come roaring back in with a new tax on business .
they 're going to come roaring back in .
and they 're coming in to this area .
and we 're going to cut regulations and our favorite , unbelievably old company is going to thrive again , hopefully better than it 's ever been since andrew jackson .
ok ?
so one of the things that we have to do , and there 's so many , one of the things we have to do , supreme court justices , right ?
the new president is going to have probably -- next president , probably more picks of supreme court justices .
we lost a great one with judge scalia , lost a great one , we lost a great one , a great guy .
i met him a couple of times , what a great , great guy , very conservative principles , very smart .
and he was n't -- and that was n't supposed to happen , that was supposed to be another 10 years , 15 years .
so we have one before we start .
we could have four , we could even have five ; probably we 'll have three .
but when i watch these people , never trump , those poor , poor , sad people .
they 've been saying never trump now for two years .
never trump , never trump .
trump gets more votes than anybody in the history of the republican party , and then never trump , never trump , never trump .
i do n't get it .
i do n't get it .
never trump .
i mean , we won massive numbers of states , far more than -- there was n't even a second - place finisher , frankly .
so we won these massive numbers of states .
we won almost 14 million votes , and that 's with 17 people , do n't forget .
when ronald reagan ran -- great guy , by the way -- when ronald reagan ran and when others that did well ran , they 're running against two and three people and four people .
i ran against 17 people and got more votes .
think of what that means .
we got more votes than anybody .
we brought in new votes into the republican party .
that 's all not being registered in different forms of media .
they 're not talking about the fact that the republican primaries were up 60 percent and the democrats were down 20 percent .
so with all the bernie stuff -- and we like bernie .
look , bernie , the system was rigged .
and we 're going to watch pennsylvania very quickly .
we 're going to watch pennsylvania .
go down to certain areas and watch and study and make sure other people do n't come in and vote five times .
because if you do that -- and i know you 're all voting .
is everybody here voting ?
if you do that , if you do that , we 're not going to lose .
the only way we could lose , in my opinion , i really mean this , pennsylvania is if cheating goes on , i really believe it .
because i looked at erie and it was the same thing as this .
and i 've been all over the state and i know the state well , i know the state well .
but let me just tell you , i looked all over pennsylvania and i 'm studying it .
and we have some great people here , some great leaders here of the republican party and they 're very concerned about that .
and that 's the way we can lose the state .
and we have to call up law enforcement and we have to have the sheriffs and the police chiefs and everybody watching because if we get cheated out of this election , if we get cheated out of a win in pennsylvania , which is such a vital state , especially when i know what 's happening here , folks , i know .
she ca n't beat what 's happening here .
the only way they can beat it , in my opinion , and i mean this 100 percent , if in certain sections of the state they cheat .
ok ?
so i hope you people can sort of not just vote on the 8th , go around and look and watch other polling places and make sure that it 's a hundred percent fine .
because without voter identification , which is shocking , shocking that you do n't have it -- many states it gets approved and some states they do n't get approved .
and i have still -- i 'm supposed to be a smart person -- i have still -- i have yet to understand how you can not approve voter identification , at least in some form , right ?
so we 're going to do things that are going to be amazing , i really believe , on november 8th .
we 're doing well in florida , we 're doing well in ohio .
i think we 're going to do well in virginia -- we 're not doing as well there now , but i actually think we 're doing really well , i just do n't think they 're giving us the credit .
we 're still pretty close .
but we 're doing really well in certain states that no other republican would even waste their time with .
we 're doing well in lots of different -- we 're doing well in michigan .
hey , look , i 've been talking about michigan being ripped off with their car companies moving to mexico , for two years , ok ?
they do n't talk .
hillary does n't know about it .
hillary , aye , aye , aye .
four more years of obama , but worse , and run by the machine and total dishonesty , total dishonesty .
i mean , again , look at the e- mails .
remember , 33,000 e - mails , 33,000 e - mails and it 's ok , it 's all right .
do n't forget .
well , maybe it is ok .
no , it probably is .
33,000 -- she needed a few for the wedding and she needed some for yoga class , right ?
so i figure two for yoga class , five for the wedding , where are the rest ?
boy , oh , boy , would i like to see .
hey , can you imagine what 's on those e - mails ?
now , they say that nsa has those e - mails .
you know that , right ?
they say they have them .
they say nsa has everybody 's e - mails , but they say that nsa has the e - mails .
so if they have the e - mails , if they have the e - mails , i think maybe should they give them out ?
i do n't know -- i do n't know , i do n't know what the law is .
but they say that they would have the e - mails .
i guess somebody came out from nsa and they said we have everybody 's e - mails .
so i do n't think they tried too hard .
do you , folks ?
i do n't think they tried .
we 'll see what happens .
the other thing we need , we need security at our border .
the border patrol agents , 16,500 border patrol agents endorse donald trump -- sure of   the first time they 've ever done this in a presidential race , 16,500 .
and believe me , if they did n't , their job is a lot easier , just walk right by , go ahead .
the other way they have to stop them , bring them back , it 's a lot more work .
they 're great people .
but 16,500 endorsed me .
sheriff joe arpaio from arizona , like , a great man .
he 's been on the borders for 50 years .
i ca n't imagine .
and he 's tough and he 's smart and he 's strong and he 's a good person .
i 'll tell you -- i 've gotten to know him -- thank you -- i 've gotten to know him very well .
he 's a good person .
but he knows what 's good and he knows what 's fair and he endorsed me and that was a great honor .
ok ?
and a lot of other people .
by the way , a lot of other people , but on the border .
so here 's the story .
so many people when i walked in , would you read the snake tonight ?
i do n't know , have you heard the snake , anybody ?
has anybody heard it ?
raise your hand if you 've heard it .
not that many , it 's great .
is it ok for the ones that have heard it if i read it ?
is that ok ?
written by the great al wilson years ago .
so we need a strong border because drugs are pouring across , crime is pouring across .
it 's rampant , rampant .
and when i originally ran , when i made my first statement , i talked about illegal immigration .
i talked about problems that we have .
it turned out to be true -- it turned out to be true .
so we have problems where our military is depleted ; we have to rebuild it .
we have problems where our vets are n't being taken care of ; we have to take care of our vets .
we have massive problems with education , and we have to end common core , and we have to bring education local .
we have to repeal and replace obamacare , we have to do it .
we have to save our second amendment .
the nra , by the way , endorsed me early .
i think it was the earliest endorsement they 've ever given .
but the nra endorsed me , terrific people .
they love this country , let me tell you .
they love this country .
and you know , it 's interesting .
san bernardino , they walk in , boom , boom , boom , paris , orlando , so many places .
now , paris actually has among the toughest gun laws anywhere in the world .
you do n't have guns , unless you 're a bad guy you have guns because then you 're allowed to walk in with guns .
right ?
but you obey the law , they do n't have guns .
toughest gun laws they say in the world , who knows ?
so these thugs , these horrible , horrible -- i was going to say human beings , but i would say these horrible animals walk in to various places , all fairly close together , and they just start , boom , boom , boom , you get over here , boom , boom , boom , 130 killed .
many , many , hundreds , people do n't know this , hundreds in the hospitals never really to recover .
i mean , some are so badly wounded .
same thing , san bernardino , 14 people killed , many , many people still in the hospital .
i mean , their lives can never be the same .
and i 'm just saying , if we had people in that room , if we had some people in any of those rooms with a gun right around here ...   ... where when they see it 's going to happen , the bullets start flying in the opposite direction .
you really would have had a whole different story .
and you know , if they knew that you had guns where the bullets are going to go in the opposite direction , they 'd probably say let 's take a pass , ok , let 's not even go in .
so we 're allowing -- we 're allowing -- tremendous numbers of people into our country from syria , from parts of the massive terrorist world .
we have no idea who they are .
law enforcement says there 's no way really to vet them .
there 's no real paperwork , there 's a lot of false paperwork .
and we 're allowing -- and hillary clinton wants to allow   550 percent more coming in than obama .
so i read this today and so many people standing outside they heard me , they said , would you do it again ?
i said i 'll do it again .
and it 's called the snake .
and it represents , in my mind , what 's going to happen in our country .
because this is like the trojan horse , we 're allowing people in .
and i have a bigger heart , i have a big heart , i want to take care of people .
i want to build safe zones in syria , i want to have the gulf states pay for it .
we do n't have -- hey , we 're at $ 20 trillion , ok , folks ?
it 's time we stop .
we 've spent probably $ 4 to $ 5 trillion in the middle east .
you know what we have ?
nothing , nothing .
if we would have done nothing in the middle east , we would have been unbelievable .
so we 've spent all of this money in the middle east , we have nothing for it .
so here 's the story .
i read this , i immediately thought of our border , ok , immediately .
and i said to myself , guess what , i 'm going to put this in the form of a poem and i 'm going to read it when i 'm of that mind .
because you see what 's happening , you see what 's happening in germany , you see what 's happening in france .
look at france , look at what 's going on in france with nice , with all of the things going on in france .
i have friends that wo n't go there anymore .
i have a friend , he thinks paris , the city of lights , he thinks it 's the most beautiful city .
i said , how are you doing , did you go to paris yet this year ?
i do n't go to paris anymore , france is no longer france .
how stupid are we ?
how stupid are we ?
when you see what 's going on , how stupid are we ?
so we 're letting these people in , right ?
this is a tremendous mistake .
look at what one person did , one sicko , wacko whose father was sitting behind hillary rodham clinton with a big , red hat on and a big smile on his face .
you see that ?
was that a smile ?
he 's sitting behind her .
and as soon as i saw that and i heard he was there because he came over , we think it 's him , and he had a red hat , i said , oh , no , do n't tell me , but it was n't .
it was not make america great again hat .
but you see this guy sitting back there .
and his son had just killed so many people in orlando .
and here 's the story , so i read this , and a lot of people love it .
and think of it as what happens if we 're not smart , tough and vigilant with our borders , with people coming in that we do n't know about them , that we do n't know who they are , where they come from , especially when you have a track record of violence all over the world .
what the hell do we need it for ?
we 'll build safe havens .
but what the -- what are we doing ?
so are you ready , folks ?
called the snake .
on her way to work one morning , down the path along the lake , a tenderhearted woman saw a poor , half - frozen snake .
his pretty - colored skin had been all frosted with the dew .
oh well , she cried , i 'll take you in and i 'll take care of you .
take me in , oh , tender woman , take me in , for heaven 's sake .
take me in , oh , tender woman , sighed the broken snake .
she wrapped him up all cozy in a curvature of silk , then laid him by the fireside with some honey and some milk .
now , she hurried home from work that night , as soon as she arrived , she found that pretty snake she 'd taken had been totally revived .
take me in , oh , tender woman , take me in , for heaven 's sake .
take me in , oh , tender woman , sighed the broken snake .
now , she clutched him to her bosom , you 're so beautiful , she cried .
but if i had n't brought you in by now , you certainly might have died .
now she stroked his pretty skin and then she kissed and held him tight .
but instead of saying thank you , that snake gave her a vicious bite .
take me in , oh , tender woman , take me in , for heaven 's sake .
take me in , oh , tender woman , sighed the vicious snake .
i saved you , cried that woman , and you 've bit me , heavens , why ?
you know your bite is poisonous and now i 'm going to die .
oh , shut up , silly woman , said the reptile with a grin .
you knew damn well i was a snake before you took me in .
be careful , folks .
be careful , altoona .
people put all over the country , we do n't even know where the hell they 're being put .
you know that , right ?
your government officials do n't even know , many of them , do n't even know .
your governors do n't know , your senators do n't know , you do n't even know .
this could be the great trojan horse .
this could replace the story of the trojan horse , ok ?
so i brought something special for you .
we 're going to go quickly because i want to get the hell out of here , i want to go home .
but i 'm only leaving if you promise -- if you promise -- than on november 8th you 're going to vote for trump and we 're going to make america great again .
all right .
you ready ?
all right .
congratulations , pennsylvania .
great job , great job .
great job , governor ridge .
great job .
the clinton 's legacy : one in three manufacturing jobs in pennsylvania has been lost since nafta .
would you say that 's something to be proud of ?
i do n't think so .
one in three lost since nafta .
not too good , right ?
i love these boards .
look , here 's a beauty -- here 's a beauty .
i just -- i love charts , i love charts .
and they always said , you know , it 's too tough putting a screen up , you 've got to get guys , it costs too much money -- i do n't like to spend money .
this is a cheap version of a screen , ok ?
it 's just as good , but you need good , strong hands .
so , look , you ready ?
so there it is .
so u.s. home ownership , right ?
lowest in 51 years , right ?
so the american dream , folks , the american dream , there it is , the american dream .
here 's obama , here 's where we are right now .
home ownership , the american dream is to have a house , to own a house .
here 's where we are right now , folks .
wow , wow .
great -- great job -- great job , obama .
all right , here 's the snake .
the snake , do we like the snake ?
no i do n't like the snake .
so syrian refugees admitted to the united states , monthly totals since october of 2015 .
look , look , how stupid are we , folks ?
how stupid are we , folks ?
look at that .
and hillary clinton , again , wants 550 percent more .
not going to happen .
not going to happen .
you better get out there and vote .
here 's another beauty .
number one , ready ?
number and percent of immigrants in the united states 1900 to 2010 , plus census bureau projections .
look at this , ok ?
go ahead , go ahead .
a lot of them coming in from syria , from places that are rough places , ok , rough places .
ok .
so here 's something .
so i spent a lot of money on my campaign , i continue to spend a lot of money on my campaign , that 's good .
and i 'm not looking -- you know , i 'm raising a lot of money for reince and for the whole republican party .
a lot of people do n't understand that , but that 's ok .
but i 've raised a lot of money .
we took in $ 51 million in june , we took in 82 , i think , million dollars last month .
and i do n't think they even know i 'm doing -- i 'll be honest .
some of these people , they 're saying , like , well , we do n't know if we like donald trump .
i 'm raising so much money for these people .
oh , but that 's ok .
they 'll figure it out soon .
i 'm telling you , soon they 're going to figure it out .
and the other ones , you know , when you hear never trump .
how about never trump ?
think of this -- think of this , never trump , never trump .
i told you , we got the highest vote in history , but never trump .
supreme court justice -- so it 's not me , it 's going to be hillary .
if it 's hillary , you 're going to have super - left - leaning judges .
you 're going to have a country that 's destroyed probably forever .
it would be 75 years , but probably forever , ok ?
how could they not say trump ?
but they defeated and they were defeated .
they 've been saying for so long never trump , years , never trump , and they 're embarrassed .
so we understand .
but you know what ?
it does n't matter .
because if we win , it does n't make any difference .
but i 'll tell you what , i 'm going to say never them , never ...   so , you see what i did here ?
look .
so in one way , i feel a little foolish , to be honest .
i showed this yesterday .
i feel a little bit foolish .
hillary , hillary -- these are hedge funders .
now , i know the hedge funders , many of them .
some are semi - friends of mine , some are sort of friends of mine , tough guys , tough people , tough women in a couple of cases , not too many , but tough , tough people , smart .
and they give her millions and millions of dollars .
they 're not doing that for their health .
they 're not doing that for the good of the country , folks .
this i can tell you .
these are tough people .
frankly , they 're people that i 'd like negotiating for , let 's say , against china .
you know , we have all of these political hacks negotiating our deals .
but i have some , like carl icahn , i have some of the great people on my side , some of the greatest businessmen in the world , and they love it because they want great trade deals and we 're going to renegotiate our trade deals .
and hillary clinton said , after hearing me yesterday , we are going to renegotiate , the other day , we are going to renegotiate our trade deals .
she never even thought of it before .
and she ca n't do it because her donors wo n't allow her to do it , folks , a hundred percent .
do i know this business , or what ?
hey , i used to be a donor , now i 'm a donor to myself for my own campaign .
and you think it 's easy ?
it takes guts to run for president , do n't kid yourself .
so look at this one .
so this is a campaign contributions from hedge funders , these are the tough ones , hedge fund guys , hedge fund people .
hillary clinton , crooked hillary , $ 48,500,000 ; trump , $ 19,000 .
i do n't even know who it is .
and look , they had a terrible picture of hillary , which i felt was unfair .
i said do n't do that , get the best picture you can find .
and i 'll tell you what , honestly , i feel much better about it .
no , they had this terrible picture , it was unfair .
i 'm a very fair person .
$ 48,500,000 against $ 19,000 -- i 'm going to give the $ 19,000 back , it 's ridiculous .
i do n't know who the ...   this is just a list of some of the countries , saudi arabia , morocco , oman , kuwait , bahrain , algeria , qatar .
these are millions of dollars given to hillary clinton .
you think she maybe will do what they want her to do ?
so here 's your total national debt , total national debt , it 's doubled under obama , will more than double by the time he gets out .
and you know the bad thing -- i was thinking about it today .
yes , it 's tough , but we 'll be at $ 20 trillion .
nobody even knows what that is .
we 're going to be at $ 20 trillion .
but here 's the thing .
if it doubled , bill , as an example , if it doubled and our roads were in great shape and our schools and our hospitals and everything was good , right , if our bridges and tunnels were beautiful and new and fresh -- 50 percent of our bridges are in trouble , our tunnels are a mess .
you ever go through these tunnels ?
the tiles are falling off the roof , right ?
you know , as a builder it 's disgusting to me .
you go through these tunnels and you say , i wonder , were people injured ?
you see tiles .
you know , they used to be beautiful , white tiles , right ?
and now you 'll see big openings where patches have fallen off .
i say , there are cars driving 40 , 50 miles an hour through .
i mean , if those tiles fall and the people get killed , right ?
now , i do n't know , i do n't read about it .
but you look at our tunnels , they 're disgusting , they 're dirty , there 's soot , the tiles are all off .
the roads are in bad shape .
so if you had $ 20 trillion and everything was tippy - top -- i like tippy - top .
everyone who goes to my buildings and my clubs , they 're tippy - top , right ?
tippy - top .
we 're opening up a hotel on pennsylvania avenue over a year ahead of schedule and way under budget , and it 's the best .
and it 's better than we projected .
it 's going to be one of the great hotels of the world .
pennsylvania avenue in washington , d.c. so the way i look at it , i 'm going to get to pennsylvania avenue one way or the other , i do n't care , i do n't care , i do n't care .
one way or the other .
but that hotel is under budget and ahead of schedule by more than a year .
would n't it be nice ?
you know , i was recently traveling to -- i wo n't mention the location because they 're incredible people -- but i was in an area where they have a hospital , a veterans ' hospital that 's under construction .
i said , how 's it doing ?
oh , mr. trump , sir , it 's a disaster .
why is it a disaster ?
it 's not that big , why is it a disaster ?
well , we have a $ 1.2 billion -- billion -- cost overrun .
i said , a billion dollars ?
how can you have a billion , how can you have $ 1.2 billion ?
do you think those contractors and those subcontractors are making a couple of bucks on that , folks ?
how stupid are we to let this happen ?
how stupid are we ?
$ 1.2 billion for a hospital .
that should be a tiny fraction of that to build it , to build it .
so here 's the story , folks .
we have to get out on november 8th .
i 'm going to come back .
i 'm going to be in pennsylvania a lot .
i 'll come back again and visit you .
but you 've got to get out and vote .
you 've got to get out and vote .
and i promise you we 're going to do such a great job , you 're going to be so proud of your country .
you 're going to be so proud -- less importantly , but you 're going to be so proud of your president .
i 'm a messenger .
i 'm a messenger for common sense .
i 'm a messenger for doing what we all know has to be done .
but we do n't win anymore , but we 're going to start winning again .
we 're going to win with our military , which i said before is very , very depleted .
but we 're going to build it up and we 're going to make it strong and we 're going to make it powerful .
and hopefully , we 're not going to use it other than to knock the hell out of isis .
we have no choice .
and we 're going to take care of our vets , our great vets .
and they have not been taken care of .
and we 're going to have strong borders , and by the way , we 're going to build the wall and we 're going to stop drugs from coming in .
and mexico is going to pay for the wall .
and we 're going to save our second amendment .
and we 're going to repeal and replace obamacare .
and we 're going to make the greatest trade deals we 've ever made .
jobs are going to come flowing back .
we 're not going to let our companies go .
we 're going to be the smart people .
and we 're going to win and win and win , and we 're going to win so much that the people in this room are going to call up their congressmen and say , congressmen , we can not stand it , our president is winning too much , we 're not used to it .
please , please , mr. congressman , please go see the president and talk to him .
and i 'm going to say , when he comes into washington , bill , i 'm sorry , i ca n't do that .
actually , i want to win much more .
we 're going to win so much .
we 're going to win at every single level .
we 're going to make america first , and we 're going to make america great again .
thank you , everybody .
thank you .
thank you , everybody .
thank you .
thank you , everybody .

thank you .
thank you very much , everyone .
sorry to keep you waiting ; complicated business ; complicated .
thank you very much .
i 've just received a call from secretary clinton .
she congratulated us -- it 's about us -- on our victory , and i congratulated her and her family on a very , very hard - fought campaign .
i mean , she -- she fought very hard .
hillary has worked very long and very hard over a long period of time , and we owe her a major debt of gratitude for her service to our country .
i mean that very sincerely .
now it 's time for america to bind the wounds of division ; have to get together .
to all republicans and democrats and independents across this nation , i say it is time for us to come together as one united people .
it 's time .
i pledge to every citizen of our land that i will be president for all americans , and this is so important to me .
for those who have chosen not to support me in the past , of which there were a few people ...   ... i 'm reaching out to you for your guidance and your help so that we can work together and unify our great country .
as i 've said from the beginning , ours was not a campaign , but rather an incredible and great movement made up of millions of hard- working men and women who love their country and want a better , brighter future for themselves and for their families .
it 's a movement comprised of americans from all races , religions , backgrounds and beliefs who want and expect our government to serve the people , and serve the people it will .
working together , we will begin the urgent task of rebuilding our nation and renewing the american dream .
i 've spent my entire life and business looking at the untapped potential in projects and in people all over the world .
that is now what i want to do for our country .
tremendous potential .
i 've gotten to know our country so well -- tremendous potential .
it 's going to be a beautiful thing .
every single american will have the opportunity to realize his or her fullest potential .
the forgotten men and women of our country will be forgotten no longer .
we are going to fix our inner cities and rebuild our highways , bridges , tunnels , airports , schools , hospitals .
we 're going to rebuild our infrastructure , which will become , by the way , second to none .
and we will put millions of our people to work as we rebuild it .
we will also finally take care of our great veterans .
they 've been so loyal , and i 've gotten to know so many over this 18-month journey .
the time i 've spent with them during this campaign has been among my greatest honors .
our veterans are incredible people .
we will embark upon a project of national growth and renewal .
i will harness the creative talents of our people and we will call upon the best and brightest to leverage their tremendous talent for the benefit of all .
it 's going to happen .
we have a great economic plan .
we will double our growth and have the strongest economy anywhere in the world .
at the same time , we will get along with all other nations willing to get along with us .
we will be .
we 'll have great relationships .
we expect to have great , great relationships .
no dream is too big , no challenge is too great .
nothing we want for our future is beyond our reach .
america will no longer settle for anything less than the best .
we must reclaim our country 's destiny and dream big and bold and daring .
we have to do that .
we 're going to dream of things for our country and beautiful things and successful things once again .
i want to tell the world community that while we will always put america 's interests first , we will deal fairly with everyone , with everyone -- all people and all other nations .
we will seek common ground , not hostility ; partnership , not conflict .
and now i 'd like to take this moment to thank some of the people who really helped me with this what they are calling tonight very , very historic victory .
first , i want to thank my parents , who i know are looking down on me right now .
great people .
i 've learned so much from them .
they were wonderful in every regard .
i had truly great parents .
i also want to thank my sisters , maryanne and elizabeth , who are here with us tonight .
and , where are they ?
they 're here someplace .
they 're very shy , actually .
and my brother robert -- my great friend .
where is robert ?
where is robert ?
my brother robert .
and they should all be on this stage , but that 's ok .
they 're great .
and also my late brother , fred .
great guy .
fantastic guy .
fantastic family .
i was very lucky .
great brothers , sisters ; great , unbelievable parents .
to melania and don ...   ... and ivanka ...   ... and eric and tiffany and baron , i love you and i thank you , and especially for putting up with all of those hours .
this was tough .
this was tough .
this political stuff is nasty and it 's tough .
so i want to thank my family very much .
really fantastic .
thank you all .
thank you all .
and lara , unbelievable job , unbelievable .
vanessa , thank you .
thank you very much .
what a great group .
you 've all given me such incredible support and i will tell you that we have a large group of people .
you know , they kept saying we have a small staff .
not so small .
look at all the people that we have .
look at all of these people .
and kellyanne and chris and rudy and steve and david .
we have got -- we have got tremendously talented people up here .
and i want to tell you , it 's been -- it 's been very , very special .
i want to give a very special thanks to our former mayor , rudy giuliani .
unbelievable .
unbelievable .
he traveled with us and he went through meetings .
that rudy never changes .
where 's rudy ?
where is he ?
rudy .
governor chris christie , folks , was unbelievable .
thank you , chris .
the first man , first senator , first major , major politician , and let me tell you , he is highly respected in washington because he 's as smart as you get : senator jeff sessions .
where is jeff ?
great man .
another great man , very tough competitor .
he was not easy .
he was not easy .
who is that ?
is that the mayor that showed up ?
is that rudy ?
oh , rudy got up here .
another great man who has been really a friend to me .
but i 'll tell you , i got to know him as a competitor because he was one of the folks that was negotiating to go against those democrats : dr. ben carson .
where is ben ?
where is ben ?
and by the way , mike huckabee is here someplace , and he is fantastic .
mike and his family , sarah -- thank you very much .
general mike flynn .
where is mike ?
and general kellogg .
we have over 200 generals and admirals that have endorsed our campaign .
and they 're special people and it 's really an honor .
we have 22 congressional medal of honor recipients .
we have just tremendous people .
a very special person who believed me and , you know , i 'd read reports that i was n't getting along with him .
i never had a bad second with him .
he 's an unbelievable star .
he is ... 
  that 's right .
how did you possibly guess ?
so let me tell you about reince , and i 've said this .
i said , reince -- and i know it , i know .
look at all those people over there .
i know it .
reince is a superstar .
but i said , " they ca n't call you a superstar , reince , unless we win , " because you ca n't be called a superstar -- like secretariat -- if secretariat came in second , secretariat would not have that big , beautiful bronze bust at the track at belmont .
but i 'll tell you , reince is really a star .
and he is the hardest - working guy .
and in a certain way , i did this -- reince , come up here .
where is reince ?
get over here , reince .
boy oh boy oh boy .
it 's about time you did this , reince .
my god .
say a few words .
no , come on , say something .
rnc chairman 

  amazing guy .
our partnership with the rnc was so important to the success and what we 've done .
so i also have to say i 've gotten to know some incredible people -- the secret service people .
they 're tough and they 're smart and they 're sharp , and i do n't want to mess around with them , i can tell you .
and when i want to go and wave to a big group of people and they rip me down and put me back down on the seat .
but they are fantastic people , so i want to thank the secret service .
and law enforcement in new york city .
they 're here tonight .
these are spectacular people , sometimes under - appreciated unfortunately , but we appreciate them .
we know what they go through .
so , it 's been what they call a historic event , but to be really historic , we have to do a great job .
and i promise you that i will not let you down .
we will do a great job .
we will do a great job .
i look very much forward to being your president , and hopefully at the end of two years or three years or four years , or maybe even eight years ...   ... you will say , so many of you worked so hard for us , but you will say that -- you will say that that was something that you really were very proud to do and i can ... 
  thank you very much .
and i can only say that while the campaign is over , our work on this movement is now really just beginning .
we 're going to get to work immediately for the american people .
and we 're going to be doing a job that hopefully you will be so proud of your president .
you 'll be so proud .
again , it 's my honor .
it was an amazing evening .
it 's been an amazing two - year period .
and i love this country .
thank you .
thank you very much .
thank you to mike pence .
thank you .
thank you .
so we have tremendous crowds of people outside .
would anybody like to give up your seat ?
d. 
  so i think what we 're going to have to do is a little different .
you know we have been so crowded , there 's something going on big , even bigger than before because every place we go we have these massive crowds .
yesterday , we were in ohio , we were in pennsylvania and harrisburg and we had crowds that were so enormous , so much bigger than the venue .
so we 're gon na have to start using the basketball arenas , do n't you agree ?
you know , we have -- outside , we have like thousands of people .
they 're going crazy because they ca n't get in .
so bear with us but i did get to wave to them ok ?
so it was good .
but these are great people .
you know .
something very nice just happened to me .
a man came up to me and he handed me his purple heart .
now , i said to him now , is that like the real one or is that a copy ?
and he said that 's my real purple heart , i have such confidence in you .
and i said man , that 's like -- that 's like big stuff .
i always wanted to get the purple heart .
this was much easier .
but i tell you , it was such an honor and maybe i can bring him up on the stage lieutenant colonel louis dorfman , i just have to .
so i said lieutenant colonel would you like to say something ?
he goes no , sir .
i 'd like you to just keep saying what you 've been saying .
it 's amazing .
what an honor , what an honor .
that was great .
so thank you all for being here .
we 're gon na have a little fun this morning and we 're going to be back in virginia a lot .
we have to win virginia .
you know , i have a club in virginia , do you all know my club ?
trump national .
and if we could do to the united states what i did to that , boy would we have a country .
there 'd be nothing like it anywhere , ever , in history .
but you know , i took over a club what , 10 years ago ?
and it was on the potomac river and it 's right next door .
and in fact , i wish we did this out at the golf club , to be honest with you .
right on the potomac .
maybe we 'll do that , the next one let 's do it on the potomac , i do n't know , do it , right ?
right ?
we 'll do it outside , on the potomac , by the american flag .
you know , i have tremendous acreage there , we have like almost 800 acres and it 's got two clubs , two courses .
we have the pga coming next year for a big , big , big tournament and it 's the best there is in the tri - state .
it 's one of the best golf courses in the country and it 's been a tremendous success .
d. 
  well , i took it over , it was great acreage but it was not so great , right ?
and we blew it up and built new and it was -- it 's been a fantastic success and it 's in loudon county .
and therefore i ca n't imagine that the people of loudon are going to be voting for crooked hillary clinton .
she does n't do anything , because -- i 've --   d. 
  yeah -   d. 
  so did you see over the weekend fox , chris wallace , where she lied , where she said the fbi director said like everything was just perfect , it was n't exactly - i mean she lied , she pure and simple - she only knows to lie .
she really does , only knows to lie .
but she lied , and it 's a big story .
it 's become a big story and that 's amazing .
it 's amazing that they covered because the press is so totally dishonest , ok ?
so totally dishonest .
and there is nothing like it , i 've never seen dishonesty like that .
and they 're pushing her like crazy because it 's establishment stuff and we have to make change .
you know she 's now calling herself an agent of change .
she 's been doing this for 30 years .
you know numbers just came out for her where she raised like $ 50 or $ 60 million and 20 people gave it .
i think it was - let 's see 20 people gave her $ 60 million in her fund .
$ 60 million from 20 people .
i want to get a list of those 20 people .
oh those 20 people , i want to find out who they are , i want to find out how many i know .
i want to find out - i want to find out how many i know .
but i 'll tell you what , 20 people gave her $ 60 million .
and that 's what i 've been saying folks .
look i know the game better than anybody and the game is played that way .
they own her .
they own her .
they will do whatever 's good for them .
if they have a company that wants to move plants into mexico , she 's going to say - first she 'll say that 's no good .
and then she 'll say oh i see .
they helped me i have to let them do it , because her handlers - that 's what they are is handlers -- they write her speeches , they write everything , she does n't give a talk like this with no teleprompters , she gets up and she has teleprompters , she gets on the stage for 20 minutes , she reads something and she leaves .
she goes back home and goes to sleep .
that 's what she does .
she reads it .
she goes home .
she goes to sleep .
and that 's ok , i 'm not knocking it , but the 20 people , think of it , so you have 20 people giving $ 60 million , it just got announced or it 's being announced today .
but we 're announcing something even more special .
we 're announcing that we 're going to have more than $ 35 million from a group of people like almost 60,000 people averaging 61   this does n't happen to republicans .
you know most republicans , i mean i think all , if they ever did that they 'd have like three people giving $ 12 and they 'll say that 's about as good as we 're going to do .
we 're going to have close to 60,000 people , and it 's going to be , think of it , it averages $ 61 approximately .
i guess it 's going to be filed later or tomorrow or something , but it averages $ 61 each .
and we 'll have $ 35.8 million but i think it 's going to even be higher than that , because it 's not totally tabulated .
but it 's going to be higher than that .
and that does n't include other money that we 're getting from the rnc and the republican party , and it does n't include the money that i put up , because i put up a lot of money to fund my own campaign .
and -- d. 
  - a lot .
i think i 'm into this for over $ 60 million - over $ 60 -- $ 60 million , if you do n't vote for me , look at the money - i 'll probably be in for $ 100 by the time i finish .
think of it $ 100 million cash - 

  ok good , thank you .
i 'll be in for over 100 , and think of it , no tax deduction .
see , everything i do , i think tax .
after tax , before tax , but no deductions .
but i 'll be in for over $ 100 million when it 's all finished , or thereabouts .
and it 's a lot of money , that 's a lot of money , and nobody else does that .
other rich people do n't do that either .
not that many rich people run because they 're told if you 're rich and if you 're successful you ca n't run for political office because they 'll kill you .
and i said i agree , i do agree .
i think i 'm a testament to either never do it or do it .
i will say this -- i will say this , it 's been unbelievable .
it 's been -- the journey from june 16 , coming down on the escalators , it 's been an unbelievable event .
i came down with melania on that escalator and i want to tell you ...   everybody loves melania .
they love melania .
she 's a good person , i 'll tell you that .
she 's smart and i thought she gave an unbelievable speech , unbelievable presentation .
unbelievable .
and ivanka did the introduction , unbelievable job .
and tiffany and don and who do we have here today ?
we have eric .
eric , where 's eric ?
eric come here .
eric trump , everybody .
e. 
  wow , this is a great crowd , wow .
well , listen we are , and i say this all the time , but we 're so proud of my father .
it 's an honor to be in loudoun .
in fact , him and i , when i came out of college , the first job we worked on together was the great golf course that we have here .
and the two of sat there and we put a tremendous amount of time and effort into rebuilding it and we had a great time and it was kind of the perfect -- perfect first opportunity for a son to work with a father and i 've learned so much from this man .
he 's been such an incredible father and mentor and boss and friend and every other word that you could put on it .
he 's just the best and he will do a great job for this nation .
he will do such a great job for all of you and we are so , so , so immensely proud of him .
so , with that , i give you back to the big guy , thank you so much loudoun county .
d. 
  he 's a good guy .
he 's done a good job .
he 's in there pitching   and i thought the republican national convention was better than the other one , ok ?
i think my kids were great , i thought everybody did great .
i actually thought it was better and we had more people watching the final night because that was the speech , that means a lot , by millions , but i will tell you , i will tell you , yes .
friend or foe ?
probably friend .
thank you .
all right .
your 15 seconds of fame .
well now that bernie 's out , we do n't have the -- does n't happen anymore , it 's like amazing , it 's -- you know the safest place to be anywhere , is at a trump rally , that 's true .
safest place to be .
i mean i 'll just tell you something , you do n't even know you 're doing it but here we are .
we have chairs , right ?
everybody 's standing .
d. 
  everybody 's standing because we have -- it 's excitement .
there 's like an excitement in the air .
you have seats and everybody stands .
if you want , you can sit down .
but everybody said   -- they do n't want to sit down -- but we have such fun considering we have a very bad subject you know the country is in trouble .
but were going to make it good you know a lot of people thought my speech was dark .
the -- the haters -- no only the haters we got great marks -- but the haters said well he did a good job , his delivery , everything was good but it was dark .
and i said , it was n't dark , i talk about radical islamic terrorism .
i talk about ...   i talk about drugs pouring across the border , i talk people coming in that are n't supposed to be here , i talk about crime , i talk about our police being shot , we love our police and we have to protect our police .
i talk about our veterans because our veterans are being treated horribly .
when you hear twenty - two suicides a day that 's inconceivable , twenty - two suicides a day .
our veterans are being treated horribly , were going to turn that around so fast your head is going to spin .
people ..   people waiting in line for 5 , 6 , 7 days , the veterans , our great people and that 's why maybe the lieutenant colonel did that .
i mean its such an amazing thing .
i -- he showed it me and i said , here thank you very much , here 's a -- no , mr. trump i want you to keep it .
i said , " keep it ? "
i mean these are incredible things that happen , these are incredible people that i meet .
and thinking about lieutenant colonel , thinking about our military -- our military is totally depleted , totally depleted .
our military is not being funded properly , we do n't have enough money going in .
we need a strong military , we need a powerful strong military .
when you look at what 's happening -- when you look at what 's happening around the world and when you look at the hatred , think of it , we are like the whipping post for many , many countries on trade , they kill us on trade .
but in every way they do n't respect us , china is building this massive , massive military complex in the south china sea .
they did n't get environmental impact statements by the way , they just ...   they said on monday morning were going to start building , and on monday afternoon they started , you knows that 's the way it works right ?
we would -- we could never do that because we would have to environmental impact statements -- would 30 years then they would reject it .
we do n't do things like that and you know that 's fine .
they 're not supposed it do it -- they 're not supposed to do it , they do n't respect us .
now very simply , we have tremendous power with china .
some of the top people in the world representing china have called me and one of them in particular , said " you know mr.
trump ?
i thought you were so wrong a year ago .
i heard your very strong rhetoric on trade with china and everything with china . "
and you have to understand china is great as far as i 'm concerned , i want to get along with china -- by the way would n't it be great if we got along with russia ?
would n't that be great ?
if we actually had a relationship with russia , instead of all the fighting and money and the problems and if we could get russia and others to partner up and go and knock the hell out of isis .
would n't that be a good thing ?
would n't that be a good thing ?
these people ...   these people are so obsolete .
you know these people , you know sometimes they 'll say oh could i have a list of your -- the people that you 're consulting with .
i said , " well you 're not going to like it because these are people that are n't involved currently."d. 
  well why are n't they involved currently ?
they said because look at the world , it 's a mess .
i do n't wanna use the people that are involved currently .
look at the world , it 's a mess .
look at what happened in the middle east .
look at what 's going on with north korea .
and look at what 's going on with -- we have a mess out there .
we have a total mess .
because i 'll give names that are better and they 'll say but these people have n't been involved and i said who wants the people that are currently involved ?
nothing 's working out .
nothings working out .
look at libya , look at syria , look at the migration , look at iraq , what a mess .
look at -- look at afghanistan , what a mess .
look at everything .
if we did n't do anything with iraq , if we never went there , if our presidents went to the beach we 'd be much better off .
if they just went every single day to the beach and took it easy , let obama go to the golf course .
but -- but you know what ?
we 'd be better off .
and then the way obama got us out of the war was a disaster .
we 're going to get out on a certain date .
the enemies sat back and they said nobody could say that , nobody .
actually , they thought it was a form of camouflage .
actually , they did n't believe it until it happened .
he actually said when they 're getting out .
but they laid back and then after we left you -- you see what 's happening .
so look , we have people that do n't know what they 're doing .
hillary clinton will be worse .
she 'll be worse .
ok ?
hillary clinton will be worse .
she has bad relationships with people like putin .
i 'll give you an example .
she has terrible relationships with putin .
this is a nuclear country we 're talking about .
russia , strong nuclear country .
and so are we .
but their stuff is newer .
their stuff is newer .
so she 's looking at -- they have more -- i do n't even want to say it -- they have a lot more , ok ?
so you know , she wants to play the tough one .
she 's not tough .
she 's not tough .
i know tough people , she 's not tough .
i mean she 's -- she 's just -- she 's doing the handlers , they push her from place to place that 's all it is .
you saw her speech the other night .
i mean they talk about presidential , do you think she looks presidential ?
i do n't think so .
i do n't think so .
so -- so you know , she wants to play the role of the tough guy against putin and russia and she wants to play not tough , not tough .
she should be tough on trade , ok ?
because right now we are being ripped off on trade like nobody has ever ripped us off in history .
you look at our trade deficits with china .
hundreds , i mean just take a look -- the numbers , five -- think of this .
five hundred and five billion dollars ?
look at our trade deficits total , more than $ 800 billion trade deficits coming out of this area , by the way .
coming out of the state of va and every place else .
i mean i 've gone through -- i won so many states .
and we won in landslides or i would n't be here .
look , if i did n't win , this system was not set up for somebody like me to come in and exert brains and common sense , ok ?
it was n't set up for that .
it 's set up for politicians .
and if i did n't win in massive landslides , i mean i won by a landslide .
got 14 million almost 14 million votes .
that 's more than anybody has ever gotten in the history of the republican party .
and remember ...   and that 's with 17 people .
people keep forgetting , that 's with 17 people and yet we had -- you know when ronald reagan who we loved .
but when other people ran , they 'd run against one or two people , or three people .
d. 
  and it 's a lot different .
seventeen people , we broke the all - time record .
i think we 're gon na do so great and i see some great polls .
i see one from -- from the los angeles times , just came out , where we 're ahead by four or five points .
i see one from cnn where we 're down .
i think these polls i do n't know there 's something about these polls .
there 's something phony .
you know i watch cnn , they are so negative all day long , it 's all trump all day long , and you know what their ratings are going down , and their ratings are going to start to go down big because i do n't do interviews for them .
they 're doing a big documentary on me now .
they have one problem : they need an interview from me , so let them do it without me , who cares .
but they 're very unfair .
all day long it 's negative .
in fact i have some great things that have happened , right ?
and they 'll cover it in a negative manner , so it sounds negative , great stuff .
great stuff .
even when i was winning -- i was winning by tremendous numbers , we had numerous people left , and i 'd get like 42 percent of the vote with many people , getting 42 percent is impossible .
i get 42 percent they say why has n't he hit 50 ?
i said well they 're 11 people , how do you get 50 .
you understand right ?
no , but cnn treats me so badly it 's unbelievable .
and you know what i do n't watch it anymore , i do n't watch .
you know you learn to live good , you learn to stay healthy , you learn to have a good common smart mind by turning off the negative does that make sense ?
turn it off , do n't fight it , turn it off .
just turn it off .
but cnn treats me so badly , i mean the new york times , which i call the failing new york times because it 's failing , it 's losing a fortune .
and it will be - i think it 's out of business in three years , maybe somebody 's going to buy it for a little while until they lose all that money , but they 'll buy it for a little while and they 'll keep it as - you know some rich guys going to buy it .
but the new york times , which is - it could do worse , i mean frankly that would n't be bad if somebody bought it -- but the new york times is failing badly .
they write stories that are so bad about me , and you know all my life i 've probably been on the cover of the times a few times , right ?
now if i have two stories or three stories a day on the cover - today i have two stories , both ridiculous stories - but today i have two stories -- for   the front page .
i mean i guess they use me to sell newspapers , but they are so dishonest .
the reporting is so dishonest .
i wo n't get into individual reporters names , because i 'd like to - i could tell you the good ones and the bad ones .
and they have a couple of good ones over there , but they are such a dishonest newspaper .
they want hillary clinton to win so badly they cry , they beg , they beg .
the editorials are unbelievable .
i mean here 's a woman who is a total thief , i mean she 's a crook , she 's a crook , and she lies more than any human being i 've ever seen .
and she 's got no gravitas , and by the way , she 's got a bad temperament .
she 's got a temperament of a loser .
i mean i 'm going to get the barack obama clips when he beat her .
eight years ago barack obama said things about her that were so bad , and today i just said , do me a favor look them up because i remember how bad .
now all of a sudden he 's supporting her .
and you know look it 's a hope , because she 's going to keep obamacare , she 's going to let people continue to pour into our country and we have no idea who the hell they are .
she 's going to let the syrian refugees come in and we do n't know if they 're isis , we have no idea .
it 's going to be the all time great trojan horse -- they come in by the thousands .
and she wants - hard to believe , actually it was funny -- i actually said it was 500 percent and the press said i was wrong , they said it was 550 .
you believe that ?
they actually even corrected me on that .
d. 
  but 550 percent more coming into the country that are coming in right now .
think of it .
so someday , it always happens , look at france , look at germany , look at what 's going on with people blowing themselves up in a bar .
with people shooting , look at paris , look what happened in paris , 130 dead , many , many people still in the hospital , they 'll never be - they 'll never be recovered -- never be recovered .
but you just take a look at what 's happened and you tell me that we have to be weak .
weak and ineffective and that we have to allow tens of thousands of people to pour into our country .
she wants 550 percent more people .
think of it , 550 percent more people coming in from that region that are coming in under barack obama .
and you know they 're put all over the country , you do n't even know where the hell they are .
so we 're going to have problems like you have never seen , mark my words , i 've been a very good prognosticator .
i 've called a lot of good things and bad things , but i 've called them .
but mark my words , you 're going to see some bad stuff .
we need strong borders .
we need strong borders .
we ca n't have people coming in from syria that have bad intentions and we do n't know who they are .
and if we do , we are really a very , foolish nation .
look at what 's happening with germany .
the crime wave over there -- merkel 's not going to be elected .
you know brexit , i predicted brexit .
remember ?
i was the only one .
so they were given a 20 percent chance in las vegas and the bookies over there , they were saying 20 percent chance .
i said i think it 's going to win .
i took such heat , remember ?
i took such heat .
i won and they gave me -- even though i won they all said bad things .
oh , they said i was grandstanding because i won .
i just -- they said who 's going to win ?
i said i think they 're going to pull out .
they 're going to pull out of the union , the u.k. is going to pull out of the union .
so i said , the european union .
so i said that 's going to happen .
and the reason is , i 'm there , i have a lot of property in the u.k. , great property , fantastic property - turnberry - i have so many great properties .
but you know what ?
i felt just -- i had a feel , and i 'm not there much , i may never it again .
if i win , i may never see my property -- i may never see these places   again .
but boy is eric and the kids going to have a good time , right ?
they 're going to have a good time .
but , because i 'm going to be working for you , i 'm not going to have time to go play golf and ...   believe me , folks .
but i had a feeling .
i said i think u.k. 's going for independence because they do n't want to have people pouring into their country that they do n't know where they are , who they are .
they have enough .
they have enough .
and they 've had enough .
and they voted and it was a shock .
and you know what , they 're better off .
and you watch , other countries in the european union are going to follow .
because they were forced to take people and now it 's getting to be catastrophic proportions .
and you watch what happens to angela merkel , who i always thought of as a very good leader , until she did this .
i do n't know what went wrong with her .
i do n't know what went wrong .
angela , what happened ?
what happened angela ?
and you take a look at what 's going on in germany , the real facts , ok .
i have friends that live in germany , for years they were so proud .
they were saying this is the country , donald , this is so great , this is the -- people now tell me they 're going to leave germany .
leave .
i said what are you talking about ?
we 're going to leave .
they take in millions of people and they do n't know anything about and what 's going on , you know the terms of what 's going on .
the women have heard all about what 's going on , ok ?
let me tell you folks , we are allowing thousands and thousands of people into our country .
i 've spoken to the best law enforcement people that we have , who are great people , and they said there 's no way to properly vet these people .
there 's no way .
d. 
  because we do n't know where they really come from , they have no paperwork so what they do is they make up paperwork .
everybody makes up paperwork .
remember when they stole our passport machine ?
remember ?
they have a passport machine that 's better than the stuff we have .
ok ?
these are smart people by the way .
this is not -- these are smart people .
these are very smart people .
and i have a bigger heart than anybody in this room or as big .
we wanna do safe zones in syria , i will get the gulf states who are not doing much , believe me .
the gulf states have nothing but money .
i 'm gon na get them to pay .
we are $ 19 trillion ; we 're not paying for it .
we 're not pay -- they 're gon na pay , they are gon na pay .
we are gon na get the gulf states to pay for it .
they 're gon na pay .
do n't forget , without us the gulf states wo n't exist .
they wo n't exist .
so we 're gon na get the gulf states to pay .
and we 're gon na be the smart country again .
but we 're not gon na let this happen , where all of a sudden our cafes start blowing up , our movie theaters start blowing up , full of people and all of the other things that you 've been seeing all over the world , i mean all over the world .
who would 've believed that horrible scene in nice , who would 've believed a think like that 's even possible ?
just driving a truck down , killing everybody , running all over everybody .
you know what they were screaming ?
they were screaming something that they always seem to scream ok ?
and i 'll tell you what , it 's not going to happen here .
we 're going to be very , very tough , and very , very smart .
and we can be , folks -- we can be the stupid people and we can be the politically correct people and guess what ?
we 're not gon na have much of a country left .
believe me , ok ?
so that we have to have it , so look .
stop   with   it .
you know a lot of bad numbers right ?
a lot of bad numbers .
hillary said she wants to keep it the same but she 's gon na change , you noticed she 's saying i wanna keep it the same but we got ta change .
first of all , she ca n't change .
she 's -- she 's been doing it for 30 years .
you know ii say if she wants to change , why did n't she change ?
she 's been doing this a long time .
her husband signed the worst trade deal in the history of the world , probably , and i really mean that , i 'm not exaggerating : nafta .
the worst -- now , they wanna do tpp , trans - pacific partnership .
it 's going to be as bad as nafta if not , worse .
numerous countries , documents that are 5,000 pages long .
our people have n't even read the documents , ok ?
i wanna do individual country , i like trade .
individual countries boom , boom , boom , if they do a bad job with us -- you have to see what this tpp looks like with the lines .
line , line , lines all over the place , looks like a jigsaw puzzle .
simple , simple deals are tough enough , complicated enough simple .
boom , individual countries .
we 're rewarding people that have treated us badly and they 're going in with people that have treated us well   meaning countries .
i want individual countries .
and if they do something bad or they devalue their currency so that our companies can compete because you 're losing all your jobs , i mean i just left pennsylvania , i just left ohio , i just -- i 'm going to be very soon in michigan .
upstate new york is a disaster area , i mean you look at these -- you look at these big , beautiful plants that are just rotting .
they 're just rotting .
i flew into harrisburg , pennsylvania yesterday and i looked down and i looked at -- it look like a war zone where you have these massive plants .
and you could see 25 years ago vibrance   -- families being taken care of , work , education , healthcare , people working .
it 's all in mexico , now .
the businesses have moved to mexico and other places .
but between china .
mexico , others , they 've taken our businesses .
vietnam , very big right now , really taking over .
i mean they 're doing a great job for them not for us .
vietnam 's a hot one right now , take a look .
d. 
  but we 're not gon na let that happen , we 're not gon na let it happen .
we 're gon na be smart .
when a company moves and wants to move as an example to mexico we 're gon na wish them luck .
but when they wanna sell their product back into this country we 're gon na say sorry but you have a 35 percent tax to pay to get your product back in and when we do that they 're not gon na move , they 're not moving .
they 're not going to move .
because we will have taken the " economics of moving " away from this country .
and i 've watched for years , i 've watched for years , more that just obama , i 've watched for a long period of time , president 's saying , and politicians saying how do we keep our companies , because they 're moving , they 're just leaving .
remember they did the low interest loans , they do n't need money .
they did all sorts of tax abatements .
they do n't want tax abatements .
i 'm doing the ultimate , i 'm saying you make a product outside of the country and when you leave and when you fire all of our people and you 're going to now make that product in -- as an example mex -- no , there are other places -- but when that product comes across the border you 're going to pay a 35 percent tax .
and here 's what 's going to happen .
for the most part they 're not going to move , ok .
i think very few are going to move , because you 've taken the whole point out .
but they 're not going to move .
number one very important , they 're not going to move , and if they do move , we 're going to make a fortune ok .
so it 's ok .
in fact sometimes you say please move , please move , we 'd like you to -- we 'd like you send plenty of product in here .
when china devalues it 's currency , they 're making it impossible for our companies to compete .
but china does n't want -- and i 'm very close china , i have the biggest bank in the world as a tenant of mine in new york , the biggest in the world a chinese bank .
do n't worry about that baby i love babies .
i love babies .
i hear that baby crying and i like -- i like it , what a baby .
what a beautiful baby , do n't worry , do n't worry .
the mom 's running around like -- do n't worry about it , you know .
it 's young and beautiful , and healthy and that 's what we want .
ok , but look -- look china , when they devalue -- when china devalues it 's currency they take our guts out .
and they do it so often , they do it so often .
they 're constantly devaluing their currency .
and they always wait until like it 's a bad time , like we have a problem with iraq , we have a problem with afghanistan , every time we have like a big problem they always devalue .
and a year and a half ago they devalued the biggest devaluation they 've done in 20 years .
the biggest in 20 years .
and i said man how do they get away -- but we had a problem -- we were doing other things , ok .
so when china does that we have fight back .
now here 's how you fight back , because we ca n't fight back any other way .
we have the piggy bank , they have ripped us to shreds , ripped us absolutely to shreds , actually i was only kidding you can get the baby out of here .
that 's all right , do n't worry .
i think she really believed me that i love having a baby crying while i 'm speaking , that 's ok .
people do n't understand , that 's ok .
but so you have a situation where a great country like china which is a massive -- which has really taken over now if you look .
you look at the numbers , you know a year ago they passed us .
if you would have said 10 years ago , 15 years ago that china would be passing us i would have said it 's absolutely -- anybody would have said it 's impossible .
we 've allowed them to pass us .
now when we have our manufacturers wanting to go to china , they ca n't get in , number one .
number two if they do get in they have to pay a massive tax .
when chinese companies want to sell to us , no tax , come on in fellas , we 're stupid , we 're stupid .
then they devalue .
d. 
  i had a friend , he was catching up with china , and he was really starting to compete .
he 's a very , very close   -- conscious guy , it was hard for him , but he 's a really good manufacturer , and then all of a sudden they did a massive devaluation -- boom -- and he 's back to ground one .
it 's like you know you take two steps forward , three steps back .
guess what happened to him ?
the guys phenomenal he ca n't get his product into china .
when he finally starts to be competitive , they devalued again .
and in tpp -- now china is not in tpp -- but it works the same thing with other countries .
their single greatest toom   is devaluation of the currency -- of their currency .
we do n't even have a clause in the agreement to cover it , okay ?
and because of the complexity -- 5,000 pages , nobody 's going to read it and if you want to get out you ca n't because there 's so many countries involved .
so i say " one , one , one , one , one -- you do 15 , you do 20 , you do what   everybody and if they do n't behave , meaning if they 're not good , if they take advantage of us we send them what we call a 30 day notice .
please be advised ...   please be advised we are hereby terminating your agreement with the united states of america .
because you cheated , you cheated .
you cheated on us and here 's what 's going to happen , now were are only dealing with one country .
we no longer have to worry about you know lets bring this country to the tribunal of all the others countries -- nice and simple folks it 's very complicated to start off with nice and simple .
so out of the 5,000 pages , i 'll bet we do n't have one politician in washington that 's read even a page .
and these other countries , smart as hell , smart countries by the way -- these are smart countries .
they 've read every word , every comma , every period , every paragraph , every sentence .
they did n't read obamacare , she 's right .
well there 's an example , thank you very much i was just about to say that .
no but obamacare is a great example .
obmacare was like 2,500 pages , not one politician read it and now were stuck with it .
but do n't worry were going to repeal it and replace it .
but were stuck with it .
it should have died a couple of times , it should have died by our supreme court except one of our republican presidents appointed a man , who kept obamacare going .
shockingly right ?
and not one legal scholar can figure it out .
it should have died the first time and it should have died the second time and we still have it .
and that was a republican appointee ok and speaking of appointees -- because there 's been a few beauties   -- speaking of appointees i am going to appoint great justices of the supreme court .
great .
and ...   you know i actually told a group , last night in pennsylvania , i told a group , i said -- and we had such a crowd , we had -- we had thousands of people -- like outside today .
i mean you do n't believe it , outside today , seriously we ca nt use these rooms anymore this is bigger than its ever been .
it 's a movement we have going -- we have a moment going -- but outside ...   and i told this group i said " this big , big " -- you know thousands of people i said " listen even if people do n't like me they have to vote for me . "
they have no choice -- even if you do n't -- and you do like me i hope but , i said " even if you ca nt stand donald trump , you think donald trump is the worst , you 're going to vote for me . "
you know why ?
justices of the supreme court if they pick -- if they pick judges , were going to end up with another venezuela except just a bigger version , its going to be a disaster for this country .
d. 
  and i 've already chosen 11 that were vetted and that are so good -- these are great justices .
federalist society looked at them , heritage looked at them , people that were -- are really highly respected and i 'm going to pick from that group and we already have one before we start , judge scalia .
and i want to get as many as i can in the mold of judge scalia because ...   that 's where we 're looking .
that 's where we 're looking , justice scalia , good man .
and who knew that was going to happen ?
that was a surprise , people kept talking about different names but they did n't think him .
and all of a sudden he 's gone .
that was shocking to people .
so you never know what 's going to happen .
and i 'll tell you , this could be the presidency with the most supreme court picks of any presidency in history .
you 'll probably have three , you could have four and you could even have five .
look , we have one before we even start , right ?
judge scalia .
but you could even have five and can you imagine if hillary clinton picks five super - libs because what she is , is she 's being pushed around by the bernie sanders crowd .
many of whom , are going to vote for us because of our trade policies , ok because they understand that trade is killing our country .
all right ?
so , i want to go over a couple of facts before i do though , i want to just say this .
look , we have a movement going .
this is beyond anything that anybody 's ever seen .
commentators are saying on television , people that hate me , are saying on television that they have never seen anything like this , they call it the phenomenon .
it 's a phenomenon .
they have never -- our crowds are much bigger than bernie 's were .
and bernie did good , bernie was second , i will say that .
far greater .
hillary , last night in harrisburg , where i had , i do n't know 12,000 people , we had to send away thousands .
hillary had 800 people , ok ?
now i do n't know what it means , i mean maybe it does n't mean anything .
i think it should mean something , i think it should mean something .
i mean when you have crowds that are many , many times the size of your opponent , i would think that it would mean something .
but we have these massive crowds .
i mean i felt so badly about when i went through and i 'm waving to everybody but they 're all standing out there and i feel guilty about it .
but here 's the story , we have a movement going , it 's an incredible movement .
it 's a movement like they say they 've never seen in this country before .
and i say it a lot because i have a lot of respect for him , bill o'reilly .
he said it 's the single greatest phenomenon .
he called it the trump phenomenon .
it 's the single greatest phenomenon , politically speaking , that he has ever seen in his lifetime .
i mean that 's -- you know , guy 's seen a lot of stuff , right ?
and bret baier said it .
bret baier , good guy , said it .
and brit hume who said it .
he does n't like me too much but he said that , or something similar .
and people have said this , that what we are doing is one of the great political phenomena of all time but very importantly , it 's one of the great movements of all time .
we 've got to finish it off .
we 've got to finish it off .
we 've got to beat ...   we 've got to beat a dishonest machine , totally dishonest machine .
you know as an example how hillary got away with what she got away with recently .
how do you get away with it ?
everybody thought , oh wow she 's guilty .
however , now what she got away with was a disgrace , honestly .
a disgrace to our country , but she got away with it .
and who would think that that could have happened ?
and then on top of it she lies on sunday saying , oh i was just actually fine .
i did everything fine .
and that was not said .
you know it was said , very embarrassingly .
nobody could believe that happened .
that whole thing was incredible , but we have to learn from it .
d. 
  it 's a crooked system .
it 's a rigged system .
we 're running against a rigged system and we 're running against a very dishonest media .
the media 's very dishonest .
it 's very , very dishonest .
what they do n't take -- patty smith -- when they do n't take pat , whose an unbelievable woman and they give her virtually no air time , and they give other people unbelievable amounts of air .
it 's just so unfair , it 's so unfair , we 're running against a rigged press .
we 're running against dishonest people .
ok , really dishonest people .
and -- and hey look it was rigged against bernie sanders , you could see that from all of those emails .
debbie wasserman schultz , no no , but you could see it , it was a rigged deal .
he never had a chance , the guy works so hard , and now he 's got buyers remorse .
you know you look at him , if he would have done nothing , if he would have just gone home and gone to sleep he would have been so -- because he made a deal with the devil , he made a deal with the devil .
and he made a bad deal , and then she picks a vice president that 's the exact opposite of everything that bernie represents .
now i do n't agree with what bernie represents , but i mean , honestly , it was almost 50 percent of their party .
you would have thought she would have given him a little bit of a bone .
she gave him nothing , she gave him nothing .
so we have to get everybody out , loudon county is so important .
and really i 'm a big employer here , i 'm a big , big employer here .
and -- and everybody in this room -- everybody in this room knows how great that project is and how successful it 's been because many of you -- whose been there , how many people have been there ?
it 's one of the great projects in the country , all along the potomac river , one of the great -- thank you -- one of the great projects in the country .
so let 's go over a couple of numbers because you have to see this to really believe it .
and by the way , hillary clinton has not had a news conference i think it 's in 242 days .
she does n't do news conferences because she ca n't .
because for a number of reasons , but number one she 's so dishonest , she does n't want the people peppering her with questions , so she does n't do news conferences , it 's a disgrace .
i think it 's 242 days , you know what that is -- and she probably wo n't have one , maybe she wo n't have one .
maybe we 'll force her to have one , but she probably wo n't have one .
so listen , since 2000 the number of unemployed people in virginia has doubled .
now these are right out of the book so , statisticians ok .
virginia has lost one in three manufacturing jobs since bill clinton signed nafta .
signed by bill clinton , one of the worst ever , ok .
hillary rammed through the job killing trade deal with south korea in 2011 .
that south korean deal is a disaster for us .
but look at the people that give her money , and look how their involved in that deal .
the us trade deficit with tpp members --- these are the members going into the trans - pacific partnership , which obama wants , which hillary wanted , she called it the gold standard , but when she heard me talking about it she said she did n't want it .
but as you 're governor said , terry mcauliffe , governor of virginia , he said do n't worry , do n't worry , let her get elected and she 'll approve it .
she 'll make a couple of minor changes , she 'll approve it .
d. 
  this was said , then they backpedaled , well he does n't speak -- let me tell you terry mcauliffe knows her better than bill knows her .
terry knows her better than anybody , your governor , he made this statement .
ok , all right , so here 's a couple of things that are just sort of amazing .
president obama has doubled the national debt since he 's been in office .
u.s. trade deficit in goods reached nearly $ 800 billion .
in other words , we trade with people .
you know , it 's funny when i want to make good trade deals the press says oh , he 's not a free trader .
i 'm a great free trader .
i like free trade .
but i like smart deals .
somebody said well , then what do you call yourself ?
because i know free trade , i know fair trade , i know every form of trade ever thought up by man .
believe me , it 's meaningless .
so they said what are your policies ?
i said my policies are very simple , i wanna make great deals for our country ok ?
very simple .
you can call it fair trade , free trade or any other of the other 10 ten names .
i want great deals for our country .
and i was endorsed by carl icahn some of the greatest business leaders in the world .
and we have to use our great business people to negotiate the deals .
because we 're using political hacks to make deals and it 's a joke .
the chinese people look at us like we are the dumbest people .
they are using their smartest , their brightest from the time they 're three years old , you know they have like a pyramid , right ?
boom , boom , boom , they use the guys right on the top .
and they walk in and deal with our clowns and they say i ca n't believe we 've gotten away with this .
for years and years and years , we 've rebuilt china with our trade .
we 've rebuilt china .
we have so much power over china and if they do n't behave we throw a 10 percent tax on goods coming in from china .
we will make a fortune .
and you know what ?
they 're gon na send the same goods .
then what are they going to say , we 're not gon na send because we 're not gon na pay a 10 percent tax ?
but when they raise their currency -- when they do things with their currency , they manipulate .
and they knock out their currency .
and they devalue their currency and they do all their masters , they 're grand masters at currency and a currency manipulation .
we have the ultimate -- we say thank you very much .
now , just so you understand , when we send things to china they charge us a tax .
so people would say donald trump is not a free trader .
i 'm a free trader .
but it 's got ta be a two - way street , right ?
i mean it 's got ta be a two - way street .
they 're killing us .
$ 23.8 million americans in their prime earning years are out of the labor force right now .
in the last seven years , another 14 million people have left the workforce ok ?
nearly 4 in 10 african american children are living in poverty while 58 percent of african american youth are not employed , ok ?
two million more latinos are in poverty today than when president obama took office .
now , thank you , thank you , thank you , thank you .
we 're gon na bring jobs back .
thank you , that 's very nice .
we 're gon na bring jobs back .
that 's why we had a very good poll recently with the hispanics .
and it was an amazing poll .
and you know -- way up from what people thought .
because people want jobs .
and by the way , the latinas , the hispanics , they do n't want -- and you understand this , they do n't want people pouring into our country taking their jobs , taking their houses .
they want -- they wanna have security , they really want the wall .
they want the wall .
we 're gon na have a strong border and we 're going have the wall .
we 're going have the wall .
oh we 're going build a wall , do n't even think about it .
we 're going build a wall and you know -- you know and i say it and i mean it , mexico 's paying for the wall folks .
you know , if mexico wanted to , they could stop all of the problems that are coming into our country , including the drugs .
new hampshire -- which i won -- i got to know the people so well up there .
what 's your number one problem ?
heroin coming from the southern border .
and i said does n't make sense , you go to south carolina , north carolina .
no matter where .
here , you go no matter where , we have drugs pouring into our country .
we could stop it .
you see , our politicians do n't wanna stop it because there are people out there that make a lot of money with that and they take care of the politicians .
they do n't wanna stop it .
they could stop it .
but mexico could stop it , without even us , 16,500 border patrol agents endorsed me recently , ok ?
sheriff joe , endorsed me .
sheriff joe arpaio .
from arizona , which is great .
we 're gon na get it going .
but we 're gon na build a wall , mexico 's gon na pay for the wall and some politician came up to me .
number one , you ca n't build a wall .
i said really , china just build a 13 -- 2,000 years ago -- built a 13,000 --- china built a 13,000 mile long 2,000 years ago .
we have 1,000 miles that we need .
it 's 2,000 miles but we need 1,000 you have natural barriers .
we need 1,000 miles .
so china can do 13,000 mils 2,000 years ago -- and that 's the serious wall by the way in case anybody has n't seen it .
and we ca n't do -- we ca n't do a wall that 's 1,000 miles and we have caterpillar tractors .
and we 're gon na use caterpillar , by the way .
we 're not going with komatsu .
we 're not going with komatsu .
so here is one of the most depressing stats .
according to the second quarter gdp report , you saw this yesterday , the economy only grew at 1.2 percent .
this is the third straight quarter that the economy has grown under two percent and is the single weakest -- weakest of any economic expansion in more than 70 years .
so we have the weakest expansion in 70 years and it 's going back -- now it 's going down because the numbers are getting worse and worse all the time .
if they get real bad i hope it happens fast so i do n't have to -- they 'll all blame me .
you 'll end up winning and your first day the economy crashes because of some incompetent people before me well , we 're gon na straighten up .
but we 'll certainly blame them .
ok , we 're going to blame them .
no but think of it , the weakest in 70 years , 70 years .
i mean it 's terrible .
now , here 's another one .
u.s. home ownership , the rate fell , of ownership , to 62.9 percent in the second quarter .
the lowest rate of home ownership in more than 50 years , terrible .
did hillary mention any of these facts in her optimistic speech ?
ok and we 're not talking about the shooting of the police which by the way is at massive levels , massive levels .
we 're not talking about crime .
in major cities , our crime is going through the roof .
you look at what 's going on in some of these cities , crime is up numbers that you would n't even believe .
they do n't talk about that , they talk about how everything 's wonderful .
look , with hillary you 're gon na have four more years of obama and you know what ?
if you have four more years of obama our countries finished .
it 's finished .
here 's one that 's an amazing -- here 's one that 's amazing .
household incomes are more than $ 4,000 lower than their levels in the year 2000 .
think of it , household -- you 're making $ 4,000 less now than you did 16 , 17 years ago .
d. 
  another one that 's very common and out there , people -- many people in this room -- but people are making , in terms of real wages , less money today than they made 18 years ago .
and they 're working two jobs in many cases and that 's because of obamacare .
because obamacare , it makes sense for employees to do part time workers .
so you 'll have a worker who 's worked at a company for years and all of a sudden the boss goes up to him to say i hate to do it , with tears , and says i 've got to make you a part time employee .
because of obamacare .
its forced people to be part time employees .
it 's a horrible thing that 's going on in this country .
and you did n't hear that in hillary clinton 's speech .
you did n't hear that , you did n't hear that .
you heard all is slowing stuff .
it 's a disaster .
and then when you look at other countries , how they 've built up their military -- look at russia .
how they 've built up their military .
take a look at what they 've done .
take a look at what they 've done on the nuclear weapons front .
how they built up their military and how we 're so far behind and our equipment is obsolete in many cases , and we have jet fighters that are so old that they have to go to graveyards , airplane graveyards and museums to get parts for current jet fighters .
and we have our pilots , our wonderful , incredible pilots saying it did n't use to be this way .
and now they 're older and they 're going to leave and they 're going to retire and they do n't want to stay .
they 're so depressed at what 's happened .
but they 're fighting , you saw the report , you probably all saw it .
they had documentaries on television about how old our aircraft is in our services .
and you have other countries , you look at china , what they 're doing with their massive , with their massive installations that they 're building in oceans .
south china sea , massive , we would never even think about it .
no , we 've got to get smart folks , we 've got to get smart .
we 're falling way behind .
we 're falling .
and i can keep reading this stuff , it 's just point after point , you 're doing lousy over here by the way , hate to tell you , but point here 's recent factory closings in virginia , all right ?
right ?
kennametal , ball corporation , closed .
kennametal closed .
sandvik closed .
moved their jobs to mexico .
let 's see , mexico , mexico , mexico , mexico , yes .
smith foods inc. closed its plant , 400 workers gone .
anybody used to work for smithfield ?
that 's true .
i -- it 's true .
stanley furniture closed its plant in vista .
laid off 400 workers , closed its plant .
moved their jobs to china and canada .
north carolina has lost so many jobs .
pennsylvania has lost tremendous numbers of jobs .
ohio has lost 34 percent of their manufacturing jobs since china 's entrance into the world trade organization .
folks , what are we doing ?
what are we doing ?
are we -- we 're being led by stupid people , folks .
and people that are controlled .
people that are controlled by special interests and lobbyists so here 's the story .
so we 've got to build up our military , we 've got to make great trade deals .
i told you that no more , when our companies leave , they want to -- they think they 're going to leave and sell us back - product from a different company with other employees from other nations , not going to happen .
not going to happen .
i mean it 's going to happen , but they 're going to pay for it .
there 's going to be consequence .
they 're going to pay a tax , very simple .
now a lot of people think i 'm not conservative because i want them to pay a tax .
i think they 're not conservative because they 're stupid .
d. 
  ok , they 're stupid .
and by the way , it 's 100 percent foolproof .
we 're not talking about oh , maybe it will work .
can you imagine they used to go around and offer companies loans ?
and its not even funny .
we 'll give you an interest free loan if you stay .
and a couple of companies took the money and then left because they forgot to say you had to stay .
the lawyers did n't do too good a job .
but look , look , we have to be the smart people again .
we have to be -- and we do n't have much of a choice because we are losing so many of our jobs and we ca n't take our factories and keep taking our factories and converting them into nursing homes .
you know nursing homes are wonderful , but we have to make things again .
we need jobs , we need jobs .
it 's wonderful .
nursing homes is wonderful .
but we need jobs .
i see things happen where there 's a couple of beautiful jobs up in new england , they 've taken an old factory , they 've converted it into -- and it 's all fine .
but we ca n't do that .
we need manufacturing jobs .
we need the income , we need the productivity , we need the future .
we -- as you stand here right now , there are companies negotiating from virginia , right here .
they 're negotiating to leave virginia and move to mexico and other places , as you stand here .
some of the people in this room work for companies that are right now under negotiation to get out .
if i get in , that ends .
hillary wo n't do anything about it , she talks , she knows her way now , she 's talking about trade .
did you notice two days ago she said , i 've been talking about , we 're going to re - negotiate nafta .
and if they do n't give us a great deal and if we do n't re- negotiate a great deal , we 're terminating nafta , we 're getting out and we 'll bring our jobs back a different way , ok ?
so ...   the other day , now that was like , a horrible thing to say .
two days ago , hillary clinton said , we are going to start re - negotiating our trade deals .
she ca n't do it .
number one , if she wanted to she can , but they would n't let her .
those people that put up all that money for her , those 20 people and there 's plenty of more of them , they wo n't let her do it .
she ca n't do it , if she wanted to , she ca n't do it .
so she 's just kidding all of you .
so we 're going to make america great again .
we 're going to build up our military , so depleted .
we 're going to take care of our veterans , who have been treated horribly .
we 're going to make phenomenal trade deals , we 're going to make trade deals that bring jobs back , not trade deals where we lose our businesses and our jobs .
we 're going to have strong borders , we 're going to have the wall , mexico 's going to pay for the wall , and we 're going to have people come into our country but they 're going to come into our country legally , legally .
we 're going to appoint great justices of the united states supreme court .
we 're going to repeal and replace obamacare .
we are going to save our second amendment , which is under siege .
and we 're going to start winning again , folks .
we 're going to win on every front .
i want to thank everybody in loudoun county , i love this place , i 'm here a lot .
i want to thank everybody .
i want to thank everybody in the state of virginia .
virginia , we are going to be here so much you 're going to be so sick of me , you 're going to say , please keep him out of here , we 'll vote for you , but please keep him out .
i 'm going to be in virginia a lot , we 're going to be here a lot .
and just so you know , we are going to be proud of our country again .
we 're going to put america first .
we are going to start winning again .
we are going to make america great again .
thank you very much , thank you folks .
thank you very much .
take care everybody .
thank you .
it is so great to be here in pueblo , colorado .
we love pueblo .
and those two gentlemen are amazing men and i want to thank them for being with us .
you know , pueblo 's called " home of the heroes " ; did you know that ?
because of your proud tradition of military service .
pueblo 's the home of four medal of honor recipients , and i just got the endorsement of 19 , all together -- 19 .
so when you have 19 , that 's pretty good .
but you have four , which is amazing .
and as president eisenhower said , " there must be something in the water " out here in pueblo , because all of you guys turn out to be heroes .
what 's going on ?
what 's going on ?
is there something in the water ?
give me some of that water .
colorado his home to six military bases .
we 're going to eliminate the defense sequester and rebuild our military .
we 're going to strengthen it ; we 're going to make it truly , truly strong again .
another great colorado legacy is hunting and fishing .
my sons know that very well ; they 're here all the time .
we 're going to conserve your land for the future generations and we 're going to save your second amendment , which is under siege .
we 've got a lot of people in this room .
this is very impressive .
thank you .
thank you .
it 's a great honor .
it 's a great honor .
one other issue of such great importance in colorado is energy .
crooked hillary clinton wants to shut down the mines , and shut down shale , and shut down oil and natural gas , and we 're going to end the war on american energy and we are going to put the miners back to work .
they have to be put back to work .
i 've also made a centerpiece of my economic revitalization plan , the largest middle - class tax cut since ronald reagan and the largest regulatory reform in american history .
we 're going to do that .
and hillary clinton is going to increase your taxes very , very substantially , and she admits it .
at least she admits it .
but that because i know how overtaxed and overregulated the working people and companies in this country are .
a central issue i would like to address today is our broken tax code -- an issue of concern to all americans .
along with securing our borders , rebuilding our military , keeping us safe from terrorism , redoing our trade deals and bringing back jobs -- and they 're sort of one in the same .
fixing our broken tax code is one of the main reasons i 'm running for president .
i 've been saying from the beginning of this campaign how ridiculous , complex and , yes , unfair the tax system is .
it is an unfair system , and so complex that very few people understand it .
fortunately , i understand it .
this is not the fault of the irs , but the political class that is owned outright by the special interests and lobbyists , believe me .
it 's these politicians who wrote the tax code and who are constantly adding , revising and changing an already overcomplicated set of laws , all at the behest of their favorite donors and special interests who want certain provisions put in and they wo n't take no for an answer .
it 's thousands of pages long and almost no one understands it .
the average american would need an army of accountants and lawyers to wade through -- and wade through it .
many so - called experts , due to their sheer size and complexity of the code , do n't have a clue what these pages represent .
these are experts -- they get payed and they do n't even know what it represents .
the unfairness of the tax laws is unbelievable .
it 's something i 've been talking about for a long time , despite , frankly , being a big beneficiary of the laws .
but i 'm working for you now ; i 'm not working for trump .
believe me .
i understand the tax laws better than almost anyone , which is why i am one who can truly fix them .
i understand it .
i get it .
and that is what i commit to do .
we want fairness , we want money brought in , and we want money to be spent when it goes out because they spend our tax dollars so unfairly and unwisely ; remember that .
as a businessman and real estate developer , i have legally used the tax laws to my benefit , and to the benefit of my company , my investors and my employees .
i mean , honestly , i have brilliantly -- i have brilliantly used those laws .
i have often said on the campaign trail that i have a fiduciary responsibility to pay no more tax than is legally required , like anybody else , or --   -- put another way , to pay as little tax as legally possible .
and i must tell you , i hate the way they spend our tax dollars .
and , believe me , that makes a difference .
as a major real estate developer in this country , and throughout the world , i face enormous taxes -- city taxes , state taxes , sales taxes , excise taxes , employee taxes , federal taxes , vat taxes -- different countries .
it 's my job to minimize the overall tax burden to the greatest extent possible , which allows me to reinvest in neighborhoods , in workers , and build amazing properties which fuel tremendous growth in their communities , and always help our great providers of jobs , and we have to help our small businesses .
what it 's all about .
it 's what it 's all about .
the news media is now obsessed with an alleged tax filing from the 1990s , at the end of one of the most brutal economic downturns in our country 's history , if you remember the early 90s .
other than , i would say , 1928 , there was nothing even close .
the conditions facing real estate developers in that early 90s period were almost as bad as the great depression of 1929 , and far worse than the great recession of 2008 -- not even close .
what had been a booming economy in the year of ronald reagan , changed dramatically , and the business landscape changed with it .
bank failures and collapse , the absolute , total destruction of the savings and loan industry , and the implosion of the retail market and real estate in general , something we 've never seen anything like it .
many businesspeople , including many of my competitors and some of my friends , were not able to survive .
companies , jobs and opportunities were lost and lives were destroyed as tens of thousands of people were put out of work .
some of the biggest and strongest people and companies went absolutely bankrupt -- which i never did , by the way .
are you proud of me ?
i would have loved to use that card , but i just did n't want to do it .
thank you .
yet , today , my company is bigger , stronger , far greater assets than it 's ever had before ; more premium properties .
we 've never done better .
it 's the strongest we 've ever been and we employ thousands of people , and over the years have employed thousands and thousands of people , which is a thing that , frankly , makes me most happy .
that did not happen by chance or luck .
it happened by action and talent .
a lot of talent .
i was able to use the tax laws of this country , and my business acumen , to dig out of the real estate mess -- you would call it a depression -- when few others were able to do what i did .
and those most -- 

  i 'm a star .
thank you ; you are too .
oh , they were amazing times .
in those most difficult times , when so many had their backs to the wall , i reached within myself and delivered for my company , my employees , my family , and the communities where my properties existed -- and i really delivered .
those who spend their lives within the confines of government work , and who know virtually nothing of business , fail to understand the skill , dedication , the sheer grit it takes for a company to climb out of an economic depression of the scale we had in the early 90s .
people like my opponent , hillary clinton , whose only -- 


  thank you , darling .
and i 'm praying for you and i love you .
great people .
now i get the whole hero thing .
now i get it .
but that is why i have left private business to go into public life .
if you would have ever told me that i was going to be doing this -- now , had i known i was going to be doing this , i would have commenced with certain television interviews , radio interviews .
i would have said things slightly differently .
and i would n't have had a good a time in life and as much fun in life , but it would have made my life as a politician a little bit easier , right ?
and , you know , these people -- holier than thou .
they never say anything around the breakfast room table , do they ?
they never -- they never do .
bill and hillary never say anything like this around the -- can you imagine what they say ?
well , they talk about deplorables and irredeemables , right ?
they talk about that .
you 're deplorable .
you 're irredeemable .
i think irredeemable might be worse , if you think -- everyone talks about -- deplorable .
these are the greatest people in this room , and many other rooms like it .
we 've seen hundreds of thousands of people .
these are the greatest people .
and , really , importantly , we 're going to make it great for all of the people .
it 's not my people , or people that are voting for me .
we 're going to make it great for all of our people in this country .
but i 'm doing this , and i 'm doing it for a very specific reason : because i understand our country is in very , very bad shape .
that 's all right .
sounds like a nice person .
oh , oh -- i thought that was the commission on presidential debates that was working .
i said " i did n't know they were here . "
you know , when they were playing with the mic -- back , forth -- i thought that was the commission .
those -- that 's a beautiful commission .
let 's see what happens on sunday again .
my biggest opponent was the microphone .
and now our country is in need of a major comeback .
it needs one now , just about more than ever .
we owe $ 20 trillion in debt , doubled during obama 's period as president .
doubled .
think about it .
but that 's only part of the story .
we have over $ 100 trillion in unfunded liabilities and we have a budget that 's out of control with annual deficits .
in addition , because of the incompetence of our leaders , we run massive trade deficits on an annual basis .
i 'll get bernie to negotiate a couple of these trade deals .
you 'll find out .
and we now have almost $ 800 billion a year in trade deficits .
and you say to yourself " who are these people negotiating our deals ? "
our country is broke .
it 's broke .
and the worst part is that , with all of the money we spend so foolishly all over the world -- stupidly all over the world -- we protect other countries with tremendous -- i mean , tremendous losses .
and we want to protect countries , but they should pay us the proper amount .
why should we be losing money ?
but , think of it .
with all of the money that we spend , and with $ 20 trillion in debt , and all of the things we do , and all of the talk , and all of the political nonsense , we have a decaying infrastructure , we have failing schools , we have rising crime , we have a depleted military -- our great people -- and a depleted military .
we have planes that are so old , they go to airplane graveyards to take out parts .
they go to museums to take out parts because they do n't make the parts anymore .
we have an open border .
we have an economy that ca n't create full - time , high - paying jobs , because our jobs -- our great jobs -- many of them have been -- have been taken .
and we will build the wall .
do n't worry , we 're going to build the wall .
we 're going to build the wall .
we 're going to build the wall .
we 're going to build the wall .
we 're going to build the wall , mexico 's going to pay for the wall .
they do n't know it yet , but they 're going to pay for the wall .
and you have a tremendous problem right here , but we 're going to have drugs stop pouring into our country , destroying our youth , poisoning our people -- poisoning our people .
we 're a divided nation , and each week it seems we 're getting more and more divided with race riots on our streets on a monthly basis .
now , somebody said do n't call them race riots , but that 's what they are .
they 're race riots .
and it 's happening more and more .
you looked at charlotte -- a great city where i have property .
a great city .
you look at different places our country -- st. louis , ferguson , baltimore , chicago .
in chicago , thousands of shootings -- thousands since january 1st .
four thousand shootings .
think of it .
since january ?
this is not the america that was handed down to us , and it 's not the america that we want to leave to our children .
and it 's certainly not the america we want to pass down to our grandchildren .
but this is the america we will have if we do n't turn things around starting immediately .
we do n't have much time , folks .
we do n't have much time .
and if we do n't win this election , it will never happen again .
this opportunity is never going to happen again .
what i say is not lost on the american people because 70 percent of you believe our country is headed in the wrong direction .
and i 'm trying to figure out who the other 30 percent are .
i want to meet them .
we can not have another four years of barack obama .
and hillary clinton will be worse .
she will be worse .
we can turn our country around .
but if we do n't make a change in leadership right now , it 'll never happen .
the failed political establishment must go .
it must go for the sake of your country , your future , and those you love the most .
in the early 90s , the splashed the front pages with stories about how donald trump -- me -- they said i was finished .
everybody said that i was done .
there were front page articles in the wall street journal and the new york times , among many others .
they were thrilled and delighted .
and i 'm still here .
can you believe these people ?
they must be going -- they 're going crazy .
can you believe ?
the wall street journal and the new york times ; they are going crazy .
they say -- 1990s -- and now , here i am still .
they 're saying " can we ever get rid of this guy ? "
but they were thrilled to write these negative stories .
so they said i was finished .
the only person who did n't think that i was in trouble was a guy named donald j. trump .
i did n't think i was in trouble .
i sort of did n't know what they were talking about .
does that make sense ?
power of positive thinking , but i did n't know what they were talking about .
i started my company with a small loan , and , as i grew , i borrowed money to grow the company .
and -- big money from big banks .
when the bottom fell out of the real estate market , i had this large amount of debt .
and it stayed the same but the value of assets plummeted .
so you have to learn .
i was young and you have to learn .
and i learned .
and i worked really hard .
but i knew how to use the tax code to rebuild my company when others did n't .
i knew how to understand -- and i fully understood the banks and the bankers and how to deal with them .
i knew a lot .
but my understanding of the tax code gave me a tremendous advantage over those who did n't have a clue about it , including many of my competitors , who lost everything they had , never to be heard from again -- never -- they were never heard from again .
some people that i knew -- they were good , they were doing a good job -- never , ever to be heard from again .
now they 're gone and i 'm here and i 'm ready to turn things around for our country .
i 'm going to do it .
the early 90s was a very tough time for the world .
but in tough times , you need very tough and very smart people .
these are tough times for america .
and , i will tell you , we need very tough and very smart leadership .
not people who tell you what you want to hear , but people who tell you what you need to hear .
we must never allow corrupt , career politicians like the clintons ever back into the white house again .
these tough times were when i performed my very best .
the economy and banks ; they were collapsing .
the government was a mess .
but i enjoyed waking up every day to go to battle -- and that 's what it was for three years .
i had an expression in the early 90s : " survive until ' 95 and you 'll be okay . "
and then people copied it -- survive until ' 95 .
i enjoyed getting up every morning to take on the financial establishment on behalf of my company , my employees , my family and myself , and win ; and that 's what we did .
i won .
i won and i kept on winning .
until this day , i kept on winning .
all you have to do is ask all of the 17 people that we competed against and you 'll ask them " how did trump do ? "
they 'll say " he won . "
but that 's the thinking we need for our country .
that 's the thinking we need when we 're negotiating trade deals , which are horrible ; and military deals ; and economic deals on behalf of the american people .
we need great people negotiating our deals for us .
we have the greatest negotiators and the greatest business people in the world , and we use political hacks to negotiate our deals .
not anymore we 're not .
not anymore .
put me into the board room as your representatives and i promise i will deliver .
hillary clinton is in it only for herself , her donors , and her special interests .
i 'm fighting for america .
many people -- many people have said over the years that i perform better under pressure than anyone they 've ever seen .
i 've proven that over and over again .
and that 's what i do , and that 's what we have to do right now because our country is under tremendous pressure .
when the pressure is on ; when the odds are stacked against me and you , because many of you people are the same way .
when people say " it ca n't be done " , that 's when we just get started .
we 're going to change things around .
the thing that motivates me the most is when people tell me something is absolutely impossible .
for me , impossible is just a starting point .
that 's when you begin .
and , remember , with $ 20 trillion in debt and $ 100 trillion in unfunded liabilities -- a lot of people say it 's impossible .
we 're sitting on a big , fat , ugly bubble .
our fed to raise interest rates , because when those interest rates go , you watch what 's going to happen .
it 's going to be very unattractive .
he 'll be out playing golf someplace .
but , you know what ?
they 're wrong in what they 're doing and it 's unfair to the people ; it 's unfair to the country ; and they 're so wrong .
from the depths of that terrible real estate depression , i created a company worth billions and billions of dollars , and created tens of thousands of jobs .
our company -- our employees -- we -- we 've made -- i mean , we actually remade skylines together , revitalized neighborhoods , rejuvenated communities , and hired thousands and thousands of workers .
on november 8th , america 's comeback begins , and we need a comeback .
and we are going to rise up from our present challenges bigger , and better , and stronger than ever before .
a lot of people said " why are you going to pueblo ? "
i said , number one , i like the state -- number one , everything about pueblo says winner , including what dwight eisenhower said long ago .
and they said , " well , do you think they 'll like you in pueblo ? "
i said , " i think so . "
they said --   they said , " well you have a lot of hispanics / latinos in pueblo . "
and i said " i think that 's why they are going to like me , actually .
that 's why they 're going to like me .
believe me .
when you look at what 's happening with the african- american community ; when you look at what 's happening with hispanic community -- very , very unfair .
very , very unfair .
thank you .
and , as americans , you 're entitled to the same protections as every other american gets .
everyone living lawfully inside our borders are entitled to the same things : safe communities , a great education , and access to high - paying jobs and really good jobs .
and this is n't happening .
this is the change that i will deliver .
hillary clinton has been there for 30 years delivering nothing but talk and failure .
you know , the other night when we were at the debate , i noticed more than ever before -- we 're at the debate and she 's saying she 's going to do this , or this , or this , and that .
and i said to myself , " why has n't she been doing it for 30 years ?
right ?
just talk .
her policies have brought death and destruction overseas and poverty at home .
she 's brought massive poverty for everyone , but especially for african american and latino citizens .
she comes in , tries to get their vote -- although , i must tell you , the enthusiasm for her is very small .
don king , the great boxing promoter who endorsed me , said " donald , the african americans , donald , love you . "
don king -- big don .
and here 's a man , whether you like him or not , that 's a smart cookie , a tough cookie , and he 's done a job -- he 's done a job .
but he said " you are going to see a big surprise on november 8th with -- and in this case he was talking about the african americans .
he said " you 're going to see a big surprise because so many african american people love you and they want you to really help them out in terms of the inner cities , in particular , where it 's so dangerous ; where education is so bad ; where jobs are non - existent ; where youth can not get jobs . "
so i want to thank don king and so many others for their endorsement .
we had so many others -- so many reverends and pastors , bishop jackson from detroit -- incredible people ; darrell scott -- pastor darrell scott .
so many and i 'm so honored by it .
and , believe me , i am honored by it .
and don said that hillary clinton takes the african american vote for granted .
here 's the bad news : i do n't think they 're going to want to go out and vote for her .
this is not barack obama where they really had spirit to vote for him .
nobody has spirit -- remember , she called african american males youth super - predators ?
who wants to vote for her ; she 's not going to do the job anyway .
she opposes school choice and she wants to trap african american and latino children into the failing government schools because she 's getting a lot of money from the teachers ' unions .
so she does n't want to have choice and she does n't want to end common core so we can bring education locally , which is very important .
she does n't want to do that .
we 're going to get poor , minority --   i 'm telling you -- i 'm telling you , the commission on presidential debates is operating this microphone .
every time the secret service hears that sound , they go " woah . "
no , that commission on presidential debates -- what a joke they are .
i 've got to go through them on sunday not again ?
and , by the way , mike pence on tuesday night -- he has been fantastic .
governor mike pence .
what a fantastic guy .
tuesday night .
tuesday night .
we are going to get poor , minority children out of failing schools and into the public , private , charter , or magnet school of their choice .
it 's going to be a big .
i 'll tell you , the latino children , the african american children -- it 's going to be some difference , believe me -- some difference .
hillary clinton supports obamacare and wants to expand it .
and obamacare is an absolute disaster .
how much have they raised your premiums   -- double ?
double .
how about triple ; quadruple ?
it 's horrible and it 's going to die of its own weight , but we 're going to -- we are going to terminated it and we are going to replace it , and it will be so much better and so much less expensive .
premiums in colorado are set to go up another 20 percent .
the only way to stop this disaster is to vote for trump .
i 'm telling you .
they 'll be going down .
hillary clinton also supports the terrible trade deals like bill clinton 's nafta and china 's entry into the world trade organization .
and , next , she wants to support trans pacific partnership -- the deal she calls the gold standard --   -- that she lied to during the debate .
she said she never called it the gold standard , and lester holt kept questioning me on everything , but he never questioned her on that , right ?
and it turned out to be a lie .
she called it the gold standard and she will approve if she gets in .
but if she gets in , you people have made one bad mistake , i can tell you .
colorado has lost more than one in seven manufacturing jobs since nafta and china deals .
but , while you 've lost out , hillary clinton has raked in cash from her contributors .
she and bill have made $ 150 million in speeches -- and she 's a bad speaker --   -- to special interests .
they gave 39 speeches to big banks , including $ 2 million in speaking fees from goldman sachs .
the clintons received another $ 2 million from a swiss bank after hillary negotiated a favorable settlement for them as secretary of state .
to hide her corruption , hillary clinton puts her emails on an illegal secret server , open to foreign hacking .
then she deleted and bleached 33,000 emails , after a congressional subpoena , to hide them from the public .
she lies to congress under oath and her ringleaders took the fifth amendment and got immunity deals .
explain that one .
in so many ways it 's worse than watergate .
the investigation of hillary clinton was rigged and it 's a shame .
and it 's one of the saddest things that have ever taken place in our nation , believe me , what 's gone on .
we 've become a banana republic .
you know what ?
we have .
now , today , we learned that the fbi made a side deal with clinton 's top aides to destroy their laptops .
did you know this ?
let me repeat , the fbi reportedly made a deal to destroy the laptops of government officials implicated in a massive criminal cover - up .
i think you have a lot of great people in the fbi -- and you do , indeed .
i think they are extremely upset at what 's going on .
hillary clinton is the ringleader of a criminal enterprise that has corrupted our government at the highest levels , and the american people have one chance to stop it , by showing up and voting on november 8th .
people have had it with the years and decades of clinton corruption .
this is the year the american people say " enough is enough . "
the clinton 's are the sordid past .
we are , together , as a movement -- all of us -- outside of this area , all over the country -- we are the bright future .
now , another issue i want to address today , finally , immigration .
as i mentioned , pueblo is filled with wonderful , hard - working immigrants .
it 's these hard - working immigrants who stand to lose the most from our open border immigration policy .
illegal immigration and broken visa programs take jobs directly from latino and hispanic workers living here lawfully today -- you know that .
they 're taking your jobs .
illegal immigration also brings with it massive crime and massive drugs , including a terrible heroin problem right here in colorado -- you have a big problem .
so we 're going to build the border wall and we are not -- what ?
we 're going to build the wall and we 're going to stop the drugs , the gangs , the violence from pouring in to colorado .
we 've got a lot of bad people that came in .
we have great people that came in , but we have a lot of gang members ; we have a lot of drug lords ; we have a lot of drug sellers .
we 're going to ship them the hell out , okay ?
immediately .
we 're going to shut down the sanctuary cities that have led to the preventable deaths of so many .
cases like kate steinle , murdered in san francisco by a five - time deported illegal immigrant who should never , ever have been here .
or cases like sarah root , killed by an illegal immigrant released at the border by president obama , and then released again after the killing .
there are over two million criminal aliens in this country and we are going to get them out and get them out fast .
to the cartels , the gangs , the drug dealers : i have a simple message for you .
your days are numbered and your reign of crime will soon come crashing to an end .
but we also have to keep our country safe from terrorism .
the terrorists who planted the bombs in new york and new jersey , and who carried out the mall stabbing in minnesota -- you all saw that last week -- were foreign nationals admitted into our country , as was the mall shooter in washington .
or look at cases like the boston bombers , here on asylum ; or the san bernardino shooter , here on a fiance visa -- fiance -- nice visa -- from saudi arabia ; killed 14 people that gave them a baby shower a short while before -- and she killed them .
not only killed them , but many , many horribly wounded to this day .
or the orlando shooter ; the son of a taliban supporter from afghanistan .
terrorists are infiltrating our country .
now , hillary clinton wants a 550 percent increase in syrian refugees and countless more refugees from across the middle east .
i want to keep your families safe .
my job is not to represent foreign countries .
my job is to represent the citizens of the united states of america .
putting your jobs , your wages and your security first .
america first .
remember that .
america first .
you 're living in the united states today as a lawful resident or a u.s. citizen , i will ensure you have a safe community , rising wages , and secure immigration system , which is what we want .
immigration security is national security -- very important .
it 's national security .
here are some of the things we will do starting in 2017 : we 're going to lower your taxes substantially .
she 's going to raise your taxes .
we 're going to eliminate every unnecessary regulation .
we 're going to repeal and replace job - killing obamacare .
we will make childcare affordable .
we 're going to save your second amendment , which is under siege .
and i have the endorsement of the nra , very early on .
great people we 're going to support the men and women of law enforcement .
and we 're going to appoint justices to the supreme court of the united states who will uphold and defend our constitution .
we are going to finally rebuild america .
we are going to revitalize america .
we are going to unite america .
we 're going to come together as a people .
imagine what our country could accomplish if we started working together as one people , under one god , saluting one american flag .
together , we will make america wealthy again .
we will make america strong again .
we will make america safe again .
and we will make america -- like your cap -- we will make america great again .
thank you , everybody .
god bless you .
god bless you .
thank you .
thank you .
with great people , thank you very much .
thank you .
we are making very big progress , i can tell you that .
and in iowa , virtually every poll has us ahead and we are going to win iowa .
so i just wanna thank you , i love being back here , i have so many friends in iowa .
and i 'll tell you what , i enjoyed the primaries and i 'm enjoying this even more , so thank you very much .
thank you very much .
spending time here really has been one of the -- really -- and i can say this , one of the great , great joys of campaigning .
and especially with all of the friends we 've developed so it 's fantastic .
but here 's what 's most important .
together , we 're gon na win iowa in november .
to be specific , november 8th , we have to be specific and we 're going to win the white house and we are going to make america great again , ok ?
we 're going to make america great again .
the white house will become the people 's house that will happen .
we will tackle and fix the problems that have gone unsolved for years and believe me , there are many of them .
we 're going to fix our crumbling infrastructure , renegotiate our horrible trade deals , they are disastrous .
free children from failing government schools , eliminate government waste and create a fair , simple and efficient tax code to add millions and millions or new jobs , which we need .
prosperity will rise , poverty will recede and wages will finally begin to grow and they will grow rapidly .
if they do n't , i 'll be very disappointed in myself , i will tell you .
this is a campaign about big ideas designed to help everyday people .
in recent days , we 've rolled out one new policy idea after another on taxes , on school choice -- so important -- on foreign policy , on defeating terrorisms , on rebuilding our military , on veterans care and unleashing american energy .
oh we 're having a good time , we 're having a good time .
go ahead , go ahead .
there 's always one .
thank you , men .
all right you can get them , thank you .
thank you .
thank you very much .
that 's great .
that 's all right .
single person .
they 'll end up with more publicity than all of you put together .
so we 're going to unleash american energy , we 're going to put those jobs back like you have not seen in your lifetimes , you have not seen before .
by contrast , hillary clinton is running a policy - free campaign .
she offers no ideas , no solutions , and only hatred and derision .
it 's true .
you saw that .
i 'm running to be a president for all americans , democrat , republican , independent , everyone .
whether you vote for me -- right ?
whether you vote for me , or whether you vote for someone else , i will be still your greatest champion .
right ?
our support comes from every part of american and from every walk of life .
we have the support of cops and soldiers and carpenters and welders and accountant 's and lawyers , the young and the old , and millions of working class families all over this nation .
we cover everybody .
this is a movement like nobody 's ever seen before .
it really is .
it 's a movement ...   they 're considering it a great phenomena .
i consider it a great phenomena if we win on november 8th .
that 's what i consider .
well my opponent slanders you as deplorable and irredeemable , i call you hard - working american patriots who love your country and want a better future for all of our people .
her comments displayed the same sense of arrogance and entitlement that led her to violate federal law as secretary of state , hide and delete her e - mails .
i mean , think 33,000 e - mails .
and that 's just one batch .
it 's a lot of wedding talk .
it 's a lot of wedding talk .
put classified information in the reach of our enemies , lied to congress and sell government favors and access through the clinton foundation .
it 's this attitude of arrogance that explains why hillary clinton made 13 phones disappear , including with a hammer - so the fbi could n't see them and why she bleached her e - mails after a congressional subpoena - that 's after the subpoena came .
this is n't before .
that 's after the subpoena came .
now the people who destroyed the e - mails are all pleading the fifth amendment in front of congress today .
how you seen ?
have you seen what 's going on in front of congress ?
fifth amendment , fifth amendment , fifth amendment .
horrible .
horrible .
and will anything happen ?
that 's going to be the question .
we 're going to find out .
anyone watching today 's hearing in congress knows that hillary clinton 's actions are far more corrupt that we ever imagined .
it 's happened today .
this is far bigger and a far bigger scandal than watergate ever was .
but with watergate , we had justice , we had a justice department that went after the people .
here 's something that just - nobody 's ever seen anything like this , folks .
what we 're witnessing is a first .
we 've never ever seen anything like this .
this is a scandal that threatens national security and that involves a multimillion - dollar pay for play scheme between the secretary of state and her foundation .
whether it 's her e - mails , her disasters in iraq , libya and syria , or her failures on the economy , of which it 's been disastrous , hillary clinton lacks the judgment , temperament and moral character to lead this country .
she does .
you know it .
everybody knows it .
everybody knows it .
everybody knows it .
in the words of a secret service agent posted outside her office , she simply lacks the integrity and the temperament to serve in the office . "
from the bottom of my soul , " he said , " i know this to be true . "
the policies of hillary clinton have produced death , destruction overseas .
it 's been disastrous .
no matter where you look , everything she 's touched has been a disaster and produced only failing schools , rising crime , job loss , shrinking incomes , and tragic poverty at home .
you want four more years of it ?
i had a feeling you might say that .
it 's so sad .
to see what 's going on in our country is so sad .
one in five american households do not have a single member in the labor force .
another 14 million people have left the labor force since 2009 .
and the national debt has doubled to nearly $ 20 trillion during the obama years .
i 'm running to reverse these policies and to create a future of prosperity for all americans -- all americans .
that includes , you 'll be happy to hear this , our family farms right here in iowa -- family farms .
the farmers are being left out in the cold .
family farms are the backbone of this country .
we are going to end the epa intrusion into your family homes and your family farms .
we are going to protect the renewable fuel standard , corn - based ethanol ; eliminate job - killing regulations like the waters of the u.s. rule ; and provide desperately needed tax relief .
our plan lowers the tax rate on family farms , down to 15 percent from 35 percent .
and you watch your farms grow .
you watch businesses all over the country grow .
you watch jobs come back .
it will be a beautiful thing .
and remember this , the double taxation of family farms at death .
you want to leave your farms to your children ?
it 's a disaster because it does n't happen .
so helping to ensure that the family farm , we have to make and we have to continue the tradition in iowa .
we want it to continue to thrive with your family .
and you 'll be looking down your family and you 'll be proud .
ok ?
so we 're going to take care of that .
my economic agenda can be summed up in three words : jobs , jobs , jobs .
that means we 're going to negotiate trade deals to protect our farmers , help them export their goods , and make money doing it .
because the way it is now , it 's impossible , and grow family farming in america .
we 're going to grow the farms .
my first day in office , i 'm also going to order a review of every single regulation issued over the last 10 years .
all needless , job - killing regulations will be canceled .
millions and millions of new jobs will come pouring into our country .
we 're going to lift the restrictions on american energy , which means lower electricity prices for our farmers and a half a million jobs a year at least , probably a number much higher than that .
and that will just be the beginning .
also , on my first day , i 'm going to ask congress to send me a bill to immediately repeal and replace disastrous obamacare .
this will instantly save another 2 million jobs at least , probably more than that .
by the way , remember jonathan gruber ?
anybody remember that name ?
people forgot , a long time ago but some people remember , i see that .
jonathan gruber was the architect of obamacare .
and he said -- remember they got him i guess on a cell phone or somehow , but they got him .
he said the lack of transparency was essential to passing the legislation and then he talked about , like , and i quote , " the stupidity of the american voter having to do with obamacare " -- " their stupidity , " an exact quote , " the stupidity of the american voter . "
now , this is what we get .
this is the hateful attitude of insiders like mr. gruber and hillary clinton .
and the voters have had enough of this .
on november 8th , we 're taking back our country , november 8th .
another major reform is going to be school choice .
and by the way , we 're getting rid of common core .
we 're bringing it local .
bringing it local .
totally getting rid of common core .
common core is a disaster .
all you have to do is look at the ranking of schools and see that we pay the most per pupil .
not even close .
and we 're down on the bottom of the list so ca n't do that .
gon na be a lot of changes , really good changes .
i 've outlined a plan to provide every disadvantaged child in america the freedom to choose the public , private , magnet , religious school of his or her choice .
this will help lift millions of poor african - american and hispanic children out of poverty .
the poverty is beyond belief .
you do n't think of it with this country .
the poverty is beyond belief .
it 's time to break up the failed democratic control over our inner cities and provide real hope and opportunity to every single community in this nation .
we have to bring everybody with us , everybody .
our policies on taxes , trade , regulations and education will grow incomes , boost jobs , and reduce poverty for african - american and hispanic communities .
we have to do it .
we have to being these communities into a great system and we have to bring these communities back .
we have to do it .
we need a new civil rights agenda for our time , one that promises safe neighborhoods , great education and a secured job .
nearly four in 10 african - american children live in poverty , including 45 percent of african - american children under that age of 6 .
45 percent .
fifty - eight percent of african - american youth are not working .
violent crime rose in america 's 50 largest cities last year .
homicides are up 50 percent in d.c. , and more than 60 percent in baltimore .
and everywhere else .
over 3,000 people have been shot in chicago since january 1st of this year , 3,000 people .
there 's a shooting , on average , every two hours .
to those suffering and hurting i say , " what do you have to lose ?
i 'll fix it .
vote for donald trump .
i mean that .
what do you have to lose ? "
" it ca n't get any worse . "
and i say this to -- i say this to the african - american community : it ca n't get any worse .
it ca n't get any worse .
forty percent poverty , 58 percent ca n't get jobs , youth .
it ca n't get any worse .
i 'll fix it , remember that .
and hillary just wants your vote and then she 'll say , " see you in four years . "
ok ?
bye - bye .
and you see what 's happened with our inner cities , where you ca n't walk down the street without being shot .
and you see the crime and all of the problems , what do you have to lose ?
i will fix it , believe me .
i 'll bring back millions of jobs , higher wages and great schools .
i will make your communities safe .
safety also means protecting our people from radical islamic terrorism , all right ?
i hate even saying this , but this just happened .
new video has just been released showing isis -- absolute butchers -- murdering innocent people in what has been called a syrian slaughterhouse .
the victims were dragged , then hung from meat hooks and then their throats were slit .
so we have no question , we 've got to name the problem , which hillary and , as you know , president obama , they wo n't do .
we 've got to name the problem and we 've got to solve the problem .
we 've got to solve the problem .
this is an evil , sadistic , monstrous enemy and we must keep these killers out of our country .
we know for a fact that isis is trying to infiltrate refugee flows -- no question about this -- and to recruit refugees after their entry into our country .
my opponent wants a 550 percent increase in syrian refugees over and above ...   then you 've got to vote for trump .
it 's very simple , very simple .
that 's a 550 percent increase over and above the obama administration .
thousands and thousands , 550 percent higher .
we have no idea who these people are , where they come from .
we have no idea .
we have no idea what we 're getting into .
we have no idea .
according to the senate subcommittee on immigration , her entire plan will bring in 620,000 refugees in a first term and cost $ 400 billion in lifetime benefits .
instead of providing free health care and jobs to refugees from around the world , we should rebuild our inner cities and help struggling americans get jobs all over our country .
and we all have a heart .
we all have a heart .
and so i support totally construction of safe zones in the region .
but we do n't want to pay .
we owe $ 20 trillion -- $ 20 trillion .
nobody even knows what it means -- $ 20 trillion .
so what we 're going to do is we 're going to get -- exactly -- we 're going to get the gulf states to pay for it .
we 'll lead it .
we 'll get them to pay for it .
they 've got plenty of money .
they just have nobody to ask them : you 've got to put up the money .
maybe tell them is a better statement .
at the same time as we rebuild our military , we are going to get our allies to pay their fair share .
only five of the 28 member nato countries meet their obligations to spend two percent of gdp on defense .
i will convene a summit of our european and asian allies to make sure everyone is sharing in the burden of security .
we are paying tremendous amounts of money to secure other nations , to protect and defend other nations .
we are going to be made whole .
we have no choice .
this is n't 30 years ago .
this is n't 40 years ago .
and i believe properly asked , we 'll be in a very good position and they will be very nice about it .
got to be properly asked .
and we 're going to then focus , and we have to focus , on radical islamic terrorism .
we 're going to be focused .
in all things , it 's time to put americans first .
we are doing that .
and we have to start taking care of each other , which we 're not doing .
tonight , i 'm going to roll out a plan to help our mothers and our families get affordable , quality childcare for their children .
and my daughter ivanka is going to be involved .
she 's the one ...   ... she is the one that has been pushing for it .
so , " daddy , daddy , we have to do this . "
and it 's true .
she 's very smart and she 's right .
on policy after policy , we 're going to provide opportunity , prosperity and security for all americans , which we do n't have now at all .
i 'm going to lower your taxes .
i 'm going to get rid of massive amounts of unnecessary regulations on business .
and in your life , we 're going to , as i said , repeal and replace obamacare .
i 'm going to appoint justices of the united states supreme court who will follow the constitution .
i 'm going to rebuild our very depleted military and take care of our great vets for the first time .
i 'm going to save your second amendment which is under siege .
and as you know , the nra endorsed me very early , earlier than anybody else .
and i 'm very honored by that endorsement .
but the nra , you know what they 're doing with our second amendment .
they 're fighting to save it .
it 's a very tough fight , another reason we need help and we have to have the help from the united states supreme court .
and if the wrong justices get appointed , starting with the great justice scalia , who unexpectedly passed away , so now we have a tie court .
if somebody takes his place , i think you can wave your second amendment , as you know it , you can wave it goodbye .
you can wave it goodbye .
so all of you that are big second amendment proponents and believers , you better get out there and you better vote or you 're not gon na have much of a second amendment .
november 8th .
i 'm going to stop illegal immigration and i 'm going to stop drugs from pouring into our country .
and yes we will build a wall and you 're right , mexico will pay for the wall .
they will pay for the wall .
we will build a wall , folks .
we got ta stop the drugs from pouring in .
we 've got ta build the wall .
the endorsement of all of the border patrol agents , first time they 've ever done that .
they 're endorsing a presidential candidate .
they said mr. trump , the wall is so necessary .
it 's a tool , for them .
another tool but one of the most important ones .
but they said to me the wall is so important .
and when i look at the drugs that pour in , pour in , they 're poisoning our youth .
you look at new hampshire , you look at pennsylvania , you look at ohio , you look at all the states .
one of the biggest things and in some cases their single , biggest problem is the drug inflow -- heroin .
we 're gon na stop the drugs from poisoning our youth and plenty of other people .
we will build a wall .
and i 'm going to -- so importantly -- renegotiate your horrible trade deals , especially nafta which is maybe the single , worst trade deal ever made by any country anywhere in the world .
its just a one - way street , right now , it 's a one - way street for jobs being ripped out of our country .
leaving the united states going to mexico and other -- it 's a one - way street .
we 're gon na have a nice , double - lane highway but much of the stuff is gon na be coming in the opposite direction at least for a long while until we can get ourselves even .
but remember this , bill clinton signed nafta .
so bill clinton signed the worst trade deal in the history of the world , folks .
i mean its not like -- its in the history of the world .
there 's never been a worse or a dumber deal for trade including tpp which is a disaster -- but tpp i do n't believe will be as bad as nafta .
and as you know , hillary clinton totally wants to approve tpp .
she said it 's the gold standard , then she heard of speech of mine and she said wow , i better say i 'm gon na reject it .
but we all know that if she wants , she would sign tpp -- as you know that , you know it -- she 'll sign the tpp .
and if she signs it , it will be catastrophic for not only iowa , for our country .
so we ca n't let that happen , we ca n't let that happen .
we -- in negotiating deals -- are going to do something very , very simple .
we 're going to put america -- but we 're going to put the american worker first , very simple .
it 's very simple .
it 's a very simple thing .
we do n't think in terms of this country -- it 's almost like i was thinking about it over the last couple of weeks , in particular .
it 's almost like they want these other countries to do so well , i 'm saying we are -- because nobody can make deals that badly .
but when you think about it , the reason they are bad is because of the donors , the special interests .
in many cases , they own these countries that are leaving the country and ripping us and we 're gon na stop it .
and it 's so easy to stop the globalists .
it 's so easy to stop .
and we 're going to stop it .
and i 'll tell you another thing , apple and our other major companies , will start making their iphones , their computers and other products in the united states , not in china , and not all over the world .
because we do n't make things here like we used to anymore .
we 're going to start making things in our country .
we 're going to start having the jobs , be jobs that are good for our country .
we 're going to rebuild our roads , our bridges , our tunnels , our highways , our airports , our schools and our hospitals .
american cars will travel the roads , american airplanes will soar the skies , and american ships will patrol the seas .
we do n't make ships .
american steel will send new skyscrapers into the clouds .
and american hands will rebuild this nation .
and american energy mined from american sources will power our great nation .
american workers will be hired to do the job .
we will put new american metal into the spine of this country , american metal and american steel .
i will fight for every neglected part of the nation .
and i will fight to bring us all together as one american people , which we 're not .
we are so badly divided .
imagine what our country could accomplish , if we started working together as one people , under one god , saluting one american flag , one american flag .
it 's time to break with the bitter failures of the past and to embrace a new inclusive and prosperous -- and i mean truly prosperous -- american future .
we could be better than we ever were , we can .
we can better , we can be greater than we ever were .
i know the people , i 've traveled , i 've seen thousand , i 've seen millions of people , incredible people .
we can be greater than ever before .
jobs will return , incomes will rise , and new factories will come rushing back to our shores .
once more , we will have a government , of , by and for the people .
we will make american prosperous again .
we will make america safe again .
we will make america great again .
thank you .
god bless you everybody .
thank you very much .
thank you .
november 8th .
thank you , everybody .

thank you , thank you .
great , wow .
thank you very much .
thank you , wow .
thank you , wow .
thank you , everybody .
nice place , plenty of room .
in 25 days we 're going to win the state of north carolina , which i love , and we 're going to win the white house .
early voting starts on october 20th , so you have to get out there .
but november 8th , that 's our day .
november 8th , right ?
november 8th .
but do the early voting .
i 'd also like to take this moment to send our thoughts and prayers to everyone recovering in the tragic aftermath of hurricane matthew .
we know about it very well unfortunately right here .
we send our deepest condolences for those who have lost loved ones .
we are with you and we will always be with you and help you when needed .
so , good luck to everybody .
the incredible spirit of the people of this state will power its recovery , and it 's the same spirit that will rebuild our nation .
i have property in this state , this is a great state .
you know my property .
beautiful properly , great employees .
in the trump administration we will end decades of policies that enrich special interests and foreign countries at our expense .
we 're going to take on the big media , big business , and big donors that are bleeding our country dry .
we 're losing our jobs .
we 're going to renegotiate our disastrous trade deals and illegal immigration .
stop the massive inflow of refugees .
take care of our vets , our great vets .
and we 're going to repeal and replace obamacare , 100 percent .
that is a disaster .
premiums are soaring double digits in north carolina , beyond anybody 's wildest expectations .
it 's a disaster and you 're -- and you know what 's going on .
your country will be left with only one insurer .
you 're going to have nothing , everyone 's leaving .
and you have one insurer .
you 're going to have nobody .
obamacare if failing , we 're going to repeal it and we 're going to replace it .
your jobs come back under a trump administration .
your income goes up under a trump administration .
your taxes go way down under a trump administration .
you companies wo n't be leaving our country under a trump administration , they 'll be staying right here .
and believe me , there are plenty of them right now negotiating to leave , i hate to tell you that .
these are the issues that we 'll discuss at the next debate , which i look very much forward to .
crooked hillary is doing no more public events until after the debate .
they say she 's doing debate prep but , really she 's just resting , she 's resting .
for what -- for what she 's done , they should lock her up , they should .
it 's disgraceful .
honestly , it 's disgraceful .
what 's going on in our country right now is a disgrace .
the hillary clinton documents released by wikileaks make more clear than ever just how much is at stake on november the 8th .
wikileaks released new clinton campaign e - mails revealing how friendly hillary was with the attorney general , loretta lynch .
this was only months prior to lynch 's investigation of hillary 's illegal secret e - mail server that gave foreign governments access to our confidential information .
this comes on the heels of disclosure that clinton campaign was conspiring and colluding with the state department and justice department over the release of her e - mails and the investigation into her server .
hillary clinton told the fbi 39 times she could n't remember anything .
i could n't remember , i could n't remember .
or recall key events concerning illegal server and related misconduct .
now , in new written testimony , just out as part freedom of information act request , hillary clinton said she could n't remember , recall , or anything else , key events and key things 21 different times .
it 's one more reason that if i win i will ask my attorney general to appoint a special prosecutor .
and we also have to investigate the investigation itself .
hillary bleached and deleted 33,000 e - mails after a congressional subpoena .
she got a subpoena from congress and she said , this is no good , this is terrible , because those 33,000 e - mails had bad stuff .
and she said get rid of them , delete them , bleach them .
nobody bleaches because that 's an expensive process .
she bleached .
get rid of them .
and then she made everybody get rid of iphones , her iphones , and some of them were hammered .
they were hammered to death .
all to cover up her crimes .
yesterday new disclosures were made showing again how hillary clinton 's pay for play works .
saudi arabia paid bill clinton a lot of money to make a speech and then got an arms deal from hillary and her state department that they were unable to get .
the nation of qatar also kicked in $ 1 million for bill clinton 's birthday party , so nice .
but , as wikileaks showed the clinton 's ripped off the people of haiti as they were suffering and dying after the earthquake .
and her brother 's on the board of a gold mine , her brother .
but , the media 's covering up for the clintons and their many crimes against so many people .
the wikileaks documents show how the media conspires and collaborates with the clinton campaign including giving the questions and answers to hillary clinton before the debate , ok .
what a rigged system folks .
last night , we had a massive crowd of over 20,000 people in cincinnati , filled up an arena .
and the media wo n't even talk about the size of the crowd , the enthusiasm of the crowd .
i watched nbc this morning , they said , last night donald trump was in cincinnati .
if hillary clinton has 800 people , the crowd is so big .
it is horrible -- it is really horrible .
the corrupt media is trying to do everything in their power to stop our movement .
believe me , they do n't want this happening .
we have one of the great movements -- we have the great movement .
we have a movement that 's never happened before .
and no paper is more corrupt than the failing new york times .
the good news is it is failing , it wo n't be around too much longer .
but they are really , really bad people .
the largest shareholder in the times is carlos slim .
now carlos slim , as you know , comes from mexico .
he 's given many millions of dollars to the clintons and their initiatives .
so carlos slim , largest owner of the paper , from mexico .
reporters at the new york times , they 're not journalists , they 're corporate lobbyists for carlos slim and for hillary clinton .
we 're going to let foreign corporations and their ceo 's decide the outcomes of the -- you just ca n't do this .
we ca n't let this happen .
we are not going to let it happen where they decide the outcome of our elections .
they ca n't do it and we 're not going to let it happen .
this is our last chance to save our country and reclaim it for we the people , and it 's going to happen .
oh , it 's going to happen .
as you have seen , right now i am being viciously attacked with lies and smears .
it 's a phony deal .
i have no idea who these women are , have no idea .
i have no idea .
and i think you all know i have no idea because you understand me for a lot of years , ok ?
when you looked at that horrible woman last night , you said i do n't think so .
i do n't think so .
whoever she is , wherever she comes from , the stories are total fiction .
they 're 100 percent made up , they never happened , they never would happen .
i do n't think they 'd happen with very many people but they certainly are n't going to happen with me .
folks , you know my people always say , oh do n't talk about it , talk about jobs , talk about the economy .
do n't worry , your jobs are going to be coming back to north carolina like you 've seen , the economy 's going to be good .
but i feel i have to talk about them because you have to dispute when somebody says something .
and fortunately we have the microphone , we 're able to dispute , some people ca n't .
these are lies being pushed by the media and the clinton campaign to try and keep their grip on our country .
they are all false , they 're totally invented , fiction .
all 100 percent totally and completely fabricated .
never met this person , these people , i do n't know who they are .
i do n't know who they -- think of what 's happening to our country .
think of what 's happening .
i do n't know who these people are , i look on television , i think it 's a disgusting thing and it 's being pushed .
they have no witnesses , there 's nobody around .
they just come out .
some are doing it for probably a little fame , they get some free fame .
it 's a total setup .
now suddenly after many , many years , phony accusers come out less than a month before one of the most important elections in the history of our country .
it also comes at a time as wikileaks unveils horrible , horrible things about hillary clinton .
but they 'd rather talk about this .
somebody that you 've never seen that said , oh , 1992 he went like this .
one came out recently where i was sitting alone in some club .
i really do n't sit alone that much .
honestly , folks i do n't think i sit alone .
i go in with groups of people -- i was sitting alone by myself , like this .
and then i went whaw .
to somebody .
i just heard this one .
it 's like , it 's like unbelievable .
even a simple investigation would 've shown these allegations against me , in just about all cases , it 's nonsense , it 's false .
and eyewitnesses already debunked to a people magazine story .
here 's my question about the dishonest writer from people magazine .
why did n't she write what she said happened before we wrote the story , why did n't she put it in the story ?
the story would 've been one of the big stories .
i was the big star of the apprentice , why did n't she go it 12 years ago ?
twelve years ago .
she 's writing a story -- no think of this .
think of this .
she 's right , she 's a liar .
she is a liar .
she 's writing a story -- check our her facebook page , you 'll understand .
hey , she 's writing a story about a beautiful love story , melania , donald , and she said i made inappropriate move .
now , just so you understand .
that 's a big story .
if i did .
she wrote the most beautiful story , honestly the most beautiful story , 100 percent story , like beautiful .
why would n't she have put this into the story ?
now , two nights ago i get a call .
oh , people magazine 's doing a story .
it 's ok .
no , no , it 's not ok , it 's about a story that was written 12 years ago .
she was on last night , or one of the top people that people was on , and he said , no , we were just informed of it .
well , did you hear about it 12 years ago ?
did you hear about five years ?
no , no , we never -- we just heard about it recently .
these people are sick .
these people are sick .
and the reason she did n't write it 12 years ago is very simple .
it never happened , it never happened .
it 's a lie .
it 's a lie .
and let me tell you , if it did happen , if it did happen , it -- 100 percent she would have written it , it would have been the biggest story of the year , ok ?
these are all horrible lies , all fabrications and we ca n't let them change the most important election in our lifetimes .
if five percent of the people think it 's true and maybe 10 percent think -- we do n't win .
in other words , they make lies .
they have people come around , oh donald trump did this or that .
i never saw these people before , i do n't know who they are .
and then you watch these phony networks , and dishonest networks , who are 100 percent -- let me tell you something about hillary clinton .
she 's got nothing going , she 's got nothing .
the only thing she 's got going is the media .
she 's got nothing going .
she 's got nothing .
the other day at the debate , where by the way , i absolutely destroyed her , ok ?
every online poll , even time magazine , time magazine is not exactly in love with me but every online poll had us skill   -- she said , the other day i 'm standing , i told you this .
but i 'm standing at my podium and she walks in front of me , right ?
she walks in front of me , you know ?
and when she walked in front of me , believe me i was n't impressed .
but she walks in front of me and she takes a question , then she walked back , and that was the end of that , no problem .
then she said the next day , i invaded her space .
give me a break .
and i was waiting for that because she had that incident once before where they made up something .
some guy invaded her space , the poor guy lost the election because of it .
but i was very conscious of this so i purposely , i purposely did n't do anything .
so -- get this guy out of here .
get him out of here , out .
get out of here .
it 's really total disrespect for the american flag .
there he is .
look , good .
great .
folks -- folks , that 's what 's happening to our country , that 's what 's happening .
that is total disrespect for our flag , that 's what 's happening to our country .
we 're going to turn it around , folks -- we 're going to turn it around .
so -- so , just to finish up -- so just to finish up , you see what 's happening .
the process is rigged .
this whole election is being rigged .
these lies , spread by the media , without witnesses , without backup or anything else   body makes an accusation that you did something , and you were n't -- you never saw this person before .
it 's a lie , total lie , it 's fabrication .
sometimes they do it for fame , maybe they get money , who knows ?
the clinton campaign is pushing it .
the new york times did a story on somebody where it was totally false .
they knew it was totally false .
we gave them the information , they wrote a whole big page about somebody where they were sending me e - mails , and letters , and everything , and then you realize -- it was a one - way send , by the way , there was nothing sent back -- and you realize it was a totally phony deal .
they did a whole big story on it .
they did n't mention all of the e - mails , they did n't mention everything coming my way .
and others looked at it and , as bad as it was , soon as they saw this stuff that was said , they immediately -- immediately decided not to do this .
the new york times did a story on it .
they read these stories and people might not know how untrue they are .
it 's really a disgrace .
i 've been saying this for a long time .
the whole thing we 've been going through , and i hate to say it but , the whole thing we 're going through -- bernie sanders was a rigged deal -- the whole thing is one big fix , it 's one big fix .
it 's one big ugly lie , it 's one big fix .
the press ca n't write the kind of things they write , which are lies , lies , lies .
the stories are fabrications and false .
and the only thing i say is hopefully , hopefully , our patriotic movement will overcome this terrible deception .
hopefully , our great movement -- and there 's never been anything like this in the united states .
and the only way they figure they can throw it down is to come up with people that are willing to say , i was with donald trump in 1980 .
i was sitting with him on an airplane , and he went after me on the plane .
yeah , i 'm going to go after .
believe me , she would not be my first choice , that i can tell you .
man .
you do n't know , that would not be my first choice .
hopefully our great movement powered by everyday citizens will overcome the sickness that is plaguing our politics and our media .
and i 'll tell you what , our media is indeed sick and its making our country sick , and we 're going to stop it .
we 're going to stop it folks .
all right , let 's get on now , let 's get onto another subject .
but is n't it good that we talk about this ?
right ?
who thinks i should n't talk , we 're talk jocks , right ?
who thinks that i should n't talk about it ?
does anybody think that ?
ok , i agree .
when somebody , you know , a long time ago - when you get hit , you hit back , you 've got to do it .
you do n't just say " i did n't get hit , oh i did n't get hit . "
when you get hit , we are destroying our country with these sick people back there , and they know it better than anybody in this arena .
i ran because i knew what trouble our country was in .
the country is in tremendous trouble , you know this .
you know this in north carolina , because you see what 's happening to your jobs , they 're disappearing .
i know it 's not about me , it 's about you , and that 's why i 'm doing this .
i did n't need to do this , but it 's about you .
it 's about bringing our country , making our country great again .
i 'm taking these slings and arrows for you , so we can have our borders , so we can get back our jobs ...   ... so we can be a safe nation again .
you know , the murder - the number of murders in our country this year , went up more than they have in 45 years .
it 's true .
look , obama is an incompetent .
he is an incompetent president .
he does n't know what he 's doing , he 's out campaigning all day long , he talking about me like he knows me .
i do n't know him , he does n't know me .
and why does n't some woman maybe come up and say what they say falsely about me , they could say about him .
they could say it about anybody , they could say it about anybody .
i 'll tell you what , he better be careful , because they could say it about anybody , anybody at all .
but obama is in incompetent , as a president , he 's about as bad as it gets .
look at what 's happening , how iran is taunting us .
look at what 's going on , look at the world .
he gives away $ 400 million in cash , but it turns out to $ 1.7 billion in cash .
gives them $ 150 billion ...   this guys does n't know what he 's doing , it 's an embarrassment .
if you look at the middle east , it 's a blow up , it 's a total disaster .
we have an incompetent president .
i hate to say it , but it 100 percent true .
and all he 's doing , instead of working on your jobs and your companies leaving for mexico and other places , he 's campaigning for crooked hillary .
that 's all he does .
either we win this election or we 're going to lose our country , because 4 more years of obama , you ca n't take it .
wikileaks documents , hillary clinton speaking in secret - oh man , you saw those too , a secret brazilian bank .
hillary clinton said " my dream is a hemisphere common market with open trade and open borders . "
there go the rest of your jobs -   there go   - even though she does n't say that , but that 's what she said in a very , very secret meeting .
the e - mails show that behind closed doors speaking to these international bankers , hillary clinton 's pledged to destroy the sovereignty of the united states .
a trump administration will secure and defend our borders than you 've ever .
and yes , we will build a wall .
crooked hillary also wants a 550 percent increase in syrian refugees to pour into our country .
and that 's   obama numbers and those are thousands and thousands .
this - even though she admitted it private , according to wikileaks , again , nobody is covering wikileaks .
they 're covering somebody that i never saw before , that she knows terrorists are trying to infiltrate the refugee program .
so you have terrorists coming in , she knows they 're coming in , and yet she wants to increase it .
and our country will never be the same .
so let me state this as clearly as i can .
i am going to keep radical islamic terrorists the hell out of our country .
at the same time , we 're going to take care of our military and we 're going to take care of our great , great , great veterans .
they 've been treated very badly .
that includes - veterans ' choice so veterans can either attend a public v.a. facility or if they have to wait online like they 've been doing , sometimes for as much as seven days and then still not get proper care , they 'll go to a private medical center or they 'll go to a private or public or something , they will go outside ...   ... they 'll go to a private doctor , they 'll go to a private hospital , they 'll go to a public hospital .
we 're going to get them care and we 're going to pay for their - that care .
they 're not going to wait online .
for seven days and die sometimes waiting online for a simple , simple procedure or prescription .
it 's not going to happen like that any longer for our veterans , ok ?
not going to happen .
and hillary clinton said , no , no , the v.a. is doing a good job , ok ?
north carolina is home to more than 100,000 active - duty military personnel and almost 800,00 veterans .
the military supports over half a million jobs in this state .
we are going to repeal the obama - clinton defense sequester and we are going to rebuild the military of the united states which is very , sadly , depleted .
when it comes to keeping america safe , i believe in a three and - i think you believe in these words , i think - three very important words , peace through strength , right .
peace through strength .
and we do n't want to use our strength , but you have to have our strength .
and the world is laughing at us .
they 're laughing at the stupidity of our president .
remember he drew the line in the sand -- the line is in the sand .
remember hillary the last debate ?
i was n't secretary of state then .
she does n't even know .
it turned out she lied .
remember she said tpp was gold standard , she said she never said that during the debate .
she lied about that .
she 's a liar .
but to be a strong country , we must also be a very rich country .
at the center of our economic revival we 'll be fixing our really horrendous , one - way street , horrible trade deals .
we 're going to fix them folks .
you know , last year we lost almost $ 800 billion in trade deficits .
we have trade deficit with other nations of almost $ 800 billion .
and i have some friends in the audience , i guarantee i can take any one of those friends - one in particular who happens to be brutal but that 's ok , lives in north carolina , so you know , one of those things , right , but a great business person .
i put him in charge - this case him - we would have such a good thing .
and there are people like that .
we have the greatest negotiators in the world , we have the greatest business people in the world , we do n't use them .
we use political hacks .
so we have a trade deficit of almost $ 800 billion .
sad , is n't it ?
is n't it pathetic ?
north carolina 's industrial   workers have been crushed by bill clinton 's signing of nafta supported by crooked hillary .
do n't forget , a lot of people want that to happen because they make a lot of money by taking money out of this country .
those deals are very good for a lot of people .
a lot of people know - everybody knows that nafta is no good for the united states , but it 's good for their wallets in some cases .
you 've lost nearly half of your manufacturing jobs since nafta , did you know that ?
you 've lost almost half of your manufacturing jobs .
this region used to be the furniture manufacturing hub of the world .
i know because i bought plenty .
but the nafta deal and then china 's entry into the world trade organization , another bill and hillary backed disaster , have sent those jobs to other countries .
you know better than anybody .
i used to be here a lot for furniture , gets smaller and smaller every year .
not going to have anything left pretty soon .
we 're living through the greatest jobs theft in the history of the world .
our jobs have been stolen from us and we have people that do n't know what they are doing , in particular our leadership .
if i win , day one , we are going to announce our plans to renegotiate nafta .
if we do n't get the deal we want , we leave nafta and start over to get a much better , a much more fair deal because right now , we 're a one - way highway into mexico , a one - way highway .
i mean , you take a look at this , it 's one way .
they get the jobs , they get the factories , they get the cash , and all we get - we get illegal immigration and we get drugs .
and the drugs are poisoning our youth , the drugs are poisoning our youth and others .
but we 're getting the drugs and we 're getting lots of problems .
and i 'll tell you , i was endorsed by the , as you know , by ice just last week , and by the border patrol agents .
sixteen thousand five hundred border patrol .
they 've never -- they 've never done this before .
they 've never done -- they 've never endorsed a presidential candidate .
both groups endorsed me .
because we 're going to have strong borders .
and we 're going to have people come into our country , but they 're going to come in legally , legally .
and we 're going to stand up to china , we 're going to stop their currency manipulation and product dumping , which is killing us .
and they do n't follow the rules and , if they do n't , we 're going to institute tariffs .
when they send something into our country -- and , believe me , they 're going to obey our rules so quickly , you have no idea .
and we 'll end up with a better relationship with china than we do now .
look what they 're doing , they 're building a massive fortress against everything .
a massive fortress in the south china sea .
and yet they 're ripping us off .
now , if they 're going to rip us off , you would n't think they 'd be building fortresses .
they have no respect for our president -- which i can understand that -- they have no respect for obama , they have no respect for our country , and they 're getting away with murder .
and we have the cards , we have the cards .
we have all the cards .
because we 're like the piggy bank that everybody keeps stealing from .
but pretty soon we 're not going to be piggy bank anymore .
we 're going to be the opposite of the piggy bank .
we do n't have -- we are $ 20 trillion , half of which came during the obama years .
and yet we did n't fix anything .
our roads are bad , our bridges are bad , our tunnels are bad , our schools are bad , our hospitals are bad .
we 're going to start making things again in america .
as part of our plan to bring back our jobs , we 're going to lower our business tax from 35 percent to 15 tax , the biggest since ronald reagan .
wages will rise , jobs will return , and factories will come rushing , rushing back in to our country .
we 're also going to fix our inner cities .
forty - five percent of african - american children are -- under the age six -- are living in poverty .
think of it , 45 percent .
fifty - eight percent of african- american youth do n't have jobs .
more than 3,000 people have been shot in chicago since the beginning of the year .
three thousand people since january , three thousand .
it 's like a war zone .
violent crime in greensboro increased by 25 percent last year .
did you know that ?
twenty - five percent .
to those african - americans suffering in our country , i say , what do you have to lose ?
vote for trump , i 'm going to fix it .
what do you have to lose ?
what do you have to lose ?
what do you have to lose ?
i will fight harder for you than anyone has fought for you before .
here are some of the more amazing things we 're going to do when we take over , hopefully , this incredible country and run it properly in 2017 .
we going to have the biggest tax cut since ronald reagan , we 're going to eliminate job - killing regulations which are a disaster , we are going to defend religious liberty .
we 're going to end common core .
going to bring our education local .
we 're going to support the men and women of law enforcement , repeal and replace obamacare .
we are going to save our second amendment .
we 're going to appoint great justices to the united states supreme court to uphold and defend the constitution of the united states .
so you have 25 days to make every dream you ever dreamed of for your country come true .
but to beat the system , you have to pound the pavement , get your friends and co - workers out , organize your neighbors and fight for the country you want .
on november 8th , the arrogance of washington , d.c. will come face to face with the righteous verdict of the american voter , it 's time , all right ?
i am asking all americans , republicans , independents and democrats , to join us in our campaign to defeat the corrupt establishment and give our government back to the people .
it 's going to happen .
i 'm going to fight for every citizen of every background .
thank you .
thank you .
so we 're going to fight and we 're going to fight for every stretch of this nation .
and i 'm going to fight to bring us all together , we 're a divided nation .
very divided nation right now .
we 're going to be unified nation , a nation of love .
imagine what our country could accomplish if we started working together as one people under one god saluting one american flag .
you 're going to look back at this rally for the rest of your life , and we 're having a good time .
we 're having a good time .
you 're going to remember this day .
this is a movement like nobody 's ever seen in this country before .
even our enemies admit that .
we 're going to make history together , you 're going to look back at the election , on november 8th , and you 're going to say it is the most important vote you 've ever cast because that 's when our country started working again .
that 's when our country --   -- became safe again .
that 's when our country became strong again and rich again .
and we will make america , just like your beautiful hat , we will make america great again .
thank you , thank you very much .
thank you .
thank you .
thank you very much everybody .
thank you everybody .
god bless you , go out and vote november 8th .
thank you very much .
thank you .
thank you .
what a crowd .
wow , look at that .
boy .
what a crowd .
thank you .
thank you very much .
thank you .
we just set a record in this building , folks , so that 's good news .
that 's fantastic .
thank you .
i love michigan , and i must tell you , come november , to be specific , november 8th , with your help , we are going to win and we are going to win big .
and wish going to the white house and we are going to bring jobs back to our country and we are going to bring jobs back to michigan .
it 's going to be a victory for the people , a victory for the wage - earner , the factory worker .
remember this , a big , big victory for the factory worker .
they have n't had those victories for a long time .
a victory for every citizen and for all of the people whose voices have not been heard for many , many years .
they 're going to be heard again .
it 'll be a win for the voters , not for the pundits , not for the journalists , not for the lobbyists , not for the global special interests funding my opponent 's campaign .
it 's going to be your victory .
these are hard times for many in this country .
i just got back from a tour of the suffering and devastation in louisiana .
perhaps you can tell by the way i 'm dressed .
just got off the plane .
it was actually incredible .
the spirit of the people is incredible .
the devastation , likewise , they 've never seen anything like it , but the spirit of the people is incredible .
and honestly , obama ought to get off the golf course and get down there .
we mourn for the lives lost and we pledge our help , comfort and support to every last person in need .
to the people of louisiana , we are with you and we will always be with you .
in my vision , i saw not only the suffering of our people but also their strength , courage and really unbeatable spirit .
their spirit will overcome .
we have a lot to overcome in our country , especially the fact that our jobs are being taken away from us and going to other lands , and we 're not going to allow it to happen , and especially it 's happening right here in michigan .
it 's an amazing spirit that we will need to rebuild our country .
it 's that strength that we 're going to need to create the new american future our children so much deserve .
in this new -- thank you .
thank you very much .
in this new future , millions of workers on the sidelines will be returned to the work force .
and if i 'm not elected president , that will never happen , believe me .
they 're talking to you , they 're playing you , but believe me , you know the answer .
and i have to say that i 've been talking about michigan and the car industry and how your businesses and plants have been ripped out of your land , and i have been doing it for four years to the people of michigan .
other people started talking about it last week .
they 're not going to do anything about it .
crumbling roads , bridges and airports we will replaced with the infrastructure our country needs and deserves .
families strapped in welfare will be provided with jobs and opportunity .
children stuck in failing government schools will be able to attend the school of their choice .
government will become lean , effective , responsible and honest .
our boarder will be protected and our children will be safe , very , very safe .
and we will build the wall , do n't worry about it .
we will build the wall .
law and order will be restored and the poorest places in our country will know safety and peace again .
american values and cultures will be cherished - and i mean cherished and celebrated once again .
but to achieve this new american future , we must break free from the bitter failures of the past , and reject the same insiders telling us the same old lies and over again , and over again , and over again .
no group in america has been more harmed by hillary clinton 's policies than african - americans no group .
no group .
if hillary clinton 's goal was to inflict pain to the african - american community , she could not have done a better job .
it is a disgrace .
tonight i 'm asking for the vote of every single african - american citizen in this country who wants to see a better future .
the inner cities of our country have been run by the democratic party for more than 50 years .
their policies have produced only poverty , joblessness , failing schools , and broken homes .
it 's time to hold democratic politicians accountable for what they have done to these communities .
at what point do we say enough ?
at what point do we say enough ?
it is time to hold failed leaders accountable for their results , not just their empty words over and over again .
look at what the democratic party has done to the city -- as an example and there are many others , -- of detroit .
40 percent of detroit 's residents , 40 percent , live in poverty .
half of all detroit residents do not work , and can not work , and ca n't get a job .
detroit tops the list of most dangerous cities in terms of violent crime , number one .
this is the legacy of the democratic politicians who have run this city .
this is the result of the policy agenda embraced by crooked hillary clinton .
33,000 e - mails gone .
the only way to change results is to change leadership .
we can never fix our problems by relying on the same politicians who created our problems in the first place .
a new future requires brand new leadership .
look at how much african - american communities are suffering from democratic control .
to those i say the follow , what do you have to lose by trying something new like trump ?
what do you have to lose ?
i say it again , what do you have to lose ?
look , what do you have to lose ?
you live in your poverty , your schools are no good , you have no jobs , 58 percent of your youth is unemployed , what the hell do you have to lose ?
and at the end of four years , i guarantee you , that i will get over 95 percent of the african - american vote , i promise you ; because i will produce - i will for the inner - cities and i will produce for the african - americans .
and the democrats -- the democrats will not produce and all they 've done is taken advantage of your vote .
that 's they 've done .
and once the election 's over , they go back to their palaces in washington and , you know what , they do nothing for you , just remember it .
so you have nothing to lose , one thing we know for sure is that if you keep voting for the same people , you will keep getting the same , exactly , the same result .
my administration will go to work for you as no one has ever done before - we will work .
we will bring back jobs .
we will work .
by contrast , the one thing every item in hillary clinton 's agenda has in common is that it takes jobs and opportunities away from african - american workers .
it takes jobs away from all workers , because your companies are leaving michigan , your companies are leaving every single state in our union .
they are going to mexico ; they 're going everywhere but here .
hillary clinton supports open borders , which means many things , but it means people pour in and take your jobs , whether you like it or do n't like it , they take your jobs .
her fierce opposition to school choice ; you need choice .
you have to get your children into good schools .
you do that through competition .
you need choice .
her plan to massively to raise taxes on small business and everyone , $ 1.3 trillion increase , whereas i am cutting taxes very substantially , for business and for the middle class .
her tremendous opposition to american energy , the opposition is fierce , and her record of giving our jobs away to many , many other countries .
america must reject the bigotry of hillary clinton , who sees communities of color only as votes , not as human beings worthy of a better future .
hillary clinton would rather provide a job to a refugee from overseas , than to give that job to unemployed african - american youth in cities like detroit , who have become refugees in their own country .
it 's time to get our country back to work and that includes an all - out effort to help young african - americans get the good paying jobs that they deserve .
hillary clinton 's plan would bring in an estimated 620,000 refugees in her first term , at a lifetime benefit cost of some $ 400 billion to our country , according to the senate immigration subcommittee .
hillary clinton wants to be america 's angela merkel .
by the way , for the price of supporting one refugee in the united states , we could support 12 in a safe zone in the middle east , or let 's say syria .
the improved refugee screening standards i have proposed will save countless billions of dollars .
it 's called extreme vetting .
extreme vetting .
we will invest a portion of the money saved in the jobs program for inner - city youth .
the african - american community has given so much to this country .
they fought and died in every war since the revolution .
they 've lifted up the conscience of our nation in the long march towards civil rights .
they 've sacrificed so much for the national good .
yet nearly four in 10 african - american children still live in poverty and 58 percent , as i said , of young african - americans are not working .
they can not find a job .
we must do better as a country .
i refuse to believe that the future must be like the past .
it wo n't be .
our future is going to be a great future for everyone .
for everyone .
in a trump administration , all workers of all colors will get priority for jobs in their own country , which is about time .
i want higher wages for african - americans , for hispanic americans and for all americans .
we want higher wages .
many , many workers in our country are making substantially less money today in real wages than they made 18 years ago .
they 're working two jobs instead of one .
they 're working much harder as they get older and it 's supposed to be the opposite .
we 're going to stop it , we 're going to create great jobs and we 're going to get the wages up .
hillary clinton is a throw back to an ugly past where politicians preyed on our poorest citizens while selling them out for personal gain .
promises , promises , all talk , no action -- all talk , no action politicians .
they talk , talk , talk , you vote them in with great fanfare , and then they do nothing .
with trump , that 's not going to happen .
believe me .
we must turn the page on yesterday .
only a change in leadership will produce a change in outcomes , and we ca n't take , as a country , four more years of obama .
and that 's what you get with hillary clinton but probably worse .
in this new american future , american workers will always come first .
america first , always come first .
this will include a complete revitalization of the michigan manufacturing sector .
now , you have to understand , the michigan manufacturing sector is a disaster .
it is a disaster .
look at your notes , look at your stats , look at what 's happening to your state .
you 're losing your businesses .
it 's like taking candy away from a baby , and many people in this audience right now that think you have jobs , you 're going to find out very soon that your company is leaving for mexico or some other place and you 're not going to have your job very long .
and if trump gets in , those days are over , folks .
those days are over .
we will be bringing back our jobs to michigan .
there will be a very big price to pay for those companies that want to leave our land , go some place else , manufacture their goods and sell them back with no retribution .
it wo n't happen ; there will be consequence .
it wo n't happen .
it will not happen .
michigan lost more than one in four of its manufacturing jobs since nafta .
as you know , nafta , one of the worst trade bills in history , maybe -- maybe the worst trade bill ever signed in the history of the world , not only in our country .
it 's emptied out michigan , it emptied out new england .
it emptied out new york state .
it emptied out so many of our great companies , they leave and they fire .
we end up with devastation .
we end up with unemployment .
we end up with nothing .
the bill was signed by bill clinton .
it was supported by hillary clinton .
right here in this community , you have lost one in seven manufacturing jobs since bill clinton put china into the world trade organization -- another hillary clinton backed deal .
she backs all the deals and by the way , she will be backing the transpacific partnership , tpp .
if she is elected , just mark your words , just remember , you know it 's going to happen .
she considered it the gold standard .
all of a sudden , when she heard me talking about it , she said , i ca n't win this one .
so she went against it , she 'll go back immediately and you saw that when the governor of virginia , whose her friend , said that was going to happen .
detroit lost more than one in three manufacturing jobs following the nafta and wto agreements that were supported very strongly by my opponent .
no industry has been hurt more by hillary clinton 's policies than the automobile industry , or as we call it the car industry .
it has been a total disaster .
according to the bureau of the labor of statistics , before nafta went into effect , there was 285,000 auto workers in michigan .
today , that number is down to 160,000 and it is going to be a lot lower because if you look at the massive plants being built right now in mexico - car plants , folks -- you can kiss these jobs goodbye .
but not me .
now with me .
it wo n't happen .
in 2014 , general motors announced plans to double it 's investments in mexico by plans by 2018 .
not good .
in april 2016 , ford motor company announced plans to invest another $ 1.6 billion constructing an auto plant in mexico .
mexico will become the car capital of the world very , very quickly .
and michigan is going to end up with lots of empty buildings all over the place unless you elect donald trump president .
in same month , fiat -- chrysler announced 1,300 layoffs .
the list goes on and on .
we will turn it around , we will turn it around fast .
we will meet with these companies and we will say , it will not be easy for you to move your plant to mexico - for you sell your cars through what will be a very strong border , and for you not to pay tax on those cars coming in , okay ?
and when we tell them that there will be a substantial tax on the cars that they make in mexico and other places , number one , they 're not going to move in the first place , and number two , if they do , our country will make one heck of a lot of money .
but to save your jobs and do all of the things that i 'm talking about , we have to win on november 8th .
the destruction that nafta started will be finished off if the transpacific partnership is approved .
it will be almost -- nothing is as bad as nafta -- but it will be almost as bad as nafta .
we know from hillary 's closest friend , she is planning to ram through tpp if she 's elected .
she called it , as i said , the gold standard .
it 's passage would be a disaster for michigan , in particular , for the car industry in particular , for the people of michigan .
i wo n't let it happen .
according to the economic policy institute , the united states trade deficit with the proposed tpp member countries cost over one million manufacturing jobs in our country in 2015 .
by far the biggest losses occurred in motor vehicles and parks , which lost nearly 740,000 -- think of that -- 740,000 manufacturing jobs .
michigan ranks first for jobs lost as a share of state workforce due to trade deficit with tpp members .
just imagine how many more automobile jobs will be lost if hillary gets her wish and approves tpp .
it will not be pretty .
that 's why i have announced that we will withdrawal from the deal before that deal can ever , ever , ever happen .
i have have previously laid out a detailed seven - point plan for trade reform , available on my website .
it includes strong protections against currency manipulation from countries like china and tariffs against any nation that cheats by unfairly subsidizing their goods , of which many of them do .
my plan also includes a total renegotiation of nafta so our jobs can come back .
and if we ca n't make a much , much better deal than we have right now , we will walk .
i 'm not in any way , shape or form an isolationist .
i do n't believe in it , but we have to make great deals for our country .
we 're losing in our whole trade negotiation with oil   countries over $ 800 billion a year .
that 's our trade deficit .
who negotiates these deals ?
we want great trade deals and we will have them .
but we want trade deals that work for america , that create jobs and wealth for our country , that work for the american worker .
we want to shrink our almost $ 800 billion trade deficit .
we do n't want to expand it , and it 's been expanding for years .
for years and years .
you look at the charts -- up , up , up , up , up .
and i say to myself so often , why do n't they do something about it ?
and the reason is we have political hacks as our negotiators .
we have politicians as our negotiators .
we have politicians that are controlled like hillary clinton by her donors , her special interests and her lobbyists and they wo n't let her do what 's right for our workers and for our country .
we want to be leading the world in production , exports and manufacturing .
we want jobs to leave from other countries and come into our country for a change .
another major issue in this race is foreign policy .
hillary clinton has made one bad foreign policy decision after another .
beginning with the support for going to war in iraq , and i opposed it so strongly .
nobody cared .
i was a civilian , but i opposed it .
i said you will have a total destabilization of the middle east .
it was such common sense and look what happened .
her tenure as secretary of state may be regarded as the most disastrous in united states history .
but she is totally without remorse .
her failed decisions as secretary of state unleashed isis onto the world .
but has she ever apologized for the death and destruction she has caused ?
no .
look at the world before and after she became secretary of state .
pre - hillary in the early 2009s , iraq was seeing a reduction in violence .
libya was somewhat stable .
syria was under control .
the group we now know today , isis , was close to being extinguished .
iran was being choked by sanctions .
now , take a look at what we have .
fast forward to the present time .
after hillary , here is what it looks like .
iraq is in total chaos .
syria is in the midst of a disastrous civil war .
a refugee crisis now threatens europe and the united states , where we 're taking in thousands and thousands and thousands of people .
isis has been unleashed unto the entire world .
iran , the world 's top state sponsor of terrorism has been put on the path to nuclear weapons , was given $ 400 million in ransom payment cash , where they just yesterday caught obama in yet another lie .
very much like -- you can keep your doctor , you can keep your plan , obamacare -- a total disaster .
it will be repealed .
it will be replaced .
hillary clinton is a legacy of death , destruction , and terrorism .
america deserves a better legacy .
all of you deserve a much , much , better future .
i am the change agent .
i am the change agent .
i am your messenger .
and i said it many times , i 'm nothing more than your messenger .
it 's a message of strong defense , common sense , take care of our vets , great education , get rid of common core , great health care , get rid of obamacare , save our second amendment .
which is under tremendous siege right now .
hillary clinton is the defender of the status quo or what we have .
while our country lost badly under hillary clinton , she cashed in big time .
our country was losing .
our people were losing , but she is cashing in .
bill clinton 's speaking fees surged while hillary was secretary of state .
he was paid almost $ 50 million for speeches during her tenure , an increase in 44 percent over the previous four years .
by the way , things came out today that blow everything away today .
then there was all of the money funneled into the clinton foundation from foreign governments and corporations .
it was pay for play .
yet , hillary clinton , who is indifferent to the suffering she has caused , has no remorse at all .
she offers no apologies .
no apologies for unleashing isis .
no apologies for her open borders .
no apologies for lying about her e - mails or about benghazi .
the only way to learn the full depth of her public corruption is to read the 33,000 e - mails that she deleted .
and the only way to get justice in this rigged system is to show up and vote on november 8th and vote big , big , big .
and i will bring your jobs back .
so are you ready to vote ?
and what about your future ?
is it going to be great , good , or terrible ?
great .
so if you 're ready to vote for honest government and the honest government that you deserve , a trump administration will end the corruption and restore integrity to government service .
remember , i 'm funding my campaign , i 'm spending tremendous amounts of money on running for office .
i 'm raising money for the republican party and the republican national committee , which i think is doing a very good job , but i 'll tell you more about that on november 8th .
i 'll let you know if they do a good job or if they do not such a good job .
but i think they 're going to do a great job .
no one will be above the law in a trump administration .
the state department will work for the country , not for hillary clinton 's donors .
and i will work for you and i will work for no one else .
i will work for you .
i will never lie to you .
i will never put any other interests before you and i will never , ever stop fighting for you .
never .
the government will work for the people again .
that means we are only going to admit individuals into our country who support our values and we 're not going to issue visas where   screening   controls take place .
we are going to make sure that we have total screening , and without it , we can not continue to have our government run like this .
we will also seek to join in partnership with any nation that wishes to join us in defeating and destroying isis .
at home , taxes will go down , especially for -- look , i mean , it 's going to go down for a lot of people , for business they 're going down , businesses are going to flourish , they 're going to come pouring back .
but taxes will go down , especially for middle - income americans .
and small business rates will be lowered to 15 percent so we can put millions of new jobs into our poorest neighborhoods .
as i said , obamacare will be repealed and replaced .
voters , not special interests , will be in charge finally .
we are going to bring our country together again .
we have a divided country .
it 's totally divided .
the era of division will be replaced with a future of unity , total unity .
we will love each other .
we will have one county .
everybody will work together .
we are going to do it by emphasizing what we all have in common as americans .
it 's time to break with the failures of the past and to fight for every last child in this country to have the better future they deserve .
in my administration , every american will be treated equally , protected equally and honored equally .
we will reject bigotry and hatred and oppression in all of its forms and seek a new future built on our common culture and values as one american people .
this is the change i am promising to all of you ; an honest government with low taxes , a thriving economy and a just society for each and every american .
it 's time to vote for a new american future .
together , we will make america wealthy again , we will make america united again , we will make america proud again , we will make america safe again and we will make america great again .
god bless you .
thank you .
thank you very much , michigan .
thank you .
thank you very much .
oh jon .
jon is such a great actor and such a great person .
he is such a great person .
and he 's really been with me a long time in a lot of different ways .
he 's been incredible , so i just want to thank jon and i hope he makes another movie very quickly because i love his movies .
in particular i wanted to thank our host , tony perkins , for his years of leadership , and we know all about that .
and we all express our support for tony as he deals with the aftermath of the terrible floods in louisiana where two weeks ago i spent some time and i saw some incredible , incredible people .
right .
thank you .
amazing .
amazing people .
one of the greatest privileges of my journey has been the time i 've spent with the evangelical community and the support they gave me in those primaries was absolutely incredible .
i have to tell you .
all across the nation .
a lot of people said , " i wonder if donald will get the evangelicals ? "
i got the evangelicals .
i 'm gon na make it up to you , too .
you watch .
there are no more decent voters , or selfless people , than our christian brothers and sisters here in the united states .
so true .
i 've witnessed that incredible generosity all across this land .
-- gotten to know so many people .
i -- 
  -- during my trip to louisiana where christian volunteers raced to help their fellow citizens in need .
franklin graham is an example .
he brought the most incredible people and equipment to louisiana .
and he did n't want anything for it .
he 's a great man .
it 's that spirit of giving that we will need to rebuild louisiana and to rebuild this country , which is in serious , serious trouble .
yet , our media culture often mocks and demeans people of faith , and you understand that .
all the time i hear from concerned parents how much harder it is for a christian family to raise their children in today 's media environment .
it is right , is n't it ?
it is right .
not even close .
your values of love , charity and faith built this nation .
so how can it be that our media treats people of faith so poorly ?
one of the reasons is that our politicians have really abandoned you to a large extent .
and hillary clinton , you can forget about her .
so let me state this right upfront .
a trump administration , our christian heritage will be cherished , protected , defended like you 've never seen before .
believe me .
i believe and you believe it and you know it .
you know it .
and that includes religious liberty , remember .
remember .
i recently had a chance to visit a church in detroit .
great faith ministries international .
stand up if you 're a member , that 's good .
that was a great -- that was an amazing experience .
and the bishop , what a great guy .
in my remarks , i spoke -- 
  -- about how african american church , and this is all across the country , for centuries have been the conscience of our nation .
their unbreakable faith and spirit overcame some of the most difficult periods in our history , leading us all to a better future .
it 's very true , amazing .
this was such an amazing experience .
this is the power of faith .
it 's the power to heal , it 's the power to unite , it 's the power to make all of us live better lives , all of us .
our nation today is divided .
nobody likes to say it , but we 're living in a very , very divided nation .
it will be our faith in god , in his teachings , in each other that will lead us back to unity .
each of us here today has a role to play in bringing our country together , united in common purpose and in common values .
so let 's talk today about some of the things , and these are great things , that we can do together to create the american future for everybody , not just a certain group of people , but for everybody .
the first thing we have to do is give our churches their voice back , it 's been taken away .
the johnson amendment has blocked our pastors and ministers and others from speaking their minds from their own pulpits .
if they want to talk about christianity , if they want to preach , if they want to talk about politics , they 're unable to do so .
if they want to do it , they take a tremendous risk that they lose their tax - exempt status .
all religious leaders should be able to freely express their thoughts and feelings on religious matters .
and i will repeal the johnson amendment if i am elected your president .
i promise .
so important .
thank you .
that 's so important .
and i must tell you from the heart , this started -- a building of mine in manhattan , i had 50 pastors in a big conference room .
and we actually had 50 pastors , two rabbis , a couple of priests , we were all talking .
and we were there for two hours .
and at the end , it was a love fest .
we all agreed it was like a love fest .
and i said to them -- we were high up in a building on fifth avenue .
and i said to them , i 'd love your support .
and i know when i can get support .
i 'm quite sophisticated .
and i know they wanted to give me their total support , 100 percent , just like i had in the primaries .
and i said , i really would like your support .
and they did n't really know what i was talking about .
and i said , what 's going on here ?
they said , well , sir , we ca n't do that because we would be violating the laws .
and i said , what 's the punishment ?
well , we could lose our tax - exempt status .
which , of course , is a massive penalty .
i said , tell me about this .
and we sat down and they talked about it .
when did it happen ?
1954 or so , lyndon johnson was having problems .
powerful guy .
i actually , as his own   way , have to gain respect for what he was able to do .
can you imagine that this man singlehandedly -- he was having problems with churches .
and there was a church in houston that was giving him a hard time , maybe for a very good reason .
and he put in an amendment that basically stopped our great pastors and ministers and others from talking under the penalty of losing their tax - exempt status .
so we were looking down onto the sidewalk , and there were people walking on the sidewalk .
and i said , so , folks , what you 're telling me is those people walking way , way down there on the sidewalk have really more power than you do because they 're allowed to express their feelings and thoughts openly and without penalty .
and one of the pastors , who i knew very well -- and these are powerful people .
these are strong people with magnificent voices and just -- and magnificent hearts , much more importantly .
they looked at me and they said , that 's actually right , they have more power than we do .
we 're not allowed to express .
and that 's when i said we have to start thinking about this .
and i thought about it .
and then we had a large group of pastors again .
i said , i have thought about it .
if i become president , we are going to knock out the johnson amendment .
we are going to do that .
and it 's not going to be hard .
it 's not going to be hard .
when you -- when you think from the standpoint of political , you have more than men -- let 's say men are 50 percent , women are 50 percent .
you 're much more than 50 percent added together .
and i actually believe that 's one of the reasons why you have n't seen christianity and other religions within the united states going like a rocket ship , like our polls have been going in the last four weeks , a rocket ship .
right ?
i really believe that .
because you 're great people .
the people that you rely on sunday and all during the week , they 've been stopped from talking and speaking by a law and we 're going to get rid of that law -- it 's going to get rid of -- we 're going to get rid of it so fast .
and i 'm so proud to say , honestly i do n't want to take credit -- 
  -- but you had 50 people in that first meeting and many more in the second , i am so proud , i was just telling this to tony   to say , that was my idea .
i figure it 's the only way i 'm getting to heaven so this is going to very ...   the only way .
so we 're going to get rid of it and we 're going to let your great people speak and you 're going to see something happen that 's going to be very , very good , ok ?
so important .
i hope -- which means , you have to get out and vote .
on november 8 , you can not -- you did n't vote four years ago , you did n't vote .
you did n't , well you did , a few of you did .
believe me i know .
i look at the stats .
you did n't vote .
but this time you really have -- and this is your last chance , this is it .
i mean we 'll never have this opportunity again .
so i hope you can get every one of your friends and just get up your family and your friends and get out and vote , ok ?
november 8 .
thank you .
and if you do , we 're going to win by a lot .
that 's not going to even be a close election .
if you do n't , could be a very unhappy november 8 .
we 're also going to repeal and replace disastrous obamacare .
which gives the government control over the lives of every day citizens and the numbers are horrendous .
your premiums are going up by 50 , 60 , 70 percent .
the deductible is so high you never get to use it unless you are going to   a very long and very complex bad period .
very , very long .
it is a disaster .
it 's a disaster and everybody knows that , that it 's going to die of its own weight anyway .
but we 're going to get rid of it and we 're going to replace it with some great , great alternatives .
a much better healthcare at a much lower price .
hillary clinton wants to have completely government run healthcare , which would be a disaster for the liberties and freedoms of all america , this is what she wants , that 's what she 's aiming at .
that 's what obama wanted , he did n't quite there .
but he got this and you see how bad this has been .
one of the biggest issues in this race is going to be the issue of school choice .
and i ca n't possibly emphasize this enough , millions of poor and disadvantaged students are trapped in failing schools .
this education crisis afflicts all communities but none more so than the african american community , none .
the democratic party has run the inner cities of america for 50 , 60 , 70 years , some cases over 100 years .
over 100 years .
their policies and their politics and in particular , the politics of people like hillary clinton have produced only poverty , joblessness and rising crime .
when she was running for the senate in new york state , she said she was gon na produce jobs , jobs , jobs , in upstate new york .
it 's a disaster .
she could have produced jobs .
big thing .
jobs .
we 're gon na bring back jobs .
gon na -- catastrophe .
we 've lost tens of thousands of jobs -- she never did a thing .
it was all talk , no action .
just like what she 's doing right now is all talk and no action .
she 'll talk and talk and nothing will happen , only bad will happen .
but you just have to ask the people in upstate new york -- she won because of them , and she produced absolutely nothing .
jobs left .
it 's today one of the worst , one of the most depressing places in this country .
so just remember that when you hear her talking about jobs .
i know jobs .
she does n't know jobs .
that i can tell you .
i have outlined a new civil rights agenda for our time .
the right to a safe community , a great education and a secure job .
and i say to african - american parents , i say to hispanic - american parents , and i say it with great respect , our inner cities are a disaster .
crime , no jobs , education is the worst , in many cases almost worldwide bad and in many cases actually worldwide bad .
i say with great respect , what do you have to lose ?
it ca n't get any worse .
it ca n't get any worse .
you choose donald trump , i 'm gon na fix the problem .
you 're gon na have safety , you 're gon na have good education , we 're gon na get jobs because we 're gon na bring our jobs back .
mexico 's taken our jobs .
so many other places have taken our jobs .
what china 's doing to us is horrible .
we 'll have jobs .
what have you got to lose ?
i 'm gon na fix it .
i 'm gon na fix it .
school choice is at the center of this civil rights agenda .
and my goal is to provide every single inner city child in american that is trapped in a failing government school the freedom to attend the school of their choice .
competition and the schools will get better and better and better .
and if that means a private school , a religious school or a charter school or a magnet school -- school choice also means that parents can home school their children .
hundred percent .
hillary clinton opposes school choice because she 's controlled totally , totally , like a puppet , by special interests .
her policies will force millions of african - american and hispanic children to remain stuck in failed government schools , leading to higher unemployment and more poverty .
the poverty levels in this country nobody will believe .
nobody will believe .
my plan will break the government monopoly and make schools compete to provide the best services for our children , including every african - american and hispanic child in this country .
every single one of them .
this proposal begins with a $ 20 billion block grant from the federal government to states to pursue school choice programs .
however - that 's good , right ?
however , because 90 percent of education spending is at the state level , i will campaign to get the states to reallocate another $ 110 billion of their education budgets to school choice programs .
if we do this , that would mean $ 12,000 in school choice funds for every disadvantaged student in america .
what a difference this is going to make .
the money will follow the student to the public , private , or religious school that is best for them and their family .
in so many ways you 're going to have a choice .
my administration will partner with the leadership of any inner city , anybody , anybody , in the inner cities of america willing to run a pilot program -- and there will be a lot of them -- to provide school choice to every child in that community .
in baltimore , for instance , that would mean more than $ 15,000 in funds available per student .
as your president , i will be the biggest cheerleader for school choice you 've ever seen .
this means a lot of me because i know it can turn things around .
again , the education ca n't get worse .
common core , we 're going to end it .
we 'll bring in education .
i will fight for every child in this country who deserve better futures .
the african - american community has heard my message that i am going to make the inner city safe again , and i 'm going to bring back jobs , and i 'm going to bring back the great education .
do n't be surprised -- remember this , november eighth .
do n't be surprised , because we have been given a lot of support over the last three or four weeks , if on november eighth i get more african - american and hispanic votes than anyone thought possible about a month ago .
you see what 's going on .
they 're starting -- people are starting to hear about this and they say , wow , wow .
they 're liking it .
and , again , ca n't get any worse .
it 's going to get a lot better , but only if i do .
they ca n't do it .
the -- the democrats they have what they 've done is incredible .
and hillary clinton will be absolutely more of the same , rigid .
it 'll never change .
remember , 100 years , 70 years , 50 , it 's not going to change .
not going to happen .
now let 's talk about another issue that will define the future of this country for generations to come .
the united states supreme court .
earlier this year we lost the great justice antonin scalia .
the next president will not only have to fill this seat , but as many as four others .
it could even be -- i mean we could end up with a total of five judges by one president .
it would be record - setting .
probably be three .
could be four , could even be five .
and you pick the wrong people , you have a country that is no longer your country .
it will be a disaster .
one of the most important issues frankly , other than maybe defense -- because we 're going to build up our military .
it 's so depleted .
we 're going to take care of our vets .
we 're going to protect your second amendment .
so many things .
but one of the most important -- some people think it 's actually the most important -- is the filling of the seats united states supreme court .
you see what 's happening right now .
essentially it 's four and four and you see what -- how bad it is .
we 're going to pick great judges .
i 've already put a list of 11 federalist society highly recommended .
got uniform great on these 11 people .
and we are going to put truly great people -- maybe we use judge scalia as the ultimate example of what we are looking for , ok .
this will determine whether or not we remain a constitutional republic , frankly .
that 's what 's going to happen .
i have pledged to appoint judges who uphold the constitution , to protect your religious liberty and apply the law as written .
we reject judges who rewrite the constitution to impose their own personal views on 300 million - plus americans .
not going to have that .
i 've made public a list of judges , as i said , that will guide my selection process .
hillary clinton has refused to provide such a list , and we brought it up .
let 's see a list .
if you ever saw the list , you would walk out of here not feeling very well .
because she knows the extremist judges she would pick would be rejected by the overwhelming majority of the american public , they 'd be rejected .
clinton 's judicial picks would allow her to completely take over american healthcare , the american economy and americans ' religious liberty .
not to mention your second amendment , which is on very thin ice right now , as you know , because of the fact that we 're four - four .
if they even pick one judge who 's wrong , you can probably , as you know it , you can kiss the second amendment goodbye .
and we do n't want to see that .
another issue in this race of great importance to everyone in this room is the issue , of course , of national security .
just today , it was announced that north korea performed its fifth nuclear test , it 's forth since hillary clinton became secretary of state .
it 's just one more massive failure from a failed secretary of state .
she failed at everything .
her policies have also put iran onto a path of nuclear weapons .
and i have to say , made them overnight an absolute power .
they were dying three years ago .
the sanctions were choking them .
they would have fallen , but obama did n't support people that would have taken over , and i think in this case , probably would have taken over the right way .
they had no support .
but look at what 's happened to iran in such a short period of time .
but remember the ransom payments , remember , it was $ 400 million two weeks ago .
but then they made a mistake .
this is cash .
remember , they said they paid cash because they could n't open a bank account , there was no way of sending it into a checking account ?
all lies , just like obamacare was a big lie , remember ?
you can use your plan , you can use your doctors , 27 times , right ?
twenty- seven times .
use your doctors , use your plan .
it turned out to be a lie , it 's all a lie .
it 's all a big lie .
it 's a rigged system and it 's a lie .
and i 'll tell you what -- i 'll tell you what .
the $ 400 million , for those that have n't been reading the papers over the last two days , turned out to be $ 1.7 billion in cash , cash .
and i actually said -- they said that money 's going to be used for terror .
i said , no they do n't need it for terror , they 've got $ 150 billion .
that 's in addition to the $ 150 billion we gave them back .
i said they do n't need it .
this is going into their swiss accounts and going into their accounts .
they 're not going to use it for terror , they have plenty of money for terror .
think of it , $ 1.7 billion cash .
massive big vats of cash .
you saw them .
cartons .
never saw anything like it .
i 've seen a lot of cash .
never saw anything like this -- $ 1.7 billion .
can you imagine these guys ?
planes get -- they stop .
remember they would n't give back the hostages , they waited there for hours and hours and obama kept saying , " no , no , this has nothing to do . "
even the hostages said they kept us waiting for a certain plane to come in .
not to take them back .
because they were waiting for something .
it was this .
just another lie .
but can you imagine these people sitting there and they see $ 1.7 billion in cash .
oy , oy , oy , they think we 're stupid .
they think we 're stupid .
they wo n't be thinking it for long .
at the same time , isis is hunting down and exterminating what it calls the nation of the cross .
isis is carrying out a genocide against christians in the middle east .
we can not let this evil continue .
ca n't let it .
isis must be destroyed .
have to .
have no choice .
to defeat isis , we must use military warfare , but also cyber warfare , financial warfare and ideological warfare .
it 's a whole different ballgame today than it was 50 years ago and 200 years ago .
different world .
we must also establish a bipartisan goal in the united states and an international goal with our allies of defeating radical islamic terrorism .
words that our president wo n't use and words that hillary clinton wo n't use .
just like we won the cold war by identifying our enemy and building a consensus to guide a long - term strategy , so too must we do the same with islamic terrorism .
by the way , president obama has allowed syrian refugees to pour into our country at unbelievable rates and hillary clinton wants to allow 550 percent more .
but it 's almost impossible to get a christian in from syria .
they take others , but they do n't take christians .
very rare , very rare .
so i said that we need to make safe zones in the region .
we want to take care of people .
but we absolutely can not allow this potential tremendous threat to continue and we have to stop this .
this is going to be potentially a catastrophe for our country .
it 's from within .
this could be the all - time great trojan horse .
this could be it .
you ever notice on the -- you look at the migration trail and you see people with cell phones .
cell phones .
and some of the cell phones have the isis flag printed on them .
and some of them have things far worse than that .
scenes far worse than that .
so it was the failed policies , you have to remember , of hillary clinton and obama that unleashed isis in the first place .
if they did the right thing , you would n't be talking about isis right now .
now she wants to get rid of them , oh we 're going to get rid of them .
she tells them already , there will be no boots on the ground .
now even if you even do n't want boots on the ground , you do n't want to say it .
do n't say it .
now they 're saying oh , i hope she wins , oh boy would they dream of having her as president , can you imagine ?
they dream about it every night , having hillary clinton .
but even if you believe it -- and i can understand that , no boots on the ground , i can understand , you do n't say it .
let them think they 're going to go through hell , do n't say it .
can you imagine the great general douglas macarthur , can you imagine the great general george patton or one of our great generals that we have today , general flynn , who 's here someplace , i love general flynn .
but can you imagine these people saying , i mean they 're basically giving out the strategy .
there will be no boots on the ground .
if you do n't want that , i fully understand .
do n't say it .
do n't say it .
can you imagine macarthur saying , we 're going to fight the enemy and we 're going to move our troops in about a month .
we 're going to hit from behind .
we 're going to hit them from the front but -- and everything they say turns out to be true .
you know i hate to say this because we have a lot of evangelicals in this room , but maybe we should n't be so honest when it comes to military strategy , does that make sense ?
hope i did n't lose your vote for saying that .
just look at what her policies have left us with in iraq , syria and libya .
the problem is hillary clinton is trigger happy .
she really is , she 's trigger happy and yet she says , no boots .
which is sort of -- probably will be boots , you know , probably will turn out to be another disaster .
her tenure has brought us only war and destruction and death .
she 's just too quick to intervene , invade or to push for regime change with people we do n't even know who they are .
and they take over and they 're far worse .
this creates the power vacuums that are filled by terrorists and groups like isis .
my administration on the other hand , will work with any country that is willing to partner with us to defeat isis and halt radical islamic terrorism .
and by the way , that includes russia .
if they want to join us on knocking out isis , that is just fine as far as i 'm concerned .
it 's a very imperfect world and you ca n't always choose your friends .
life , but you can never fail to recognize your enemies and we have some real enemies .
unfortunately for our country , our enemies probably hacked into hillary clinton 's e - mails .
these are the same e - mails she destroyed after receiving a federal subpoena , what 's that ?
using software in order to bleach the e - mail so you can never , ever see then .
she even mysteriously lost 13 different phones before the fbi got them and many were destroyed with a hammer .
did anybody ever hit a hammer -- you know , maybe two or three people .
but they were just released from prison , those two people .
can you believe this ?
destroyed them with a hammer .
the old- fashioned way , i guess .
the other night , in the commander - in - chief forum -- did anybody see that ?
how did i do ?
good .
well , we have a big debate coming up .
who knows what 's going to happen there , but i will say every poll has me winning big league the commander - in - chief .
we had ...   the polls came out after that event and we won big league .
now , we have a debate coming up .
i do n't imagine any of you are going to be watching the debate .
i wo n't , i promise .
hillary clinton answered questions on her e- mails horribly .
that 's why she lost , that 's why she did so poorly , she was terrible .
she was -- honestly , i should n't be saying this .
she was terrible .
she keeps talking about the e - mails , every time she talks about them , she talks about them differently .
it seems each week -- true -- she has like a different answer .
but there can be no answer when she deletes 33,000 e - mails , bleaches them so they can never be recovered , an unheard of practice , hammers them into total silence .
you know what 's happening .
you know what 's happening .
i always say getting away with that will be the single greatest accomplishment of her career .
it 's true .
it 's true .
so her answers were bad .
they were bad .
and a lot of people said it was so totally dishonest .
and you know , she was blaming matt lauer .
i thought matt lauer did a very good job .
i mean , his questions to me were very tough .
but the gentleman who stood up and said , honestly , you should be in prison for what you did .
to me , that was the tough one .
that was the tough -- that was a tough question .
well , sort of a question in the form of a statement , right ?
clinton is unfit to be our president for many reasons .
true .
she 's unfit for many reasons , the biggest of which is her judgment .
it 's just so bad .
it 's time to restore honesty and integrity to our government , we have to do it .
and one more issue -- final issue i wanted to discuss today is the economy and helping those in need .
there is no more charitable group in this country than christians and all of us -- true -- and all of us here today determined to lift suffering americans out of poverty .
we 're going to do it .
with -- a lot of other people are going to help .
as your president , i will pursue a complete reform of our economy to bring back millions of new jobs into our country , millions of new jobs .
we 've lost our jobs like we 're a bunch of babies .
they 've gone to other countries .
they 've gone to mexico .
they 've gone to many other countries .
china 's taking massive advantage of us .
it 's all so easy , believe me .
it 's all so easy .
that includes we will be doing massive tax cuts for working families and for businesses .
it includes , very importantly , the elimination of all needless job - killing regulations .
it includes lifting the restrictions on america energy , which is under siege .
i will also renegotiate nafta .
and if they do n't want to renegotiate it so it becomes a two - way highway , not just a one - way highway out of the united states for our companies and our jobs , we will terminate nafta .
believe me .
we 'll stand up to china and we 're going to fight for every last job .
it 's going to be america first and it 's going to be the american worker first .
crucially , i will also fight for the american family and american family values .
the family must be at the center of any anti - poverty agenda .
has to be .
thank you .
our country just lost one of the great champions for the american family , phyllis schlafly , great woman , really great woman .
we send our thoughts and prayers to her loved ones .
i will be going to her funeral tomorrow in st. louis .
phyllis fought very hard to the very end for a free and prosperous america .
she understood that to be truly united as a country , we ca n't simply turn to government or to politicians .
the bedrock of our unity is the realization that we 're all brothers and sisters created by the same god .
phyllis understood that .
phyllis understood .
and by the way , phyllis endorsed me a long time ago when it was n't necessarily something that was so easy to do .
and she was incredible .
she was so brave .
she endorsed me , and that was not the thing to do at the time .
people said , " trump ? "
she said , " he 's going to win , you do n't understand , he knows how to win , he 's going to win . "
they said , " phyllis , not going to be trump . "
and we went boom , boom , boom .
but i will tell you , phyllis endorsed me at a time when it was n't necessarily the thing to do , even the popular thing to do .
and i will never forget that .
that had a huge impact .
she was a great , great powerful woman with a tremendous heart .
and i look forward to being with her family tomorrow because you really -- that 's a celebration .
she was 92 years old .
we 're all equal and we all come from the same creator .
if we remember that simple fact , then our future is truly limitless .
there is nothing we as americans ca n't do .
there 's a biblical verse that i 've often read and i want to repeat it again because i think it is so important to what we 're trying to achieve right now for our country .
it 's from first john chapter four . "
no one has ever seen god , but if we love one another , god lives in us and his love is made complete in us . "
so true .
so true .
imagine what our country could accomplish if we started working together as one people under one god , saluting one flag .
it 's time to stop quibbling over the smallest words and time to start dreaming about the great adventures that lie ahead for our country .
this is my promise to all of you .
starting in 2017 , we will be one american nation .
it 's time to break our ties with the bitter failures of the past and to embrace a new american future .
have to do it .
together , we will make america believe again , we will make america united again and we will make america great again .
thank you much and god bless you , thank you .
thank you .
thank you very much .
thank you .
thank you .
thank you very much .
thank you and it 's great to be in charlotte .
i just met with our many amazing employees right up the road at my property .
i will tell you , they like me very much .
i guess i pay them a little too much .
i 'd like to take a moment to talk about the heartbreak and devastation in louisiana , a state that is very , very special to me .
we are one nation .
when one state hurts , we all hurt , and we must all work together to lift each other up .
working , building , restoring together .
our prayers are with the families who have lost loved ones , and we send them our deepest condolences .
through   words can not express the sadness one feels at times like this .
i hope everyone in louisiana knows that our country is praying for them and standing with them to help them in these difficult hours .
they are very , very difficult .
thank you .
we are one country , one people , and we will have together one great fantastic future .
together , i 'd like to talk about the new american future that we are going to create as a team together .
last week , i laid out my plan to bring jobs back to our country .
they are vanishing , and they are vanishing quickly .
on monday , i laid out my plan to defeat radical islamic terrorism .
on tuesday , in wisconsin , i talked about how we 're going to restore law and order to this country .
we need law and order .
without it , we have nothing .
let me take this opportunity to extend our thanks and our gratitude to the police and law enforcement officers in this country who have sacrificed so greatly in these very difficult times .
and they are difficult .
the chaos and violence on our streets and the assault on law enforcement are really and truly an attack against all peaceful citizens .
if i 'm elected president , this chaos and violence will end , and it will end very , very quickly .
every single citizen in our land has a right to live in safety .
to be one united nations , we must protect all of our people .
all of our people .
but we must also provide opportunities for all of our people .
we can not make america great again if we leave any community behind .
nearly four in 10 african - american children are living in poverty .
i will not rest until children of every color in this country are fully included in the american dream .
jobs , safety , opportunity is what we have to have and it 's what we need .
fair and equal representation .
this is what i promise to african - americans , hispanics , americans and -- of all types , of all colors , of all religions .
this is what we promise , we all promise .
everybody in this room promises this is what we have to do .
but to achieve this new american future , we must break from the failures of the past .
as you know , i 'm not a politician .
it 's good .
i 've worked in business , created a great company , created lot of jobs , rebuilding neighborhoods .
that 's what i 've done all of my adult life .
i 've never wanted to learn the language of the insiders and i 've never been politically correct .
it takes far too much time .
truthfully , it takes far too much time and can often make it more difficult to achieve total victory .
sometimes , in the heat of debate and speaking on a multitude of issues , you do n't choose the right words or you say the wrong thing .
i have done that .
and believe it or not , i regret it .
and i do regret it , particularly where it may have caused personal pain .
too much is at stake for us to be consumed with these issues .
but one thing -- i can promise you this .
i will always tell you the truth .
i speak the truth for all of you and for everyone in this country who does n't have a voice , of which there are many .
i speak the truth on behalf of the factory worker who lost his or her job , and that 's happening more and more in our country .
i speak the truth on behalf of the veteran who has been denied the medical care they need and the medical care they deserve .
and so many are not making it , but they 're going to make it if trump becomes president .
that , i can tell you .
they are dying on lines waiting for a doctor .
we are going to take care of our veterans .
i speak the truth on behalf of the family living near the border that deserves to be safe in their own country , but is instead living with no security and no protection at all .
we will build the wall .
believe me , we will build it .
our campaign is about representing the great majority of americans .
republicans , democrats , independents , conservatives and liberals who read the newspaper or turn on the television and do n't hear anyone -- anyone speaking for them .
all they hear are insiders fighting for other insiders .
that 's what they do .
these are the forgotten men and women in our society , and they are angry at so much and on so many levels ...   ... the poverty , the unemployment , the failing schools , the jobs moving to other countries .
i 'm fighting for these forgotten americans .
fourteen months ago , i declared my campaign for the presidency on the promise to give our government back to the people .
every day since then , i 've worked to repay the loyalty and the faith that you have put in me .
every day i think about how much is at stake for our country in the upcoming election .
this is n't just the fight of my life , it 's the fight of our lives together to save our country .
thank you .
i refuse to let another generation of american children be excluded from the american dream , which is what 's happening .
our whole country loses when young people of limitless potential are denied the opportunity to contribute their talents because we failed to provide them the opportunities that they deserve .
let our children be dreamers too .
our whole country loses every time a kid does n't graduate from high school or fails to enter the workforce or , worse still , is lost to the dreadful world of drugs and crime .
and so many are , so , so many .
when i look at the failing schools , the terrible trade deals , the infrastructure crumbling in our inner cities , i know all of this can be fixed and i can fix it .
but i know it can be fixed very , very quickly if we know what we 're doing .
in the world i come from , if something is broken , you fix it ; if something is n't working , you replace it ; if a product does n't deliver , you make a change .
i have no patience for injustice , no tolerance for government incompetence -- and that 's what it is , is gross incompetence ...   ... and no sympathy for leaders who fail their citizens .
that 's why i am running : to end the decades of bitter failure and to offer the american people a new future of honesty , justice and opportunity ...   ... a future where america and its people always -- and i mean always -- comes first .
america first .
remember america first .
america first .
are n't you tired of a system that gets rich ?
and this is a system which is getting very rich at your expense , that 's what 's happening .
are n't you tired of the same old lies and the same old broken promises ?
and hillary clinton has proven to be one of the greatest liars of all time .
are n't you tired of arrogant leaders who look down on you instead of serving and protecting you ?
and that 's what 's happening .
that is all about to change and it 's about to change very , very soon .
how about november 8th ?
we are going to put the american people first again .
i 've traveled all across this country laying out my bold and modern agenda for change .
in this journey , i will never lie to you , i will never tell you something i do not believe , i will never put anyone 's interests ahead of yours ...   ... and i will never ever stop fighting for you .
i have no special interests controlling me and i have no special interests .
i 'm spending millions and millions of dollars on my own campaign .
i 'm funding my campaign .
my only interest is the american people ; my interest .
this country has been so good to me , i 'm giving back .
and that 's what it 's all about , giving back .
so while sometimes i can be too honest , hillary clinton is the exact opposite .
she never tells the truth : one lie after another and getting worse with each passing day .
thank you .
the american people are still waiting for hillary clinton to apologize for all of the many lies she 's told to them and the many times she has betrayed the american people at great danger to them .
tell me , has hillary ever apologized for lying about her illegal e - mail server and deleting 33,000 e - mails ?
has hillary clinton apologized for turning the state department into a pay - for - play operation where favors are sold to the highest bidder , which is exactly what 's happening ?
has she apologized for lying to the families who lost loved ones at benghazi ?
has she apologized for putting iran on a path to nuclear weapons ?
has she apologized for iraq ?
for libya , for syria ?
has she apologized for unleashing isis across the world ?
she and barack obama unleashed isis .
whether you like it or do n't like it , whether you want to hear it or do n't , that 's what happened .
has hillary clinton apologized for the decisions she made that have led to so much death , destruction and terrorism ?
speaking of lies , we now know from the state department , just announced , that president obama lied about the $ 400 million in cash ...   ... that was flown to iran .
it was flown to iran .
$ 400 million in cash .
he denied it was for the hostages , but it was .
just came out .
he said , " we do n't pay ransom , " but we did .
he lied about the hostages , openly and blatantly , just like he lied about obamacare .
you remember , " you can have your doctor , you can have your plan , " right ? "
you can have your doctor , you can have your plan . "
did n't work out that way .
now the administration has put every american traveling overseas , including our military personnel , at greater risk of being kidnapped .
hillary clinton owns president obama 's iran policy : one more reason she can never , ever be allowed to be president .
let 's talk about the economy .
here , in this beautiful and great state , so many people have suffered because of nafta .
nafta .
remember nafta , what it 's done to this country .
bill clinton signed the deal and hillary clinton supported the deal .
north carolina has lost nearly half of its manufacturing jobs since nafta went into effect .
bill clinton also put china into the world trade organization , another hillary clinton - backed disaster .
your city of charlotte has lost one in four manufacturing jobs since china joined the wto , and many of these jobs were lost while hillary clinton was secretary of state , our chief diplomat with china .
she was a disaster .
totally unfit for this job .
totally unfit .
hillary clinton owes the state of north carolina a very big apology .
and i think you 'll get that apology around the same time you 'll get to see her 33,000 deleted e - mails .
in another words , you 'll never see the apology .
another major issue in this campaign has been the border .
our open border has allowed drugs and crime and gangs to pour into our country and our communities .
so much needless suffering , so much preventable death .
i 've spent time with the families of wonderful americans whose loved ones were killed by the open borders and sanctuary cities that hillary clinton supports .
i 've embraced crying parents who 've lost their children to violence spilling across our border , parents like laura wilkerson and michelle root and sabin durden and my friend jamiel shaw , whose children were killed by illegal immigrants so needlessly .
my opponent supports sanctuary cities .
but where were these sanctuaries for kate steinle ?
where were they ?
where were they ?
where was it ?
where was the sanctuary for kate ?
think about it .
where was the sanctuary for the children of laura and michelle and sabin and jamiel ?
where was the sanctuary for every other parent who has suffered so horribly ?
these moms and dads do n't get a lot of consideration from our politicians .
they certainly do n't get apologies .
they 'll never even get the time of day from hillary clinton .
she does n't even care , i 'm convinced .
but they will always come first to me .
listen closely .
we will deliver justice for all of these great american families .
we will create a system of immigration that makes us all proud .
hillary clinton 's mistakes destroy innocent lives , sacrifice national security and betray the working families of this country .
please remember this : i will never put personal profit before national security .
nobody should .
i will never leave our border open to appease donors and special interests , which is what hillary is doing .
and they are being appeased .
i will never support a trade deal that kills american jobs .
i will never ever put the special interests before the national interests .
i will never put a donor before a voter , or a lobbyist before a citizen .
instead , i will be a champion for the people .
the establishment media does n't cover what really matters in this country or what 's really going on in people 's lives .
they will take words of mine out of context and spend a week obsessing over every single syllable and then pretend to discover some hidden meaning in what i said .
just imagine for a second if the media spent this energy holding the politicians accountable who got innocent americans like kate steinle killed .
she was gunned down by an illegal immigrant who had been deported five times .
just imagine if the media spent time -- and lots of time -- investigating the poverty and joblessness of the inner cities .
just think about how much different things would be if the media in this country sent their cameras to our border , to our closing factories , or to our failing schools ...   ... or if the media focused on what dark secrets must be hidden in the 33,000 e - mails that hillary clinton illegally deleted .
thank you .
instead every story is told from the perspective of the insider .
it 's the narrative of the people who rig the system , never the voice of the people it 's been rigged against , believe me .
so many people suffering for so long in silence .
no cameras , no coverage , no outrage from the media class that seems to get outraged over just about everything else .
so again , it 's not about me .
it 's never been about me .
it 's been about all the people in this country who do n't have a voice .
i am running to be your voice .
thank you .
i am running to be the voice for every forgotten part of this country that has been waiting and hoping for a better future .
i am glad that i make the powerful -- and i mean very powerful -- a little uncomfortable now and again , including some of the powerful people , frankly , in my own party .
because it means that i 'm fighting for real change -- real change .
there 's a reason hedge fund managers , the financial lobbyists , the wall street investors are throwing their money all over hillary clinton : because they know she will make sure the system stays rigged in their favor .
it 's the powerful protecting the powerful , the insiders fighting for the insiders .
i am fighting for you .
here is the change i propose .
on terrorism , we are going to end the era of nation - building and instead focus on destroying , destroying , destroying isis and radical islamic terrorism .
we will use military , cyber and financial warfare , and work with any partner in the world and the middle east that shares our goal of defeating terrorism .
i have a message for the terrorists trying to kill our citizens : we will find you , we will destroy you , and we will absolutely win , and we will win soon .
on immigration , we will temporarily suspend immigration from anyplace where adequate screening can not be performed .
extreme vetting .
remember , extreme vetting .
all applicants for immigration will be vetted for ties to radical ideology , and we will screen out anyone who does n't share our values and love our people .
anyone who believes sharia law supplants american law will not be given an immigrant visa .
if you want to join our society , then you must embrace our society , our values and our tolerant way of life .
those who believe in oppressing women , gays , hispanics , african- americans and people of different faiths are not welcome to join our great country .
we will promote our american values , our american way of life and our american system of government , which are all -- all -- the best in the world .
my opponent , on the other hand , wants a 550 percent increase in syrian refugees , even more than already pouring into our country under president obama .
her plan would bring in roughly 620,000 refugees from all refugee - sending nations in her first term alone , on top of all other immigration .
think of that .
think of that .
what are we doing ?
hillary clinton is running to be america 's angela merkel ...   ... and we 've seen how much crime and how many problems that 's caused the german people and germany .
we have enough problems already .
we do not need more .
on crime , we 're going to add more police , more investigators and appoint the best judges and prosecutors in the world .
we will pursue strong enforcement of federal laws .
the gangs and cartels and criminal syndicates terrorizing our people will be stripped apart one by one , and they 'll be sent out of our country quickly .
their day is over and it 's going to end very , very fast .
our trade ...   thank you .
on trade , we 're going to renegotiate nafta to make it better .
and if they do n't agree , we will withdraw .
and likewise , we 're going to withdraw from the trans- pacific partnership , another disaster .
stand up to china on our terrible trade agreements and protect every last american job .
hillary clinton has supported all of the major trade deals that have stripped this country of its jobs and its wealth .
we owe $ 20 trillion .
on taxes , we are going to massively cut tax rates for workers and small businesses creating millions of new good paying jobs .
we 're going to get rid of regulations that send jobs overseas and we are going to make it easier for young americans to get the credit they need to start a small business and pursue their dream .
on education , so important , we are going to give students choice and allow charter schools to thrive .
we are going to end tenure policies that reward bad teachers and hurt our great , good teachers .
my opponent wants to deny students ' choice and opportunity all to get a little bit more money from the education bureaucracy .
she does n't care how many young dreams are dashed or destroyed and they 're destroyed .
young people are destroyed before they even start .
we are going to work closely with african american parents and children .
we are going to work with the parent students .
we are going to work with everybody in the african american community .
in the inner cities , and what a big difference that is going to make .
it 's one of the things i most look forward to doing .
this means a lot to me and it 's going to be a top priority in a trump administration .
on health care , we are going to repeal and replace the disaster called obamacare .
countless americans have been forced into part - time jobs , premiums are about to jump by double digits yet again , and just this week , aetna announced it is pulling out of the exchanges all over but also in north carolina .
we are going to replace this disaster with reforms that give you choice and freedom and control in health care at a much , much lower cost .
you 'll have much better health care at a much lower cost and it will happen quickly .
on political corruption , we are going to restore honor to our government .
in my administration , i 'm going to enforce all laws concerning the protection of classified information .
no one will be above the law .
i am going to forbid senior officials from trading favors for cash by preventing them from collecting lavish speaking fees through their spouses when they serve .
i 'm going to ask my senior officials to sign an agreement not to accept speaking fees from corporations with a registered lobbyist for five years after leaving office or from any entity tied to a foreign government .
finally , we are going to bring our country together .
it is so divided .
we are going to bring it together .
we are going to do it by emphasizing what we all have in common as americans .
we 're going to reject bigotry .
and i will tell you , the bigotry of hillary clinton is amazing .
she sees communities of color only as votes and not as human beings worthy of a better future -- it 's only votes .
it is only votes that she sees .
and she does nothing about it .
she 's been there forever , and look at where you are .
if african american voters give donald trump a chance by giving me their vote , the result for them will be amazing .
look how badly things are going under decades of democratic leadership .
look at the schools .
look at the poverty .
look at the 58 percent of young african americans not working -- 58 percent .
it is time for a change .
what do you have to lose by trying something new ?
i will fix it .
watch , i will fix it .
you have nothing to lose -- nothing to lose .
it is so bad .
the inner cities are so bad , you have nothing to lose .
they have been playing with you for 60 , 70 , 80 years -- many , many decades .
you have nothing to lose .
i will do a great job .
this means so much to me .
and i will work as hard as i can to bring new opportunity to places in our country which have known it in a very , very long time .
hillary clinton and the democratic party have taken african american votes totally for granted because the votes have been automatically there for them , there has been no reason for democrats to produce .
and they have n't , they have n't produced in decades and decades .
it 's time to break with the failures of the past and to fight for every last american child in this country to have a better and a much , much brighter future .
in my administration every american will be treated equally , protected equally , and honored equally .
we will reject bigotry , and hatred , and oppression in all of its forms and seek a new future built on our common culture and values as one american people .
this is the change i am promising to all of you , an honest government , a great economy , and a just society for each and every american .
but we can never , ever fix our problems by relying on the same politicians who created these problems in the first place -- ca n't do it .
72 percent of voters say our country is on the wrong track .
i am the change candidate .
hillary clinton is for the failed status quo to protect her special interests , her donors , her lobbyists , and others .
it is time to vote for a new american future .
together we will make america strong again .
we will make america proud again .
we will make america safe again 

  friends and fellow citizens , come november we will make america great again -- greater than ever before .
thank you , thank you , and god bless you .
thank you .
thank you very much .
thank you , everybody , thank you .
wow .
these crowds .
these crowds are terrific .
thank you very much .
in six days , we are going to win the great state of florida .
and we are going to win back the white house .
that will happen .
but you have to get out , you have to vote , we have to get out there .
we do n't want to blow it .
that i can tell you because we have worked very hard , all of us , you , me , everybody .
and it 's very historic what 's happening .
i 'd like to begin today by thanking all of you for joining me .
this has been an incredible journey and we 've all done it together .
we 're almost at the end .
but we 're really at the end of the beginning if you think about it .
are n't we ?
the end of the beginning .
our magnificent history movement has surprised the world and defied expectations at every single turn .
and now , next tuesday , we will have one last glorious surprise for the pundits , the politicians and the special interests and return the power back to the people .
it 's going to happen .
it 's going to happen .
it 's been the honor of my life share this journey with you , it has absolutely been .
there are two people , however , who i did not really get to share this with but who are in my thoughts often .
and that 's my mother and my father , great people .
i had great parents .
great parents .
i know they 're up there watching , i just felt that nice breeze .
it 's hot , but i just felt that nice breeze ...   ... so they 're helping us out .
and i just want to say thank you to both of them .
special , special people .
i 've had a great life and now i want to give back to the country that i love .
it 's time , we have to -- we have to give back , folks ...   i 've seen how the career of politicians , the big donors and the special interests have bled this country dry and stripped our middle class and stripped our companies of its jobs and its wealth .
but we 're just six days away from delivering justice for every forgotten man , woman and child in this country ...   justice for every child trapped in poverty in the inner cities , for every family that 's born -- and you know that , they 've been born into a situation in some case ; they ca n't get out of it .
we 're going to get them out of it .
we 're going to get them out of it .
we have endless wars .
every community 's hopes and dreams have been shattered and we 're not going to let that happen .
our inner cities are going to come back and   they 're going to come back strong and your going to see what i mean .
and the african - american community and the hispanic community are really understanding what 's going on and you see that right now .
you see that right now in   what 's happening at the polls .
we 're winning in florida , we 're winning in ohio , we 're winning in iowa , in north carolina .
we 're doing great in pennsylvania .
a lot of people are saying pennsylvania 's looking very good .
so many different places .
we just got a poll   with three   up   in virginia .
but we are seriously up in florida .
that 's very important , so ...   and i will never , ever let you down .
real change begins immediately with repealing and replacing obamacare , a   disaster .
a disaster .
it is a disaster .
it 's just been announced that the residents of florida are going to experience a massive double digit premium hike .
i will not tell you what the number is .
i know the number very well , but i want you to leave happy .
you do n't want to hear the number , go home , relax , wake up good and strong tomorrow morning .
you 'll learn , you 're not going to like it .
in the great state of arizona , where we just left , the   premiums are going up more than 116 percent .
over 90 percent of the counties in florida -- and by the way , in the primaries , i won 66 out of 67 primaries .
that 's good .
i was going to try and exaggerate and say i won them all , but i ca n't do   that .
over 90 percent of the counties in florida are losing obamacare insurers next year , they 're leaving .
they 're all leaving .
in minnesota where the premium increase will be close to 60 percent , the democratic governor has said the affordable care act is no longer affordable .
obamacare is a total catastrophe .
yet hillary clinton wants to double down on obamacare , making it even more expensive .
i 'm asking for your vote so we can replace obamacare and save healthcare for every family in florida , so important .
real change also means restoring honesty to our government .
as you know , the fbi has reopened its investigation into crooked hillary clinton .
hillary wants to blame everyone else for amounting legal troubles and i do n't see if you 've watched her last few speeches over the last few days .
she has become totally unhinged , unbelievable .
what she 's saying and what she 's doing is actually , it 's unbelievable .
but she has no one to blame but herself .
hillary is the one who set up the illegal private e - mail server to shield her criminal activity .
hillary is the one who engaged in a corrupt pay for play scheme at the state department .
hillary is the one who lied so many times to congress and to the fbi .
hilary is the one who made 13 phones disappear , some with a hammer and who destroyed 33,000 e - mails after -- after , after , after receiving a congressional subpoena , think of that .
unbelievable .
and as you know , they just found -- listen to this and i guess you know it , 650,000 e - mails .
and i would say that classified , confidential , i think they 're probably all over the place .
i think they 're -- i think they 're gon na find a treasure trough .
i ca n't even imagine .
in fact , they said well , this is ok they 're duplicates .
how could there be duplicates when its many more times what we thought was stolen in the first place , right ?
you know , when they deleted 33,000 i thought that was a lot .
they have 650,000 ?
hillary is the one who accepted debate questions given to her in advance and used them to cheat .
instead of reporting the breach .
that 's a big deal .
you know , to me that 's a big deal .
some people say oh , that 's fine , that 's a big deal .
that 's really -- that 's a real cheater , ok ?
that 's a cheater .
and she was given the questions by a woman that frankly should resigned from the dnc or be fired .
but that 's a really big deal .
and you notice , they never -- the dishonest prospect , the most dishonest .
if you notice , they never go after hillary .
they always talk about donna brazile , donna brazile did n't do it .
but can you imagine if i got -- can you imagine , they gave the questions to donald trump before a debate .
you know it would be the electric chair .
they 'd reinstitute the electric chair .
no .
it 'd be headlines all over the world .
this is n't headlines .
i bring it up ; it 's brought up a little bit .
but this is n't like a big deal .
she got the debate questions and answers .
but she got the debate questions prior to a debate .
now , bernie sanders should be angry right ?
should n't he be angry ?
now , i 'll tell you what .
the system is rigged .
the system is rigged .
i 've been saying it for a -- it 's rigged , and we 're gon na straighten it out .
but the system is rigged .
hillary is not the victim ; the american people are the victims of this system .
so corrupt in so many ways .
and this is your one chance to change it because you know what ?
in four years , not gon na happen .
there 's no way .
the numbers wo n't work .
in four years , there 's no way .
hillary clinton is the most corrupt person ever to seek the presidency .
and if she were to be elected , it would create an unprecedented constitutional crisis .
i mean before you go into phase two -- let 's call what happened on friday phase two .
phase one , she 's so guilty .
she should n't be allowed to run for the presidency .
that 's why i say the system is rigged .
she should n't be allowed to run .
but i have a feeling in the 650,000 e - mails , they 're gon na find things that you will not even believe .
who knows .
650,000 e - mails .
no wonder she ca n't do anything .
no , no .
how do you work ?
how do you do it ?
650,000 .
they 'll have to explain that to us some day .
but they 'll have some things in there that i can just imagine are going to be unbelievable .
hillary 's likely to be under investigation for many years .
probably concluding in a criminal trial .
out today , wikileaks just came out with a new one .
just a little while ago .
it 's just been shown that a rigged system with more collusion , possibly illegal between the department of justice , the clinton campaign , and the state department .
you saw that .
the e - mails show that the assistant attorney general who 's involved in the investigation has been feeding information directly to john podesta and the clinton campaign .
can you believe this ?
she should n't be allowed to run .
by the way , behind me , the great johnny damon .
the curse of the yankees , but ultimately he helped the yankees .
johnny damon .
stand up .
now , i 'll tell ya .
george steinbrenner was a good friend of mine .
oh , he did n't like johnny too much .
then he ultimately signed him and then he was fine .
he did great .
but johnny damon was a champ .
he was a winner .
and he loves this area , you know that .
my contract with the american voter begins with a tough ethics reform , and it ends -- i 'll tell you what .
we are going to end -- we have no choice .
we really have no choice -- government corruption .
it 's going to end .
i want the entire corrupt washington establishment to hear and to heed the words we all will say right now when we win on november 8 .
we are going to washington , d.c. and we are going to drain the swamp .
at the core of my contract is my plan to bring back our jobs .
florida has lost one in four of its manufacturing jobs since nafta , a deal signed by bill clinton with the support of crooked hillary .
america has lost -- this is so hard to believe -- 70,000 factories since china entered the world trade organization .
another bill and hillary backed disaster .
we are living through the greatest jobs theft in the history of the world .
a trump administration will stop the jobs from leaving america , and we will stop the jobs from leaving florida .
they 're leaving .
we 're going to stop it .
and you have an excellent governor , by the way .
he 's fighting hard for you folks .
i do n't know -- i do n't know .
all i can tell you is he is a worker , he is a worker , and he 's fighting very hard .
the theft of american prosperity will end and it 'll end , i 'll tell you .
we are -- it is being stolen from us folks .
it is -- we have a one - way highway right into mexico , right into other countries .
and we 're going to stop it .
from now on , it 's going to be america first .
america first .
it 's going to be america first .
a trump administration will renegotiate nafta and we will stand up to foreign product dumping , currency manipulation , and all of the unfair subsidy behaviors .
it 's horrible what 's happening to us .
our politicians do n't have a clue , they do n't know what they 're doing -- or other things , ok .
we will also immediately stop the job killing trans - pacific partnership .
as part of our plan to bring back jobs , we 're going to lower taxes on american business from 35 percent to 15 percent .
we 're the highest taxed nation in the world .
killing our jobs .
our companies are leaving .
killing our jobs .
we will become a rich nation once again .
but to be a rich nation , we must also be a safe nation .
in orlando , the murder rate doubled , you know that ?
doubled last year .
can you believe it ?
we will support our police , and i met you police of orlando , they are unbelievable people and they 've been through a lot .
i met the police and these are unbelievable people .
we will bring this crime wave to an end .
we will also keep our community safe from terrorism .
just a short time ago , orlando was the victim of the worst mass shooting in american history during the islamic terror attack on the pulse nightclub .
it was also the worst attack on the lgbtq community in our country 's history .
ca n't let it happen , ca n't let it happen .
hillary wants to increase by 550 percent syrian refugees pouring into our country .
her plan would mean generations of terrorism , radicalism , and extremism spreading in your schools and throughout your communities .
when i 'm elected president , we will suspend the syrian refuge program .
and we will keep radical islamic terrorists the hell out of your community .
got to keep them out .
and we 'll build safe zones in syria .
we have to help the people .
we 're going to build safe zones , but the gulf states have n't been doing their thing .
and believe me , they have plenty of money .
they 'll help us , they 'll fund it , i 'm sure they 'll be thrilled .
they 're going to be funding it , and that will be ok .
we want to help people .
but we have enough problems in this country .
we do n't need orlando and problems .
we do n't need what happened in san bernadino .
we do n't need what 's happening in paris , in nice and in germany -- which is a disaster .
we do n't need it .
we have enough problems right now , do we agree ?
we have enough problems .
we do n't need it .
a trump administration will also secure and defend the borders of the united states .
and yes , we will build a great wall .
we received the first ever endorsement from our ice and border patrol officers , great people .
the officers that warned that hillary 's plan is the most quote , radical immigration proposal in united states history , and that it will lead to the loss of thousands and thousands of lives , quote .
as secretary of state , hillary clinton allowed thousands of the most dangerous and violent criminal aliens to go free because their home countries were intelligent , they would n't take them back .
we bring them to their countries -- murderers , drug dealers , gang members , we 'd bring them to their countries and their countries would say : get them out , we 're not taking them back .
they call up the state department , and the state department under hillary clinton would say : oh , bring them back , we do n't want to make waves .
i guarantee you , whether it 's four years or eight years , that will not happen once under a trump administration .
hillary wants totally open borders and strongly supports sanctuary cities .
like san francisco , where kate steinle -- incredible young woman -- was murdered by an illegal immigrant who had been deported five times .
a trump administration will cancel all federal funding to sanctuary cities immediately .
we will end illegal immigration , deport all criminal aliens -- the ones we just spoke about -- and we will save american lives .
we will also repeal obama - clinton defense sequester and rebuild our very badly depleted military .
that includes major new investments in resources from pensacola naval air station at macdill air force base .
have you ever heard of those places ?
pretty good places .
a lot of people here , lot of people .
i 'm honored to have the endorsement of 200 -- more than that now , much more than that -- top admirals and generals and 22 medal of honor recipients .
great people , i 've met so many of them , they 're incredible .
incredible people .
our new foreign policy will put america first .
hillary and our failed washington establishment have spend $ 6 trillion on wars in the middle east that we never won and that never end .
and it 's now in worse shape than ever before .
the middle east is a catastrophe , it 's far worse off than had we spent nothing .
they 've dragged us into foreign wars that have made us less safe .
they 've left our borders wide open at home .
and they 've shipped our jobs and wealth to other countries .
and it 's -- it 's disappearing .
our country , in a certain sense , is disappearing .
prosperity -- real prosperity is disappearing .
we owe $ 20 trillion .
our trade deals , we lose $ 800 billion a year on trade .
we have trade deficits .
think of that .
who negotiates these deals ?
you know who does ?
stupid people .
stupid people .
with very stupid leadership .
who , by the way , they campaign all the time .
he 's campaigning right now for crooked hillary .
why is he campaigning ?
she 's under federal investigation , and we 've got a president campaigning for her .
and that 's all he does is campaign .
he ought to be working on your jobs that are leaving and going to mexico .
and your military .
i 'll tell you what , first of all , she 's got bigger problems .
but four more years of obama , we ca n't take it , folks .
four more years of isis , that 's what it is .
four more years of no jobs .
now , she wants to start a shooting war in syria and conflict with a nuclear - armed russia that could very well lead to world war iii .
russia is heavily armed , does n't like her .
putin does not respect her , does n't like her .
what are we doing , folks ?
she 's a mess .
to all americans , i say it 's time for new leadership .
just think about what we can accomplish in the first 100 days of a trump administration .
thank you .
it 's so beautiful over there .
i just noticed the water .
let 's go in for a swim .
it 's about 200 degrees out there .
anybody want to go swimming ?
let 's go .
we are going to have the biggest tax cut since ronald reagan .
and hillary wants to increase your taxes by a tremendous amount .
you know , we 're already the highest - taxed nation in the world .
she wants to increase your taxes , if you can believe that one .
we 're going to eliminate every unnecessary job - killing regulation .
killing your companies .
killing them .
one of the reasons they 're leaving .
cancel every illegal obama executive order .
we 're going to rebuild our military and take care of our great , great veterans .
they 're not being taken care of .
you know that .
a lot of veterans here .
we 're going to take care of our veterans finally .
they have been mistreated for many , many years .
we 're going to support the men and women of law enforcement .
we will save the second amendment which is , as you know , under tremendous siege .
we will appoint justices to the united states supreme court who will uphold and defend the constitution of the united states .
we will show the world that there is no challenge too great , no dream outside of our reach .
there 's no dream -- no dream outside of our reach .
we have all these people telling us what to do .
politicians -- they know nothing .
i 've dealt with them all my life , folks .
all talk , no action . ,
i have some friends that are politicians .
so let me just say there 's some good ones .
ok ?
there are some good .
i 'll tell you what , you take a look at the media .
these are the most dishonest people anywhere .
these are the most -- they -- the media -- the media is a part and one of the vital cogs in the rigged system under which we live .
they 're a big fat cog in the -- and they never show the crowds .
they never show what 's happening .
but you know what ?
you hear -- when you hear 20,000 , sometimes 30,000 , when you hear people , sounds like you 're at an ohio state football game .
but they never show it .
they never show it .
they never show it .
people of florida , we love you .
all we have to do is cut our ties with these failed politicians of the past .
hillary is a candidate of yesterday .
we are the movement of the future .
we are .
we 're asking for the votes of republicans , democrats , independents and first - time voters , of which we 're finding out there are many .
you probably heard over the last couple of weeks " texas is in play " ; " texas -- that georgia is in play . "
and i 'm saying , " gee , that 's too bad . "
let me tell you , they 're setting records in texas , and they 're voting for trump , just so you understand that .
and they know it .
but when they see those numbers coming , they do n't want to announce them .
but we are winning almost everywhere .
i think -- give us two more days , i think we 're going to be winning everywhere .
and i 'm almost starting to think that the least important problem that hillary has is the fact that we 're winning .
i think she 's got perhaps bigger problems than even that .
we 're fighting for every citizen who believes that government should serve the people , not the donors and nor hillary 's special interests .
we are fighting to unlock the potential of every american community and every american family who hope and pray and yearn for a much better future .
i am asking you to dream big -- i got to dream big .
because with your vote , we are just -- can you believe this ? --
six days away .
think of that .
from the change you 've been waiting for your entire life .
we 're going to work together .
we 're going to vote .
you 're going to vote now or you 're going to vote by the 8th .
but you 're going to vote .
thank you .
i love that guy .
he 's a tough guy , but he just screamed out , " you 're going to win . "
we 're going to win .
thank you , man .
thank you .
we have great , great love .
you know , we 're in a divided nation .
we are a divided nation .
we 're not going to be divided .
we 're going to have such love in this country .
we 're going to have such love and such respect .
together , we will make america wealthy again .
we will make america strong again .
we will make america safe again .
and we will make america great again .
thank you very much .
thank you , folks .
god bless you , everybody .
god bless you .
thank you .
get out and vote .
get out and vote .
thank you .
so how good is he ?
how good is he ?
special .
special .
he is a special man and special person .
and he has become my friend .
oh , there is a lot of people here .
whoa .
hello , everybody .
your football team is going to have a great year .
i watch .
i watch .
you 've got the quarterback , you 've got the whole deal .
i think it 's going to be a very good year .
ok ?
and if you get into that super bowl , i will be going , all right ?
so , you know , i wrote something down before , and i think it is important , because -- i love you too .
because we need unity , we have to win this election .
this is truly one of the most important elections , certainly in my lifetime .
because we are about to go -- we lose it , we are in the wrong direction , and maybe it 's gone .
supreme court justices , always remember that .
but so many different levels , and when you see what happened with crooked hillary today , it was a disaster .
a disaster .
she had a disaster .
she lies folks , she lies .
so , i want to -- i just wrote this out .
i wanted to say to the group , you know , i had a great time when i was in wisconsin , and i did not quite eke it out .
i thought i was going to , but after that , it worked out well .
you built me up , you taught me about politics .
and when i left here , i said , i think i 've learned a lot .
so , i love it .
i love the people .
i have many friends in wisconsin .
and they 're -- they 're incredible people .
you 're incredible people , i have to tell you that .
and we 're going to have a lot of fun .
we are going to have a lot of fun .
this campaign is not about me or any one candidate .
it is about america .
it is time for a change .
we need a change .
a real change , not an obama change .
we do n't need an obama change .
we have had enough .
it is time to change a rigged political system that works only for the insiders , and replace it with a government that serves the people .
have to do it .
and know both sides .
i 've been on the other side .
believe me .
i actually like this side better ; this is a movement .
this is a movement like they may be have never seen in this country , according to even the political pundits that truly hate me , ok ?
this is a -- they -- oh , this is a movement that some say , most say is one of the great phenomenons that they 've ever seen in politics .
some say it 's the single greatest phenomenon .
though the media does n't want to talk about it , we have done something -- we .
all of us , together .
i 'm a messenger ; i 'm only a messenger .
we have done something truly historic together , standing before you as nominee for president and i 'm not a politician , proudly .
i 'm not part of the system .
i ran against the system , and i 'm probably better off running against the system .
i ran against the donors .
i 'm my own donor , essentially .
i have a lot of money under this deal .
this is a very expensive crisis , i want to tell you .
i funded -- as you know , i funded the primaries .
and i 'm in for under $ 60 million , and i 'm largely funding my campaign as we go forward .
in addition to that -- in addition to that , we have raised tremendous amounts of money , and much of it from small donors,$61 ; $ 61 .
as a republican , that does n't happen .
it happens because of what you are seeing in front of you today .
and if you remember , just prior to june , they did a story , " donald trump has not really done too well with fund raising . "
well , that is because i did not even know if i was getting the nomination .
i 'm not going to raise funds -- i would 've had enough if i did n't make it .
i would have said , " bye , bye , politics . "
but i wanted to make sure -- so i got it .
and then i started raising money for the republican party .
and we raised a lot of money .
we started really on june 14th , flag day , my birthday .
my birthday .
and in june , we raised approximately -- think of this -- $ 51 million .
can you imagine ?
and those people could n't believe it ; they were really surprised .
big headlines , you know .
because they do n't give me too many good headlines .
i could do the greatest things .
i do things that i think a fantastic .
i say , good , there is no way they cover this badly .
and they cover it badly .
i gently tell a woman that i love her baby , and let the baby cry .
it is ok .
as the baby that had a voice that was superior to pavarotti continued to cry -- i remember , i told her to stay , do n't worry , ma'am .
but after about 3 or 4 minutes , and i 'm trying to speak and it was in jacksonville , we had this massive , massive crowd , filled up the stadium .
and the baby 's screaming .
so , i said , ma'am , i would like to reverse my order .
perhaps you could nicely take -- take the baby out .
your baby is great .
i did it so nicely .
she was happy .
even the baby was happy .
he stopped crying .
and maybe you could take the baby out , would that be possible ?
the whole place was cracking up .
and the next day in the newspaper , it said , " trump throws baby out of arena . "
terrible .
now , they are very dishonest .
that was a tough one , when i -- and i just had a reporter come up to me , backstage , a reporter come up -- " mr. trump , sir , but why did you throw that baby out of the area ? "
i said , " i was having fun .
i was so nice , i was so nice .
everybody likes me .
the baby liked me , the mother liked me .
we had a good time .
i try to keep the baby in , but the baby was such -- had such a powerful voice . "
in fact , i want to find out who that baby is , because i want to sponsor the baby .
and that baby will sing someday in philharmonic hall .
i 'm telling you .
new york city .
ok ?
the great philharmonic .
so , i 'm not part of the system .
i ran against the system .
i ran against the donors , because i 'm largely my own donor .
i 'm running against myself .
that 's sort of -- never thought of it that way .
and against the status quo , and the status quo , we have to get rid of , because it is not working , folks , because the country is a mess .
and that is why put up a lot of money .
but while the democrats nominated the candidate of special interests , and really a candidate of total corruption , i mean , you take a look at what she is doing , the republicans made history by choosing a nominee from outside of this very , very corrupt the system .
it is a corrupt system .
it 's a corrupt system .
you want something done , they could n't   do it for you .
and that is not necessarily , and usually it is n't good for the country .
that is why we 're going to be able to deliver real change , and real safety and real opportunity to all americans .
we have to unite .
remember that .
everything i 've accomplished , i have done by putting together a really fantastic team , including governor mike pence of indiana , who has done an incredible ...   done an incredible job .
my wonderful staff of people that really love what we are doing , and they are working so hard .
my family , friends , and it 's expanding all the time .
but i need a republican senate and a house to accomplish all of the changes that we have to make .
we have to make them , right ?
i understand and embrace the wisdom of ronald reagan 's big tent within the party , big , big tent , remember ?
ronald reagan , great man , great guy .
remember he included reagan democrats and independents and republicans , a lot of people .
we 're going to have the same thing .
there a lot of democrats perhaps in this room , are there a lot of democrats ?
raise your hands .
i mean , i do n't think we need too many to be honest with you , but -- so i embraced the wisdom that my 80 percent friend is not my 20 percent enemy , ronald reagan .
stated by ronald reagan , pretty good .
we will be the big tent party .
we are going to have a lot of cross help .
we are going to have a lot of bernie sanders people coming in because of trade , because bernie sanders knew we were being ripped off by trade .
trade is a disaster with china , with japan , with mexico , with vietnam , with so many countries , with every country , every country .
we do n't win at any level with anything , and as a unified party , we will lead our country to unity as well , very important .
we need the unity , we have to win the election .
no we have to win it --- have to win it .
otherwise , our big movement was not as big as we thought and that 's not good .
that 's why november 8th , you 've got to get everybody you know -- and you know , all this voter id nowadays , a lot of places are n't going to have voter id .
now what does that mean ?
what does that mean ?
you just keep walking in and voting ?
so you have to be very careful , very vigilant -- you have to be careful .
but we will have disagreements , but we will disagree as friends and never stop working together toward victory , and very importantly , toward real change .
so in our shared mission to make america great again , i support and endorse our speaker of the house , paul ryan .
paul ryan , he 's good .
he 's a good man .
he 's a good man and he 's a good guy .
and we may disagree on a couple of things , but mostly we agree and we 're going get it done and we 're going to do a lot of wonderful things .
he 's a good man .
and while i 'm at it , i hold in the highest esteem senator john mccain for his service to our country , in uniform and in public office , and i fully support and endorse his re - election .
very important .
we 'll work together .
i also fully support and endorse senator kelly ayotte of new hampshire .
a state i truly love , primarily because that was my first victory , but i love new hampshire .
no , i love new hampshire , one of the most beautiful places .
she 's a rising star and will continue to represent the great people of new hampshire so very well for a long , long time .
senator kelly ayotte .
working hand - in - hand , we will grow our majority in the house and in the senate .
we need that , we 've got to get things done .
arm in arm , we will rescue the nation from the obama - clinton disaster , which is exactly what it is , that has bled our country dry and spread terrorism unabated across the world , that 's what 's happening .
you saw it just now , maps came out yesterday , they said isis far bigger , it 's all over the place .
it 's all over the place .
we 're going to get rid of it , folks .
our military is depleted .
we 're going to build up our military , we are going to get others with us .
believe me , we 're going to get plenty of others with us .
and speaking of others , would n't it actually be wonderful if we could get along with russia ?
would n't that be nice ?
they talk so big and so brave and so tough , they 're the tough ones .
you know , hillary 's real tough , give me a break .
would n't that be great ?
we get along with russia , we go out together with others and we knock the hell out of isis , would n't that be great ?
together we will lead our country back to prosperity , security and peace .
ok ?
when you look at the world and what 's happened -- so we have the queen of corruption , she 's the queen of corruption .
she is a disaster .
i said before , if crooked hillary clinton becomes president , terrorism will destroy the inner workings of our country .
believe me , they are loving it .
she wants to have 550 percent more people coming in from syria and that region into our nation .
and we do n't know who they are , we do n't know where they come from really , we do n't know if they 're isis , some will be .
and look at the damage that 's done in san bernardino with a couple -- probably he became radicalized by her -- a couple , and these were friends of theirs .
these were people that gave a party in celebration of the birth of their child and they were gunned down , 14 people killed , many , many injured .
take a look at orlando -- take a look at orlando , how disgusting that was .
take a look at the world trade center and so many other places .
go to the probably toughest gun laws anywhere in the world , go to paris and take a look at that , 130 people gunned down .
you know , if people had guns , on the other side where the bullets are flying in the other direction , like you sir , you sir , you and you , ma'am .
first of all , if they knew guns were in the room , they probably would n't have gone there .
there were no guns .
they were just sitting ducks , 130 people .
in san bernardino you had 14 people .
but in paris , just like this , boom -- get over here , boom -- get over here , boom -- 130 people with many still in the hospital , many so gravely wounded .
it 's horrible .
and if they had bullets flying in the other direction , maybe they would n't have shown up , and if they did , i 'll tell you what , you would n't have had that kind of carnage .
you would have had people lying on the other side of the floor instead .
so hillary clinton wants to do major damage , as you know , to our second amendment .
hillary clinton wants to put judges -- she wants to put justices of the supreme court -- she 's going to make them nice and liberal , wait until -- wait until you see what that does to your rights .
wait until you see what that does to your second amendment .
you will not recognize it , you will not recognize it .
national rifle association , nra , endorsed me .
they 're great people , wayne -- they 're great people , chris , they love this country .
they endorsed me very early and it 's really a -- it 's really an honor .
i 'll tell you what , they are phenomenal people when you get to know them .
they love the country -- you know , they love the country .
they take a lot of heat , but they love the country , i 'll tell you that right now .
and i heard mike , governor pence , talking about 1.2 growth -- 1.2 percent growth , the lowest in memory since the 1940 's .
when you think about it , it 's the lowest .
so a lot of differences between all of us , but i thought i would mention -- because i 've known hillary clinton over the years -- i know her -- and she makes statements .
she makes statements and they are statements coming out of her playbook .
well , let 's see , " we ca n't get them for this -- ca n't get them for this . "
i 've always heard that i have the best temperament , people tell me i have the best temperament , i have a temperament to win .
we got to win .
we got to win .
she said not so long ago , " i do n't like donald trump 's tone " .
now , she is reading it off teleprompters only . "
i do n't like donald trump 's tone . "
and i said , you know , " we need a tough tone today .
we have people -- we need a kind tone , but we need a tough tone . "
we have people being beheaded all over the middle east and other places .
we have crime that is rampant .
we have people in the middle east being drowned in steel cages .
this is like medieval times , and she is worried about my tone .
so they chop off heads and they drown people , and they bury people in sand .
and then they ask me , " mr. trump , sir , " -- at one of the debates in which i won , i 'm very happy about that -- " mr. trump , sir , how do you feel about waterboarding ? "
i 'm seeing chopped off heads , drowned people , burying in sand -- i said , " i 'm absolutely ok with it , let me tell you . "
can you imagine what the enemy must say -- can you imagine the enemy -- isis in this case -- can you imagine what they must say as they spent the day chopping off the heads of christians -- " come back , get together and start talking -- and they say waterboarding is not allowed in the united states -- by the united states , waterboarding is not allowed . "
folks , we better get smart and tough and we are playing games with hillary , we are playing games .
it is just games , she is not the right person and everybody knows it .
her single greatest achievement is being caught in a crime and getting away with it .
this is true , 33,000 e - mails .
so i wrote this before on the way over to another rally at also a very nice place that 's very full and very nice in iowa .
and we love iowa do n't we , yes ?
right ?
i thought it was accurate , unstable -- and she is , she is unstable .
hillary clinton lacks the judgment that bernie sanders had .
you just have to pay attention , as soon as he said it , i started writing notes . "
she has bad judgment .
she lacks the judgment , temperament and moral character to lead this country .
plus , she is a weak person . "
we do n't need a weak person .
he just said , " plus , she is a criminal . "
she is a dangerous liar who has disregarded the lives of americans , and who has put all of us at great risk while supporting economic policies that have destroyed our economy .
we have a long way to go .
she is unhinged , she 's truly unhinged , and she is unbalanced , totally unbalanced .
and you can see , in the words of a secret service agent who just wrote a book , i bought the book , i wanted to see what he had to say ; " she simply lacks the integrity and temperament to serve in the office . " "
from my bottom of my soul " he said , " i know this to be true . "
he was there . "
her leadership style , volcanic impulsive as it is , disdainful of the rules set for everyone else has n't changed a bit .
she 's unqualified to become president . "
and she really is , and bernie said that too .
thank you .
what great people .
wow .
no , but it is true , no games , it is true .
in one way she is a monster , ok ?
look at what happened , look at her history .
in another way , she is a weak person , she is actually not strong enough to be president .
so she 's got both , but she is not strong enough to be president .
she will be a be a disaster .
she will be so bad for our country , and i 'm not just talking about justices of the supreme court .
she will be so bad for our country and we ca n't let it happen .
we ca n't let it happen .
you know , mike pence told me a story , and maybe i should not say it , but i found it interesting , but of the reasons -- i guess the primary reason that he 's in politics is because he watched the crookedness of the clintons when they were in the white house .
and he said " he ran , he ran again and he ran again , and he won . "
you have to hand it to him , this is the guy that does not give up .
he does not quit .
he never ever quits .
but he watched the clintons -- and i 'm sure they will be thrilled to hear that -- but that actually got him into politics , which is interesting .
so then we make these horrible deals ; iran deal , horrible deal , we got $ 150 billion -- and how about $ 400 million -- think of it , $ 400 million in cash , different currencies , different denominations .
now , lot of people say that money went toward terror .
i 'm nicer than that , see , i do n't have that horrible thought process that some people have in this room have .
i say , some of it went to terror , but a lot of it went into their bank accounts , believe me , that 's the way it is .
it went into their pockets , can you imagine these guys sitting there with $ 400 million in cash ?
you think they 're giving that money to terror , they are giving that money to them and i guess terror got some of it , but most of it they kept .
i mean , the concept of paying $ 400 million in cash is mind- boggling .
i mean , you would n't think -- who can authorize such a thing ?
where did they get it ?
what did they do , go to a bank teller and say , " give me $ 400 million in cash ?
i want to in euros , i want it in swiss francs , wrap it up , we will come back in 10 minutes . "
i mean , it is just inconceivable .
so we are witnessing a horror show in this country and throughout the world .
you look at what is going on throughout the world with these same people , these people funding terror -- these people are funding terrorism .
for us to have given $ 400 million to basically free our hostages .
now , obama , just like he lied about obamacare which was a tremendous lie , that was a tremendous lie , remember ? "
you can keep your plan , you can keep your doctor . "
really ?
how many people have been able to keep the doctor or their plan ?
keep your plan , keep your doctor -- not working that way , folks .
it is a disaster .
by the way , it is going to be repealed and replaced 100 percent .
and -- and honestly , i hope i win , because we will do a great job .
we are going to make america great again .
we 're going to make america great again .
but i actually think that regardless of who wins , obamacare is going to fold in any event .
it is so expensive .
people ca n't afford it and the country ca n't afford it .
other than that , it is just wonderful .
so , in texas , they just had almost a 60 percent increase .
now the increases are starting to come out .
the big increase is going to be announced on november 1st .
the election is november 8th .
folks , they want to delay it , because it is election - changing .
it is a mess .
it is election changing , and they want to change it .
and we ca n't let that happen .
because the numbers -- and i can see some of the numbers already -- the numbers are going to be astronomical .
they are going to be astronomical .
they 're going to be so big , so horrible , and the health care , you know , the plan is terrible .
it 's terrible .
and we 're going to take care of everybody , but we 're going to end up with a great plan that costs much less money for the people and much less money for the country .
this plan is a total rip .
it does not work , so it 's going to fall , because economically , it is a disaster for the country , too .
but what about people where they said they had a 30 , 40 , 50 , 60 percent increase ?
and it 's going to be worse than that , i predict on november 1st .
so , we 'd better get smart and we 'd better start thinking properly .
now , i want to talk about what is going on at the borders , because money ...   oh , we 're going to build it .
so , listen , so we have people coming to our country that should not be coming to our country .
we have thousands and thousands of people from certain terrorist states , from certain parts of the world that we are allowing to come into our country .
most of the politicians , almost all of them do n't even know where they are , where they are being put , they know nothing about these people .
this could be the great trojan horse of all time .
and hillary wants thousands more to come in over and above obama .
right ?
so , tall -- and the wall is getting taller every day .
if you think of this , i just wrote this , the obama - clinton foreign - policy has handed huge portions of iraq , libya and syria to isis .
huge portions .
it has undermined stability in egypt , and you know what they have to do over there .
and empowered iran as never before .
iran , three years ago was -- was dying .
in fact , when they were marching in the streets , if obama would have just encouraged them a little more , it would have been taken over by the people .
but obama played ball with the thugs that are running it right now .
think of this , think of this .
look , look .
we 're making a deal , and the deal is not made , and they are dancing in the streets of iran saying how stupid the americans are to be making this deal .
the leaders , and in particular the leader of iran , is calling us stupid , and the deal means nothing .
and yesterday , i think he just said that the united states is essentially nothing .
this is our -- this is our great , great partner .
but when you have somebody -- if i was making this deal , and if the other side was bragging about it , the deal was n't made , i 'm not making that deal .
i 'm not making it .
i 'm walking .
but we kept it going , and we should have never ever started negotiating that deal until we had our hostages back .
ok ?
we should have walked .
we should have doubled up the sanctions and walked .
and they would have -- and i say it .
before the plane reached new york city or washington , you could just turn it around , because they 'll call you , they 'll say , let 's go .
take your hostages .
but when you think about it , you probably read today and yesterday , one of the hostages was waiting for a very long period of time .
now , obama said that it had nothing to do with the hostages .
that he would not do that for kidnappers .
he would not do that for kidnapping .
ok ?
no , no , think of that .
you have got to think about it .
he would n't do it -- now , it was the same day , right , same day .
we have to be exactly accurate , because they 'll catch us , right ?
same day .
the money came in , and one of the hostages , a good guy , i saw him interview on television .
good guy , hard time .
btu did n't he say he waited forever , he waited .
and somebody said , nope , we are waiting for either something or a plane to come in .
and here obama stands up yesterday , and for seven minutes is telling us one thing had nothing to do with the other .
just a lie .
you know , at least be truthful .
and we 're talking about the same day , $ 400 million , and we could have had something that would have been a much better deal .
and you know what , i 'm all in favor of deals when it gets to nuclear .
but we could have made it -- we should have walked .
and we should have walked with $ 150 , too ; we have said , sorry , we do n't have the money , ca n't pay .
we do n't have the money .
we owe almost $ 20 trillion .
i 'm sorry , fellas , we love you , we think you 're the greatest guys on earth .
but we ca n't give you the money .
we do n't have it .
and they will get angry and they will be upset , and two days later , you 'll be back negotiating .
you just saved yourself $ 150 billion , right ?
hundred and -- $ 150 billion .
so , we have terrorists pouring into our country , we have people coming in .
i do n't know if you saw this , in maine -- and maine knows , because maine is -- i was up there yesterday -- a great place .
a great governor , great governor .
paul is doing a great job .
and i think the most important issue facing civilization right now is radical islamic terrorism .
and we have a president that refuses to use the term , and we have crooked hillary who does not want to use it .
now , she 's being forced to use it by me .
did you notice she gave a speech , she said , i will use it .
she called it , i think , radical islam .
but she said , i will use it .
i will .
just like the trans - pacific partnership .
she called it the gold standard .
it is a horror show .
it 's almost as bad or maybe it 's going to worse than nafta , signed by her husband , which cleaned out many of the states in our country , cleaned them out from manufacturing .
moved to mexico and other places .
nafta , a total disaster .
nafta , signed by bill clinton .
he never suffered the ravages , because he signed it , then he got out and other people did suffer with it .
but we are going to renegotiate nafta , and if they do n't want to make a great deal for us so we get our jobs back , at least a lot of them , if we ca n't make a great deal -- and she ca n't do that , by the way , if she wanted to .
number one , her donors would not let her .
her special interests would never let her .
her lobbyists would never let her .
number three , she could not do it anyway .
even if she wanted to .
but we 're going to renegotiate .
and did you hear her the other day ?
after years of saying how wonderful it is , even though you look at new england , and you look at new york state and you look at pennsylvania and ohio , if you look at a lot of other places , one of the reasons i won indiana so big -- well , one of the reasons was the great bobby knight , ok ?
bobby knight in indiana .
that 's gold standard right ?
as she said about tpp .
but one of the reasons i won was because carrier air conditioning was moving to mexico from indiana , and they let go of 1,400 people .
and i 've been talking about this , and i know how to stop it , and you 've heard me before , so easy to stop .
there have to be consequences when mexico takes our companies .
and not only mexico ; there have to be consequences when china devalues its currency so that our companies can no longer compete with china , even though we make better product .
i have friends who are manufacturers .
we make better product .
they ca n't get their product into china no how .
and when a few times arise where they can , they have to pay an incredible tax , beyond what anybody would even think costs .
but yet , we open our doors and just throw away your stuff , and we lose our jobs and it is very , very said .
but look , as many know , a major destination -- maine , has become a major destination for somali refugees .
we admit hundreds of thousands of refugees into the united states from many of the most dangerous and unstable regions in the world .
and you are getting them here too folks , you just do n't know it because you just do n't know .
anybody in this room -- anybody in this room from a terror territory ?
all right , a practice -- and this is a practice which will continue under hillary clinton except it will expand five , six , seven fold .
i do n't get it .
i mean , i know they will vote democrat , ok , that 's what i know , but they will not be voting for a long time .
i just -- i do n't get it , how can anybody even think this way ?
now , the washington times reported , " of the somali refugees -- the program in minnesota -- that the effort to resettle large groups of somali refugees is having the unintended consequence of creating an enclave of immigrants with high unemployment that is both stressing the state safety net " -- tremendous problems for safety -- " and creating a rich pool of potential recruiting targets for the islamic terror groups . "
are n't we smart ?
we are having this problem across our refugee and immigration programs .
here are some of the examples -- i will give you a few examples , and this came out of the senate subcommittee just recently . "
the boston bombers " -- remember those horrible , disgusting people ? "
the boston bombers arrived through the political asylum process .
the younger brother applied for citizenship and was naturalized on september 11 , 2012 .
the older brother had a pending application for citizenship . "
and look what happened , we took them in .
look what happened , are n't we smart ?
the moroccan national who came to the united states on a student visa was arrested for plotting to blow up a university in a federal courthouse .
great .
a uzbek refugee living in idaho was arrested and charged with providing support to a terrorist organization in the form of teaching terror recruits how to build massive and very dangerous bombs .
we let him in .
an immigrant from syria who later applied for and received u.s. citizenship was accused by federal prosecutors of planning to go to a military base in texas and kill three or four american soldiers , execution style if possible -- more than that , if at all possible .
a college student who immigrated from somalia who later applied and received u.s. citizenship , attempted to blow up a christmas tree lighting ceremony in oregon .
an immigrant from afghanistan who later applied for and received u.s. citizenship , and a legal permanent resident from the philippines were convicted for plotting to join al qaida and the taliban in order to kill as many americans as possible -- as many as possible .
an iraqi immigrant who later applied for and received u.s. citizenship was arrested for lying to federal agents about pledging allegiance to isis , his travels to syria , and how many americans he wanted to kill .
two immigrants from pakistan who later applied for and received u.s. citizenship were sentenced to decades long prison sentences for plotting to detonate a bomb -- and a very big bomb , in the middle of new york city .
an immigrant from yemen who later applied for and received u.s. citizenship was arrested for trying to join isis .
he was also charged with attempting to illegally buy firearms to try to shoot as many american military personnel as possible .
all right folks .
so , i just say , what are we doing ?
what are we doing ?
and hillary clinton wants more and more to pour in .
you can almost say , you know , politics aside , whether you are a democrat , whether you are a liberal , a republican , a conservative ; what are they doing ?
i do n't care who you are , what the hell are they doing ?
so we are going to have strong borders , our southern border is going to be very powerful .
we are going to stop the drugs from pouring into wisconsin and every place else .
the heroin epidemic is beyond belief .
in new hampshire , a great place , that is where i realized the extent of what is going on .
i met with the people of new hampshire and they tell me , " the biggest problem they have is heroin . "
i said , " it ca n't be with the beautiful lakes and streams , it so beautiful . "
right , and their biggest problems heroin .
i said , " you have to be kidding , that ca n't be right , " and it was .
their youth is being poisoned .
and then you go to massachusetts , and you go to north carolina , and south carolina , and you come here , you come here -- i just left iowa , you go to iowa and you see the tremendous problems they have with heroin and drugs that pour in from the southern border .
and look , here 's the story , we are going to have strong borders .
we are going to have a wall , it will be a big and powerful wall -- a big powerful wall .
you know that hillary clinton wanted a wall a number of years ago ?
she wanted a wall .
and the primary research , as we understand it , looking back , not that long ago , she wanted a wall .
you know , walls do work folks , all you have to do is ask israel .
all you have to do is ask some of the nations that are in europe right now that are building walls .
you know , it 's sort of interesting , obama talks about , " there will be no wall . "
but in the white house , which he just said , which is true , they want to build essentially a wall , they want to build a fence a lot bigger , and a lot higher , and a lot stronger .
you know , it is interesting .
i say , " do n't build that fence right , do n't build that fence , " because they say , " walls do n't work " -- fences do n't work , do n't build that fence . "
when hillary does n't want to let you have your guns , she is surrounded by people like this that have more firepower on them than any human beings on earth , and i think she does n't want to have guns .
i think that all of her bodyguards and all of her secret service should immediately give up their weapons .
ok , i mean it .
they should immediately give up their weapons .
they should immediately give up those weapons and if somebody comes at you with a gun , you just try to talk them out of it , i guess .
you got to do some quick talking .
you got to do some quick talking , hillary .
i do n't think even hillary with her phony lies and disgusting habits , i do n't think hillary could get away with that one .
so we are going to have a little contrast .
and i did this very quickly but it is so simple , hillary wants to raise taxes , trump is going to lower taxes vary substantially , the biggest tax decrease of all on business and personal .
hillary wants to significantly expand regulations .
trump is going to get rid of many , many , many regulations .
which , by the way , are stopping your businesses both small and big from succeeding , from expanding and more than anything , from starting .
you ca n't start a business today the regulations are so onerous and horrible .
hillary wants to shut down energy production .
trump wants to expand it significantly .
and we 'll start paying off our debt .
hillary wants to essentially abolish the second amendment , take away your right .
donald trump will protect it more so than any president that has ever served .
crooked hillary wants far left activities judges forced over there by bernie and by pocahontas .
who will destroy our constitution .
i want judges who will support and defend our constitution .
as close , by the way , to justice scalia who was great as we could get , ok ?
hillary wants to open our borders , just open them up because her special interests and donors want it that way .
there are reasons , i understand that .
i want to totally secure our borders .
but i want people to come in .
but they come in through a process and they come in legally .
hillary wants to invade foreign countries .
did you ever see where she said donald trump with the nuclear -- i 'm -- i did n't want the war in iraq .
and i 'm on record .
i did n't want the war in iraq .
i did n't want all of -- what they 've done .
and i said , if you read esquire magazine from a long time ago , you 'll see everything i said was exactly right .
it 's going to de - stabilize the middle east .
i said the meanest , toughest group of people , the people that hate the united states and its people the most , they 're going to take it over .
that 's exactly what 's happened .
they 're taking over the oil , they 're taking over the land , they 're taking over everything .
i did n't want it , but i 'm always being accused like the war hog   they think i 'm a tough guy , the war hog .
right ?
they think she wants to be tough with russia .
so she said well , donald trump likes putin .
i do n't know putin , folks .
i do n't know .
i hope i like him , i hope he likes me because i 'd love to get along with russia .
ok ?
love to .
but i do n't know .
but she goes donald trump , donald trump -- think about it -- wants to befriend putin and other things , she said right ?
and i 'm saying to myself what 's wrong with that ?
that 's good .
but she 's going to be the tough one , see ?
she 's going to be the tough one .
she 's going to play with nuclear weapons , you know ?
they have all the .
she 's going to be the tough one .
i 'll tell you what , you put her in the office of the president -- you know , she hates putin and putin hates her , right ?
that 's what i hear .
no , no -- putin probably does n't respect her more than anything else .
but putin hates her .
but she 's going to be tough .
we 're going to be tough with russia -- oh , we 're going to be tough , right ?
let me tell you , we 're in a different world today , folks .
we 're in a different world .
but she makes it sound like i 'm this tough guy that will have a temperament .
you know , she uses the word -- you know who gave her the word ?
her people that write the speeches , we 'll say trump with a temperament .
they said trump in a speech with tweets .
i 've got -- i 've got between facebook and twitter like almost 21 , 22 million people .
it 's an asset , it 's an asset .
i tweet well .
but -- but she said -- she made the statement during her speech , you know , i heard it barely because i was falling asleep , you could n't watch it .
all right .
so remember that one .
hillary wants to invade foreign countries .
look at libya .
look at that .
we did a great job there .
you know , a spot hit on gaddafi maybe , but i mean even that , what the hell do we get out of this ?
it 's a disaster .
then you have benghazi , then you have isis -- then you have isis -- then you have isis taking over the oil , large portions of the oil .
and it 's some of the finest oil in the world .
and you have isis grabbing it .
we do n't know what we 're doing .
we have people that do n't know what we 're doing .
we have people that militarily -- in fact , they said well , who is your military consultants ?
and i give them names .
but they 're not working now , you know they 're not working now .
and i said of course they 're not working now , look what working now people have gotten us .
havoc , who the hell wants the people who are working now ?
i mean ...   you know , a lot of it 's common sense and a lot of it 's instinct and she has very bad judgment , she 's got no instinct whatsoever .
and when i was asked on one of the big networks about nato , they said what do you think of nato ?
now , you know it 's not like it was my primary subject in all fairness .
i 've only been doing this for 12 months .
now , it 's actually almost 14 months , hard to believe , right ?
but nato -- so i said i know enough .
and sometimes knowing a little is better than knowing too much .
you understand , you ca n't see the forest through the trees , right ?
so i said nato in my opinion is obsolete because it 's not covering terrorism .
obsolete for that reason and also you have many countries that are n't paying their fair share , they 're not paying what they 're supposed to be paying .
and we 're protecting those guys   and we 're supposed to get into world war iii for all these countries that are n't paying their fair share .
and even the commander of nato -- and i so respect what he did .
he came out the other day and he said donald trump is right , we have cut   did you see the letter -- the big story ?
donald trump is right .
i 'm sure obama was thrilled when he saw that .
donald trump is right ; you have countries that are n't paying .
and he said how he goes in and he talks to them .
he says look , you 've got to pay your bills .
i have budgets -- which is true .
and i have to go back to congress and i have to say what 's happening .
they do n't pay their bills though because people do n't ask properly .
and they probably say to the president or whoever may handle the country . "
sir , we owe the united states millions of dollars .
we 're ready to pay . "
oh , have they asked for the money ?
no .
they 'll pay , ok ?
but i will say the commander of nato said i was right .
and then you have these people back here -- stupid people -- right here .
they said donald trump -- they 're the worst .
they 're the worst .
they said donald trump -- donald trump does n't like nato .
he is going to abandon nato .
that 's not what i said .
i said they 've got to pay .
they 've got to pay .
now , you have to walk .
you may have to walk .
but they 've got to pay .
we 're going to get in world war iii for all these countries that are laughing at the stupidity of the united states , right ?
no , they 've got to pay .
and they probably will , in all fairness .
but hillary said about japan -- because japan , we 're defending japan you know that , right ?
now , in all fairness before   put yourself back three years ago .
did anybody know that we defend japan ?
raise your hand who knew .
all right , there 's about 12 percent .
not bad .
i think some of you are lying , ok ?
i think some of you are related to hillary rodham clinton .
i think some of you are lying .
but we defend japan and a man comes up , general or something , a few months ago , i remember so vividly .
and he said at a news conference because they were embarrassed because i kept saying they 've got to pay their way .
and if they do n't -- if they do n't , you always have to be prepared to walk   you have to do that .
you know , we do n't want to do that , i understand the reason .
it 'd be nice to have them   but you know this is n't again 40 years ago .
we owe $ 20 trillion .
we 're defending all these -- we defend japan .
we defend germany .
we defend saudi arabia .
you think they have the money to pay -- how about we have military bases that we rent -- we pay rent to saudi arabia to protect them ?
no .
no , think of it .
think of it , think of the stupidity .
think of the stupidity .
so this general comes up , has a news conference a few months ago .
and he said , " mr. trump does n't understand that japan is paying 50 percent of the cost to defend them . "
so a reporter goes up who i think is fair   and said to me , " mr. trump , we 'd like your comment .
they say that japan is paying 50 percent of the cost to defend . "
and i said why are n't they paying 100 percent ?
the reporter said , ok . "
not a bad question .
now , here 's the problem with the hillary -- hillary rotten clinton .
here 's the problem .
here is -- that 's why she changed her last -- that 's why she does n't want to use the name anymore , because everybody was saying that .
i do n't know .
i 've been saying it .
but look , here is -- here is why it does n't work for hillary .
she saw that i said that we have to get reimbursed for our costs , at least , right ?
japan , economic behemoth .
germany -- see how well they 're doing -- economic behemoth .
saudi arabia , nothing but money .
they were making $ 1 billion a day with their high oil prices , now they 're making a fortune , the same thing .
economic behemoth .
why are defending them , and why are n't we being fully reimbursed ?
now , if we do that , your budget already is starting to look real good , ok .
you know , you have budgets , so we losing our assurance ; we have an $ 800 billion trade deficit , folks .
we trade with companies .
we have a deficit with other countries , think of it -- $ 800 billion a year .
trade deficit .
do we make the deals ?
no .
with china , $ 505 billion trade deficit .
and they cheat us because they devalue their currency all the time .
whenever it gets a little bit tough , devalue , devalue , and our companies ca n't compete .
right ?
so , here 's the thing .
so , hillary says about japan , how dare he not not stay with our allies , how dare he not do that ?
i will never abandon our allies , ever , ever , ever .
now , how do you negotiate when you 're telling somebody will never going to leave ?
we may have to leave .
look , japan has problems because you have the maniac in north korea making missiles .
but i mean , you know , so we 'll get it .
now , south korea , it is an economic behemoth .
you ca n't buy television that is not made in south korea , except sony , which is made in japan , which has sort of lost its way .
whether it is lg or samsung .
i order thousands of television sets ; you ca n't buy them in the united states .
i 'd love to .
show me one company .
one of the pundits said , they do make them .
there 's a company .
and he showed me , it 's a little company .
what they do is , all the parts come in for -- from all over the world ; they put them together , and they give you a television that does n't work and nobody ever heard of it .
and then i put it into a luxury hotel , and everybody complains , right ?
so , you ca n't say to people when you 're negotiating -- because we 're talking about tremendous billions and billions of dollars .
you ca n't say to people -- you ca n't say to people when you 're negotiating , we 'll never leave you .
think of this , we 're going to never leave you ; we love you , we 'll never leave you .
could you pay more ?
no , we 're not going to pay anymore .
you 're not going to leave us .
why should we pay more ?
so , there 's a chance we 'll have to leave .
and there 's a chance that , you know , japan will have to take over this monster and figure it out .
we 're very far away .
it 's very expensive .
you know , we have a treaty with japan .
and if the united states is attacked , they do n't have to do anything .
but is japan is attacked , we have to go in there will our full force and might , and who the hell knows what 's going to happen , right ?
world war iii , who knows what 's going to happen .
but if we 're attacked , they do n't have to do anything .
you tell me , who makes these deals ?
it 's like sergeant bergdahl , right ?
so , we trade a dirty , rotten traitor where five or maybe even six people were killed when he deserted , and we knew that they were killed and we knew that he was a traitor .
we trade for five of the greatest killers , the greatest killers in the middle east , the five people that they wanted the most .
that is our deal .
so , we get a traitor and they get five people that are right now , most of them , already back on the battlefields trying to kill everybody , including us .
no more , folks .
that is called the five for one president .
that 's -- that is the same guy that made the deal for $ 400 million .
the other guys could n't leave the airport , the hostages .
and then all of a sudden , they were .
and then you watched him yesterday saying that , can you believe it ?
this had nothing to do with that .
ok ?
just a coincidence .
no , no , just a coincidence -- no .
you know , she is unfit to serve as president for a lot of reasons .
he is unfit also .
he has done so bad .
he has been so incompetent .
we have doubled our debt during his -- think of it .
over the years of our country -- over the years of our country , he gets in , and in eight years by the time his term is up , we will have doubled our national debt .
think of it .
so , we have to win this election .
this is a very important election .
i do not need to do this , folks , believe me .
i could be elsewhere right now , i love being with you .
but i could be elsewhere .
i could be -- i might be in wisconsin , just a different location .
ok ?
but i felt i had to do it .
i want to give back .
i will get back give back , i 'm going to give back .
i 'm going to give back .
i want to give back .
because our country does not win anymore .
our country does not win anymore .
and it is not going to win with crooked hillary clinton .
not going to win .
it 's not going to win .
she does not know how to win .
our country is not going to win with her .
we 're going to be worse than we are with obama .
i mean , if you want four more years of what is going on , isis , all over the place , isis expanding .
and by the way , our policeman are great , great people .
and we are not going to allow our policeman to be shot down anymore .
anymore .
no more .
no more .
so , november 8th , you have a big election .
i promise you this , if i win , we 're going to start winning again .
we are going to win on trade , we 're going to win with our military , we 're going to take out isis , we are going to win for our veterans who have been totally mistreated .
our veterans are great .
we have a great plan for the veterans .
we 're are going to win for our veterans , first time , maybe ever .
we are going to win on trade deals .
we are going to make the finest , we are going to bring our jobs back .
we 're not going to make it easy for these companies to leave and fire everybody .
it going to be very , very expensive when they do it .
believe me , it 's going to be very , very expensive .
they 're going to say , you know what ?
maybe we 'll stay wisconsin , ok ?
maybe we will stay .
no , it 's going to be very , very hard .
we 're going to have strong borders , we 're going to have the wall .
mexico is going to pay for the wall 100 percent , 100 percent .
we are going to get rid of obamacare .
we 're going to get rid of common core , we 're going to bring our education -- local .
we 're going to have local education .
we 're going to appoint great supreme court justices .
and folks , we 're going to start winning again .
we 're going to win at every level .
we 're going to win so much , you 're going to get tired of winning , i 'm telling you .
you 're going to be begging me , mr. president -- you will send your great quarterback , right ?
he will come to the white house .
everybody respects him .
he 'll come to the white house , and he 'll say , mr. president , the people of wisconsin , they ca n't stand winning so much .
could you tone it down just a little bit ?
i will say , i just ca n't do that .
we are going to win more , and more and more , we 're going to win at every level .
but we are going to win .
we are going to make america great again .
we 're going to make america safe again .
thank you very much , everybody .
thank you .
thank you .
thank you .
thank you very much .
we love new hampshire , i can tell you that .
i need to open with a very critical breaking news announcement .
the fbi has just sent a letter to congress informing them that they have discovered new e - mails pertaining to the former secretary of state hillary clinton 's investigation ... 

  and they are reopening her case into her criminal and illegal conduct that threatens the security of the united states of america .
hillary clinton 's corruption is on a scale we have never seen before .
we must not let her take her criminal scheme into the oval office .
i have great respect for the fact that the fbi and the department of justice are now willing to have the courage to right the horrible mistake that they made .
this was a grave miscarriage of justice that the american people fully understood .
and it is everybody 's hope that it is about to be corrected .
so that is a big announcement that i heard 10 minutes ago and i guess obviously most of you folks have heard about , and in all fairness for all of the people that have suffered for doing so much less , including just recently four - star general james cartwright , general petraeus and many others .
perhaps finally justice will be done .
with that being said , the rest of my speech is going to be so boring .
should i even make the speech ?
we will talk about borders , right ?
we will talk about trade .
we 'll bring back our jobs , we 'll strengthen our military and let 's get going , ok ?
i want to thank general flynn , he 's a great general and i want to thank you for being here , general .
thank you very much .
just before general flynn was going up we heard this news .
i said , " general get up there and keep them busy .
we want to digest what just happened here . "
thank you general .
in 11 days we are going to win new hampshire ...   ... the state of my first victory .
and we are going to win back the white house .
seventy - five percent of the american people think our country is on the wrong track and we are going to fix it .
we are going to get our country back on the right track , and very , very quickly .
real change begins with immediately repealing and replacing obamacare , and that is , that is .
we ca n't forget how big a news that is , we ca n't lose track .
it 's a disaster , just like everything else in this administration .
it has just been announced that americans are going to experience another massive double - digit hike in obamacare premiums , including a 116 percent premium hike to our very good friends in the great state of arizona .
even bill clinton admitted obamacare is the craziest thing in the world , where people wind up with their premiums doubled and their coverage cut in half .
in minnesota , where the premium increase will be almost 60 percent , the democratic governor said the affordable care act is no longer affordable .
jonathan gruber , the architect of obamacare ...   ... admitted it was all a fraud and he said it was passed because of the stupidity of the american voter .
hey , we 're doing a lot of good work , are n't we ?
we 're catching all of these people .
we 're doing a good job .
jonathan gruber , there 's another .
see , we did n't forget .
i never forgot jonathan gruber .
i said you know , if i do this , we 're going to run and his name came up and people forget after a week or two .
i said i am never going to forget jonathan gruber , the architect of obamacare and what he said .
so we did not forget .
almost -- can you imagine , it 's like a little more than a week before the election .
we did n't forget the name jonathan gruber .
but the only real stupidity is that shown by our politicians who passed this monstrosity over the furious objection of certain politicians and the american voter .
job - killing obamacare is just one more way the system is rigged .
what i 've just announced previously it might not be as rigged as i thought .
right ?
right ?
the fbi -- i think they 're going to right the ship , folks .
i think they 're going to right the ship .
and they 're going to save there reputation by doing so .
hillary clinton wants to double down on obamacare , destroying american health care forever .
she wants to expand obamacare and make it even more expensive .
i will repeal and replace obamacare and we will replace it with a much less expensive plan and a plan that is much , much better .
just this year , hillary clinton declared obamacare is one of the greatest accomplishments of president obama , the democratic party and our country .
well , that was -- that 's turned out to be wrong .
do they do anything right ?
we do n't win anymore .
we do n't -- i mean , you 're going to have such a good time starting in ' 17 .
we 're going to start winning again .
we 're going to start winning again .
because it 's turned out , and i 've been saying this from before it passed , obamacare is a catastrophe beyond imagination .
insurers are leaving , doctors are quitting , companies are fleeing , workers ' hours are being cut , part - time jobs are all over the place .
those beautiful full - time jobs that you used to have do n't exist and deductibles are through the roof .
you do n't get to use it .
we do n't get rid of obamacare , we have no choice .
but if we do n't get rid of it , our health care system is gone forever .
we 'll never have another chance .
and by the way , if we do n't win this election , you 're never going to have another chance either , that i can tell you .
never going to happen again .
repealing obamacare is one of the single most important reasons we must win on november 8th .
but real change also means getting rid of the corruption in washington , and again , maybe that 's happened .
wow .
we have a big day .
no think of it , i won my first primary in new hampshire and i am getting here and the news this morning is -- this is bigger than watergate .
this is bigger than watergate in my opinion .
this is bigger than watergate .
hillary bleached and deleted 33,000 e - mails after receiving a congressional subpoena .
that alone to me -- there were more serious things done , but how does it get much more ?
but that was so obvious .
she gets the subpoena and she bleaches and deletes 33,000 e - mails .
that to me -- because it was so simple , you know ?
not -- it 's not about the sale of the uranium that nobody knows what it means -- i know what it means -- to russia .
then she talks to me about russia .
20 percent of the uranium in our country to russia .
but you know , the deletion of 33,000 e - mails , boy , that just sort of is so out there , after receiving a subpoena from the united states government .
she lied to congress , she lied to the fbi , she made 13 phones disappear , some with a hammer .
the clinton crew gave more than $ 675,000 to the wife of the deputy director of the fbi ...   -- and the man who was overseeing the investigation into hillary 's illegal server , but maybe that takes care of itself .
right now that takes care of itself i think , i think .
very proud that the fbi was willing to do this actually , really , very proud .
just yesterday we learned that bill clinton 's right - hand man pushed   for clinton 's foundation donors and other large corporations to funnel as much as $ 66 million in personal profit to bill and hillary clinton .
this man explained that the cozy relationship between his consulting firm to foundation and clinton 's personal income had helped bill and hillary enrich themselves , and obtain in - kind services , including personal travel , hospitality , vacations , and the like .
the same people paying bill clinton for speeches were lobbying hillary clinton at the same -- the same time , same time .
and -- these people are seriously corrupt .
terribly conflict .
hillary 's pay for play included defense contracts .
take raytheon , when the contractor wanted big foreign arms deals , they hired three lobbyists that raised hundreds of thousands of dollars for hillary 's last campaign , and are raising money for her current campaign .
and by the way 50 to 1 in ads , 50 to 1 .
and if you look at florida , we 're winning .
ohio , we 're winning .
iowa we 're winning .
doing great in new hampshire .
i think we 're going to have a tremendous victory in pennsylvania .
we better have a great victory in new hampshire , please .
ok , .
in fact when this news -- when this news of the fbi 's investigation , when it just happened a little while ago , they said mr. trump , i think they 'd understand , we could skip your speech in new hampshire this is so big .
i said i do n't have the courage to skip the speech in new hampshire .
believe me , i do n't have the courage .
i 'm not skipping new hampshire , i never will .
you know , when i won , and you remember because i go around and we had the big rallies , and they said oh , the big rallies will never work in new hampshire , you have to sit down and have dinner with everybody .
i said that 's like -- that 's a lot of dinners .
they do n't expect that .
but you remember when we met , and i 'd have a lot of small meetings too with people , we 'd   talk , and new hampshire more than any other place taught me about drugs flowing into this country .
and your police department , so great , the police departments in new hampshire , they told me .
i went to some , i became friendly with some .
and i never knew -- i never knew , honestly , i knew it was bad , i never knew it was so bad .
and i said to the people of new hampshire , because more than any other place , you look at the beautiful little roadways and lakes and streams , and everything is so beautiful , the trees , and you say how could they have a drug problem here ?
it does n't fit .
but i 'd sit down with groups , and i said what 's your biggest problem ?
and i figured they 'd say maybe the veterans which are suffering greatly in this area , we understand that .
but it was always -- and we 'll solve that problem .
but it was always , you know what , it was always heroine .
i 'd say heroine ?
what do you mean ?
and i learned so much .
and i said to the people of new hampshire that if i win , which i did with new hampshire , if i win , and i also said and if i go all the way , we are going to stop the inflow of drugs into new hampshire and into our country 100 percent .
and i gave the people of new hampshire my pledge , more than anybody else in this case , because they really taught me about what 's happening with the world of drugs pouring in .
hard to believe .
it 's just so , so strange when you look and see the beauty of this place and then you see that heroin and drugs are your number one problem , by far .
anyway , with months these lobbyists sealed over $ 26 billion in foreign arms deals , including over $ 19 billion in qatar , some people would say qatar , which happened to be off bill clinton .
$ 1 million as a birthday gift for a few minutes of face time .
$ 1 million .
the lobbyists , one of whom was the sister - in - law to hillary clinton 's current campaign chairman , received hundreds of thousands of dollars in fees , the contractor got billions of dollars in contracts , and hillary clinton got her campaign cash and money for her foundation .
and you know i 'm putting up tremendous amounts of money .
today i wrote another check for $ 10 million .
i 'm spending money like crazy .
i 'll probably have over maybe close to or over $ 100 million of my money spent on the campaign .
but there 's something nice about that .
unless i lose , in which case i say , " what was that all about ? "
but we 're gon na do what 's right for you , not what 's right for some contributor or special interest .
hillary put the office of the secretary of state up for sale and if she ever got the chance , believe me she would put the office -- and you know what office i 'm talking about -- the office called the oval office up for sale too .
i propose a contract with the american voter which will end corruption and give government back to our great people .
i want the entire corrupt washington establishment to hear and heed the words i 'm about to say , and i never loved this expression but now i love it because it 's become -- it 's become the hottest expression .
if we win on november 8th , we are going to washington , d.c. -- when we win , ok -- and we are going to drain the swamp .
at the core of my contract is my plan to bring back our jobs .
you 've been suffering with the jobs .
the jobs have gone like candy being taken from a baby .
new growth numbers just released put the average growth rate for this year at a disastrous 1.5 percent .
if china goes down to 7 or 8 percent gdp , you know it 's like a national catastrophe .
last quarter we were at 1 percent .
our job numbers last week were horrible .
they were anemic , as the expression goes .
they like to say anemic , that was the word they used .
obama is the first president in modern history not to have a single year of 3 percent growth .
and they say it 's hard because we 're a large county .
well india is a much larger country and they 're at 8 percent .
china is at 7 percent .
and china 's not happy .
so we 're at around 1 percent and we just keep going along , just keep going along losing our jobs to mexico and every other place .
forty - seven million americans are on food stamps , and 45 million people -- think of it , this is our country -- are living in poverty .
meanwhile our trade deficit with the world is now nearly $ 800 billion a year .
you say , " who negotiates these contracts ? "
we 're living through obama .
it 's true .
you know instead of campaigning for hillary clinton he ought to be in the white house in the oval office negotiating trade deals , beating isis , taking care of our veterans which he does not do .
we 're living through the greatest jobs theft in the history of the world .
they 're stealing our jobs .
greatest in the history of the world .
new hampshire has lost one in three manufacturing jobs since nafta , a deal signed by bill clinton and supported strongly by hillary .
we 've lost 70,000 factories since china entered the world trade organization , another bill and hillary disaster .
the trump administration will immediately begin negotiating and we will start this negotiation so fast .
we will start a negotiation on nafta , and if we do n't get the deal we want , we will terminate nafta and get a much , much better trade deal .
and i wo n't go into the details , but because they 're different tax systems , they 're under a vat system and we 're under our system , but because of the fact that they 're under a much different tax system , the day the deal was signed it was a defective deal , with us having a massive , at least 17 percent disadvantage .
so it 's complicated .
i 'm not going to bother you or bore you with it , but we 've been working with a defective deal for years , and nobody , no politician ever went back to renegotiate it .
we 're going to get it done , folks , so easily .
if a company wants to fire their workers and go to mexico or another country and then they think they 're going to ship their products back into the united states , we will charge them a tax of 35 percent .
so when you think these companies , which right now are out there negotiating to leave here , they 'll leave new hampshire , they 'll leave pennsylvania , they 're gon na leave ohio , they 're gon na leave all of these places , all of our great places and great states .
and right now as we 're talking , they 're negotiating deals .
mexico is the eighth wonder of the world in terms of the new plants .
a friend of mine , bill plante , he 's the biggest , he said the eighth wonder of the world what 's happening in mexico .
and i say , and i tell this to people , what about us ?
he said meh , not gon na be -- it 's gon na be the other way around .
but there will be consequences .
and you know , when they realize that they 've got to now pay a tax , all of that , to come through our very strong border , because there will be a strong border ...   ... with their product , you know what they 're gon na say ?
they 're gon na say let 's say , we 're not gon na move , and they 're gon na stay .
it 's very simple .
but the politicians do n't want to do that because they 're controlled -- they 're controlled by the people that give them their campaign contributions and probably other things .
we will -- does anybody know what i mean by that ?
we will also stand up to chinese currency manipulation and we will stop the trans - pacific partnership .
we will become a rich nation again , but to be a rich nation , we must also be a safe nation .
hillary clinton unleashed isis onto the world and it has now spread into our country .
there are right now 1,000 open isis investigations across the united states , more than at any time that we 've ever had .
now , hillary wants to increase by 550 percent ...   ... the massive number of syrian refugees flowing into our country .
that 's over the obama numbers , and those are thousands and thousands of people .
a trump administration will suspend the syrian refugee program .
and we 'll help them will safe havens and we 'll get other countries over there , like the gulf states who have nothing but money , we have $ 20 trillion in debt .
we 'll get them to pay , they got ta do their share .
we 'll lead it , we 'll help , they 'll pay , but you know what ?
we ca n't let people into this country that we do n't know about -- we do n't know .
let me state this as clearly as i can .
if i 'm elected president , i am going to keep ...   when ...   we love new hampshire , i love this place .
i love this place .
by the way , you know , we 're leading in florida , we 're leading in all these places .
the recent poll said we 're two down in new hampshire .
you know what i said ?
i do n't think so , i do n't think so .
these polls , these polls , these are called dirty polls , you know what that is ?
these are false .
i do n't think so .
she comes up here , she has four people , and it 's like oh , we have a wonderful crowd .
i do n't think so .
i think we 're winning new hampshire big .
ok .
so we 'll change it .
when i 'm elected president ...   ... i am going to keep radical islamic terrorists the hell out of our country .
a trump administration will also secure and defend the borders of the united states .
boy , you people have energy , you 're great .
well , let 's face it , it 's been a long time , right ?
it 's been a long time .
you 've been waiting a long time for the right person , but you do have energy .
you know what 's happening ?
a lot of these places ... 

  a lot of the different places , reports are coming out .
they hate to write it , you know the dishonest media .
but people -- by the way , great people , oh they 're the worst , they 're so dishonest .
they are so dishonest , folks .
but a lot of these reports coming out in the early voting states , people are coming up that have never voted .
these are great americans , these are great people , but they 've just never seen anybody that they wanted to like -- they 've never heard people say we 're going to actually bring back your jobs .
we 're not going to let companies leave us and fire everybody and move and then let the product pour into our country with no tax .
no , no , just go ahead , leave , fire all our people , move to mexico , make the product , sell your air conditioners -- carrier 's an example , they 're leaving -- they might not leave , they 're probably all about ready to change their mind .
but just let your product come right in , no tax , no nothing .
i mean , how stupid is this ?
how stupid ?
and i 'm a free - trader , i 'm a fair trader .
but we have the wrong people represent us .
so what 's happening is these lines in florida are four blocks long .
they were never like that .
they 've never seen anything like it .
and in tennessee , a great congressman , been there for 25 years , said to me , " i 've never seen -- we have never seen anything like it . "
people are coming out that have n't voted in years .
people are coming out , they literally -- they had n't voted in years .
so they 're not polled because , you know , unless you voted like in the last election , they do n't want to poll you .
so , people are coming out that had n't voted in years .
happening in texas .
they have n't voted in years .
and people that have never even voted , and yet they 're great americans .
they just never saw somebody that they wanted to vote for .
and they 're coming out and they 've got the trump shirt and they 've got the hat , they 've got buttons all over the place , you know .
now , who knows -- who knows ?
they may have all of the trump stuff and you never know .
maybe they 're voting for crooked hillary clinton , but i do n't think so , right ?
i do n't think so .
history has taught us that we do n't think so .
so , i think we 're doing great .
and yes , on the border , we have no choice , we will build a wall and mexico will pay for the wall .
got to stop the drugs .
got to stop the drugs .
remember my pledge to everybody but in particular to new hampshire , because i know what you 're going through with the drugs .
i know what your incredible law enforcement , your police and your fire departments , because i see where they 're helping so much .
believe me , they 're -- they 're not spoken about .
and how about where they 're shooting ?
during fires , they 're shooting at the firemen .
now , this is a new phenomenon .
they 're shooting at firemen .
they 're shooting bullets at firemen going to fires and fighting fires .
so we have a divided country and we 're going to make our country love again .
we 're going to bring it like this room .
countless americans who have died in recent years would be alive today if not for the open border policies of this administration .
this includes incredible americans like 21-year - old sarah root .
you 've heard that story , you 've seen it , you 've read about it .
the man who killed her arrived at the border , entered federal custody and then was released into the united states community under the policies of this white house .
he was released again and again , after crime after crime and now is at large .
sarah graduated from college just the day before with a 4.0 grade point average , top in her class .
she was violently , violently killed .
outstanding young woman .
i know her parents ; they 're incredible .
also among the victims of obama - clinton open borders policy was grant ronnebeck , a 21-year - old convenience store clerk in mesa , arizona .
he was murdered by an illegal immigrant gang member previously convicted of burglary who had also been released from federal custody .
and so many people said please , please , please do n't release him , he 's violent .
and he shot grant through the head .
another victim who we 've all read about and known about , kate steinle , gunned down in the sanctuary city of san francisco by an illegal immigrant .
and this person was deported five previous times .
and now , he 's got a good lawyer and the case will go on and on and on .
he 's got a lawyer , i see them in court all the time .
the case will go on and on .
shot in the back while standing with her father .
great parents , great brother .
then there is the case of 90-year - old earl olander , who was brutally beaten and left to bleed to death in his home .
the perpetrators were illegal immigrants with criminal records a mile long but who did not meet the obama administration 's priorities for removal .
people begged that they be incarcerated or be moved out of the country , but our geniuses would n't listen .
in california , a 64-year - old air force veteran , marilyn pharis , was sexually assaulted and beaten to death with a hammer .
her killer had been arrested on multiple occasions but was never deported .
people asked please , please deport him .
this is what happened .
this is a crime wave that never ends .
i can tell you it 's thousands of cases like this .
when i 'm president , believe me , it will end .
not only will a wall keep out the dangerous cartels and criminals , but will also keep out the drugs , remember new hampshire , and the heroin poisoning our youth .
our youth is being poisoned before they get a chance .
and by the way , i 've met plenty of people in new hampshire that are not our youth that have a tremendous problem , and i want to tell you , we 're going to work with people , we 're going to set up programs , we 're going to try everything we can to get them unaddicted , unaddicted .
so as i said , when i won the new hampshire primary , i promised the people of new hampshire that we would stop drugs from pouring into your community and i guarantee you we will .
you will be so proud of your president , you will be so proud of your community .
you will be so proud .
i just want to say in closing -- i just want to say in closing that we have an amazing movement going on .
a movement like they 've never seen before , a movement that hopefully wo n't be stopped .
we have a movement that the biggest people in the world of the media , the biggest , have said they 've never seen anything like it before .
every -- every crowd , every auditorium .
the other night , we had a situation .
we had thousands and thousands of people and i said to the fire marshal , is n't it possible to let more in ?
we had thousands of people in this massive field and we had many thousands outside of the gates they would n't let in and i said , could n't we let them in ?
and they said , we ca n't .
i said , but there 's no fire , we 're outside .
he said , it 's stampede , mr. trump , we 're worried about a stampede .
and it 's a stampede of love .
it 's true .
it 's not a stampede -- it 's a stampede of love .
because there was so many people .
they said we have very strong security guards , but mr. trump , they 're not nearly strong as 45,000 people come charging forward .
so i fully understood it .
but we have something going on that 's so special .
it 's so special .
we 're going to reduce your taxes , we 're going to simplify your taxes .
we 're going to make your businesses welcome in our country .
we 're going to reduce the taxes for middle - income people .
we call them the forgotten men and women .
greatly simplify your returns .
the only company that i can think of that wo n't like us is h&amp;r block , they will not like us .
they 're not gon na like trump too much .
but we 'll greatly simplify your taxes .
and your businesses -- we 're taking it from 35 percent , which is one of the highest in the world , just about the highest , down to one of the lowest in the world , 15 percent .
we 're getting rid of a lot of the regulations that are stopping growth .
tremendous amounts of regulation are killing your small businesses and your big businesses .
so we 're gon na have a very tax- friendly country again , and it 's gon na mean jobs , it 's gon na mean expansion , it 's gon na mean new companies growing .
we are going to create the border .
we are going to stop the drugs .
we 're gon na have people come into our country .
we want people to come into our country , but they have to come in legally .
they have to come in through a legal process .
we want a lot of people to come in .
and they 're going to come in , but they 'll come in legally .
and we 're gon na streamline the process .
people are waiting on line now 10 years .
we 're gon na streamline because we want people to come in , but we want them to come in legally .
and we want merit , too .
we want to take wonderful , great   people that love our country , they want to get out and they want to do a great job .
we want to have them also come in based on merit .
a word you do n't hear anymore .
a word you do n't hear any more .
it 's too bad .
we 're also going to very importantly appoint justices to the supreme court ...   ... who you can be proud of and who will respect the constitution of the united states .
we 're going to save our second amendment , which is under unbelievable siege .
we 're going to help big league on education , we 're going to go with choice , so important , and we 're going to terminate common core and bring education local .
our military is depleted .
we 're going to rebuild our military .
we are going to lead through strength .
and hopefully , we 're not gon na have to use our military but i will say this .
isil -- we 're getting rid of isis .
we 're getting rid of isis .
isis is -- we have no choice .
by the way , not since medieval times has anyone seen chopping off of heads , drowning in steel cages , burying in sand .
not since -- not since medieval times .
it all grew during the tenure of obama and hillary clinton .
isis -- you know she stands up and she says what she 's gon na do .
well , she was there .
it came out of the vacuum because we should have never gone into iraq , but once we did , we should have gone out the right way , not the wrong way .
and the way they went out was so bad , so bad , including giving back mosul , which now they 're fighting to take back .
and it would have been nice -- the element of surprise .
do we agree ?
does anybody not agree ?
the element of surprise .
we do n't use the element of surprise .
we use the element of tell them everything we can possibly tell them , give them plenty of time to get ready and then attack .
and it turns out to be a lot tougher than they ever thought .
but we 're going to have a country that you 're going to be proud of again .
we 're going to have a president that hopefully you will be proud of .
i will work so hard for every community .
i 'll be working very hard for the african - american community , for the hispanic community .
i 'll be working hard for every community .
and we 're gon na have this divided nation come together .
and i just want to say we 're gon na make america strong again , we 're gon na make america -- does n't sound nice , but we have no choice -- wealthy again .
but we are going to make america great again .
and i want to thank everybody in new hampshire .
get out and vote .
you 're very special people .
you 're very , very special people .
god bless you , get out and vote .
thank you .
thank you , new hampshire .
thank you .
whoa .
whoa .
this is amazing .
this is amazing .
usa .
thank you .
thank you .
this is incredible .
you know , i had a press conference before and one of the questions was , " mr. trump , what are you doing ?
you are not supposed to be campaigning today .
you have broken all of the rules .
what is going on ?
they are having their convention .
sir , you are not supposed to be campaigning . "
well , guess what , folks ?
we are campaigning .
we are going to make america great folks .
we are going to make america great again .
remember that .
and they said the same thing , you know , during the primaries .
we have 17 people , very talented people .
and they said the same thing -- this will never work because trump comes in , he has these big rallies , and then he leaves .
and i 'm supposed to have dinner , like , with two people , spend the entire evening ; they go to another .
and they said , well , why do you do that ?
i said well , i do it because i can get to rallies .
the other people ca n't get to rallies .
it 's very simple -- it 's very simple .
but that worked .
i have to thank two people that have been unbelievable and great friends : tom marino , congressman .
where 's tom ?
get up here , tom .
get up here .
and lou barletta , get up here -- oh , there it is -- lou , lou , lou .
all right .
they have , like , big fences to cross .
just a minute .
ok .
we all know what you look like .
but they have been so great right from the beginning , and i wan to thank -- i want to thank you both .
i want to thank you both .
thank you .
i mean it .
so , it 's been an amazing -- yeah , sit down .
come on .
we 've got plenty of time .
well , we have nothing but time .
it 's a nice place .
this is very nice .
first of all , mike pence has been amazing .
and you know , one of the reasons , and this is 100 percent , one of the reasons i chose mike was because indiana under his leadership has done so well .
it 's done so incredibly -- aaa bond rating .
they have really low unemployment , one of the top few states .
everything 's good , even for the veterans in terms of employment , i think it was 32 or 38 .
no , that 's not the good number .
that was when he got into office .
and when he left , right now , basically they were number two in the nation and he wants it to be number one .
that 's incredible .
that 's veterans being employed by some of the folks in this room .
so that was great .
now , when we won new york , you know , we had these incredible victories .
what do i know about politics ?
but we do have a lot of common sense , all of us , do n't we ?
we know .
we know .
we know a lot .
we know a lot .
i had a run that was incredible .
it started with new york .
and new york -- and you know what 's nice ?
i won new york ...   ... queens , queens , you 're right .
queens .
he knows .
what are you doing here ?
what are you doing here ?
but we had this incredible period of time , and we just kept winning , winning , winning .
but i went to new york and we had a massive landslide victory -- won just about everything .
and in my victory speech , i do n't even know why i said it -- but i said , " and we 're going to " -- this is in the middle of fifth avenue , ok ? -- "
we 're going to put the miners back to work . "
i said that .
i do n't even know why .
and by the way , that includes the steelworkers , and we 're going to take a lot of the regulations off of gas , because gas is big , and they want to close you down .
they want to close the mines down .
they 've been closing mines down .
it 's sad .
it 's sad .
but little did i realize that shortly thereafter i 'd go to a place called west virginia .
and did they love trump .
did you see those numbers ?
and hillary clinton -- crooked hillary clinton , she 's really crooked .
so hillary clinton -- thank you .
you know what we 're going to do ?
even better , we 're going to beat her on november 8th .
we 're going to beat her .
ok ?
that 's even better .
ok ?
that 's what we 're going to do .
got to get out there .
we got to vote .
you got to get out there .
we got to get out there .
but do you remember -- so hillary gave a press conference in an area where coal and the different things that we all love was n't so important , right ?
and she figured she 'd make the statement and it would n't get back to west virginia .
it got back to west virginia and it got back to pennsylvania and it got back to ohio and it got back to a lot of places that she did n't want to hear that message .
she said , " we 're going to put the coal miners and we 're going to put the coal mines out of business . "
ok ?
no good .
and we had an event .
it was at a big , massive place -- it was beautiful -- in west virginia and the place was packed .
it has to be 10,000 , 12,000 people and outside , they had at least double that number .
and it was love .
and i went and saw some of the miners and i said , " so tell me , would you ever think of like leaving and going to another place and maybe doing something else instead of this ? "
they said , " mr. trump , " and i understand this so well , " we love mining .
we love doing it .
this is our livelihood .
our fathers , our grandfathers -- this is what we do .
we do it so well .
we do n't want to do something else . "
and i said , " i love that . "
i love that .
i can understand it and i love that .
love it .
so hang in , because we 're going to put you back to work .
we 're going to put you back .
it 's going to be a beautiful thing to see because these are great people .
these are amazing people .
and so many from this area , but so many from this state .
and i went to school in pennsylvania .
i love pennsylvania .
you know , i love pennsylvania .
and we 're just going to -- you know , when i look at -- i look around and i see what happened , i -- i did n't need to do this .
i had a very nice life .
beautiful family , beautiful business .
i built this incredible company .
all this , and i just could n't stand -- you look at the iran deal , you look at so many -- everything is wrong .
everything is wrong .
take a look .
i 'll tell you what .
let 's talk .
take a look at the convention that 's going on right now .
they do n't honor -- think of it .
they do n't honor our police , they do n't honor our law enforcement .
we started complaining they had no american flags on this massive stage .
they had no american flags .
they forgot .
they forgot to put up -- now , we had a lot of flags .
somebody said , " i ca n't see you , mr. trump .
there are too many flags . "
i said , " that 's ok .
we 'll leave it that way . "
but we had a tremendous success and we got a balance   that , according to one of the networks , that it was one of the biggest balances   that anyone 's seen .
now , i give a lot of credit for that to my family .
my family , melania and tiffany ...   and ivanka and don and eric .
and they talk about these people .
they say , " stars , stars . "
i 'd rather have those five stars much more so , those five - plus one , by the way .
but they did an amazing job .
and i have one of the stars with me .
should i introduce you to eric ?
eric .
eric .
get over here , eric .
come here .
e. 
  wow , look at this crowd .
this is amazing .
well , you know , guys , i had to come today .
i spent so much of my youth in scranton , in coverdale , and waverly .
so many of my best friends in the world -- i went to boarding school in pennsylvania for five years and i just love this state .
i know this area as well as anyone and i just had to be here today .
we have so many great friends and thank you .
you know , we just came off a convention and we had a great time .
it was honor to be up there and to talk about my father .
we had the greatest time .
we are so proud of him and we are going to make america great again .
we are going to win this in november .
we are going to make this country great again .
thank you very much guys .
d. 
  that is my 6"6 boy , and he is a good guy .
he is a good guy .
he loved this area , he really did .
he loved the school he went to .
he went to the hills school .
he loved it and he did well .
he has been doing well .
i am very proud of my children .
i am very proud of my children .
so , president obama today was interviewed on a show , man look honestly , if he did a great job as president , i would n't care if he was a democrat , republican or conservative i do n't care .
if he did a great job as president , i would be so happy and so would you .
i would be so happy .
it has n't worked out that way .
it has n't worked out that way .
we are scoffed at all over the world .
we are looked down upon all over the world .
we are not respected anymore .
we were talking about putin today -- no respect , no like , no nothing .
you know , would n't it be a great thing if we could get along with russia ?
would n't that be a good thing ?
that would be a good thing .
not a bad thing .
it would be a good thing .
would n't it be a good thing if we could make deals , trade deals , with china , that instead of loosing hundreds of billions of dollars a year and rebuilding china 's roadways , and airports , and tunnels ; that we did much better than we are doing right now ?
you know , i am a free trader .
i believe in it , but you need smart people to make great deals .
we do n't have the right people .
we are being ripped off on by every single country we do business with on trade .
every single country we do business with .
we have people negotiating our deals that are political hacks .
these are deals that are so big -- you know , you could take a midsize country and the trade deals are bigger than the massive deals you read about with corporations .
these are bigger deals .
there is no bigger deals than the deals with china with trade .
it 's a one way street .
they take their product , they flow it in - by the way , for your steel workers , they dump more steel in this place because they 're going to put you out of business .
you are already mostly out of business , but they want to put you out of business .
we are going to start making things again folks .
we are going to start making things again , that includes steel , but we will start making things again ..   a friend of mine who 's a manufacturer -- he 's a great manufacturer .
he 's not a very political person , which is probably good for him .
but he 's a great manufacturer .
and he calls me up and he goes , you know , it 's really sad ; i work so hard to get into china ; i ca n't break in .
he ca n't get in .
it 's so hard .
then he finally gets in and he has to pay massive taxes on everything .
and they wanted to open up plants in china -- we 're not going to let you do this anymore .
and i 'm not even blaming china .
i think they 're doing the right thing for them .
but they 're killing us .
they 're killing us .
and it 's not going to happen anymore , folks ; not going to happen anymore .
and the problem is it 's a one - way street .
we pay tax .
they do n't take our goods .
they make us build like crazy over there .
you look at boeing .
they order 300 planes .
they end up having to build a massive place over there .
they devalue their currency .
they 're grand , grand masters .
they 're the greatest in the world ever .
japan 's good .
they 're all good .
we 're not good .
we do n't know what 's happening .
and it 's so easy to stop .
because they send their goods in and they send them in without tax .
and not going to happen .
so here 's the story , here 's the story .
i won the state of indiana , where i got to know mike pence .
and one of the reasons i won -- well , maybe the biggest reason was bobby knight came out and he said , you know , we want trump .
right ?
look at that .
we want trump .
but bobby knight was so great .
but one of the big reasons i won indiana was because carrier air conditioner announced -- actually about a year before , but i kept talking about carrier , carrier .
i did n't know i 'd need -- you know , it was going to be good for me .
it turned out to be good for me .
because every time i made a speech in indiana , i 'd have so many of these 1,400 people that got laid off .
they were in carrier for years ; some of them 30 , 35 years .
good people .
and one day , and if i did n't have the cell phones -- oh , those cell phones where they take the pictures .
they had -- it was all over the news .
somebody was taking a picture of this sort of mid - level manager saying , listen , we 're going to fire everybody , and we 're moving to mexico .
just another case .
but you know what ?
it 's much more effective when you can see it .
let 's say that same thing happened , but we did n't have the picture of these people that were devastated .
they were devastated .
this has been their job for many years and it 's a good job .
you know , the jobs we have are n't good jobs anymore .
they 're bad jobs .
and even the opponents say they 're bad jobs .
so i go to indiana and i 've been talking about carrier for a long time .
it got worse and worse .
and many others -- this is just -- in all fairness to carrier , this is just one of hundreds and hundreds of companies that are moving out , in this case going to mexico .
many of them go to mexico , but in this case going to mexico .
so they announce they 're closing .
they 're going to fire everybody .
they 're going to move to mexico .
they 're going to make their air conditioners .
they 're going to sell them over here .
and that 's it .
not anymore , folks .
not anymore .
not anymore .
not anymore .
so now when that happens , and this can pertain to all of you .
we 're going to keep your companies and we 're going to bring a lot of companies back .
we 're going to bring our jobs back .
we 're going to bring our coal back .
and we 're going to have clean coal .
it 's clean coal .
and we 're going to have coal .
and that gas is going to be just a beautiful thing , ok ?
because they want to regulate you right out of business .
they want you out .
they want to stop that one now .
so what happens is this .
they think they 're going to go make their products , sell it in , everyone 's going to be happy .
so for years , i 've been watching , even before this administration , this beauty of an administration .
i 've been watching and i 've seen that they are always trying to stop people from - they 're trying to come up with plans - maybe low interest loans , maybe zero interest loans .
i think they made a couple where they actually had the people -- they gave them the money at zero interest or whatever .
and then they move , because they forgot to say , " you ca n't move , we are giving you money . "
this is the people that we owe .
so here is the story , here is the story , it 's very simple , i 'm a free trader .
but when trade is n't fair , and when things are n't fair , and when countries disrespect us , we are going to be very firm , very nice .
i get along great with leadership , and i do n't , again , i 'm not angry at the leadership of mexico or japan or vietnam ; new strong vietnam or china .
i respect what they 're doing in .
what they have done is fantastic for them .
for us ?
horrible .
so what we do is simple -- i have watched for many years and it is so basic .
half of the people -- and i know a few of the people here , they 're great business people .
they are friends of mine .
they are friends of mine who came .
there 's one right over here .
stand up albert .
where the hell are you albert ?
stand up albert .
he 's a good golfer but i 'm actually a better golfer than him .
right ?
i have a lot of friends in the room , great friends .
here is what we are going to do -- they 're going to make their products .
here 's what they want to do , they want to make their products , send it in , and sell it to indiana and every other place like nothing happen .
there is going to be consequences now .
so we tell them , now , if you get there early enough before they build the plant , you say , " listen , we are really happy you are moving to mexico .
we think it is wonderful .
very hot , but it is wonderful .
but here is the story , if you are going to move to mexico , every single time you make an air conditioning unit we will charge you a 35 percent tax . "
okay ?
" we are not going to give you money or loan you money they do n't need . "
they do n't need money , they have plenty of money .
this has nothing to do with loans or anything .
so all these incentives that our government , which is complicated -- you know loaning money , giving money , and doing tax investments , it 's not simple .
and i guarantee you -- and i always joke , it is fun for me and i love business .
i love it .
and i have an instinct for it .
i built an unbelievable company , some of the greatest assets in the world .
i like it .
the only problem is as president i should not be making the call .
right , i joked about this , but i should not be calling the head of an air conditioning company , right , but we have to do it .
it 's like three minutes .
my wife would said , " you should not be calling the head of carrier air conditioning , " but i say , " but honey , i 'm telling you it is so easy . " '
i have some of the greatest business leaders in the world to endorse me .
carl icahn , great business leader and so many others .
the reason they listen is because they know what i am doing .
and so , what 's happen is this , i get a call , okay , the worst , i will have one of my workers   call .
one of the people you would not like very much but who cares , you would would n't want them out for dinner .
some of them are nice but most are rather ruthless and vicious , but that is who i want negotiating .
i do n't want our political hacks negotiating , i want these guys .
a few i have to do myself because it is fun .
so we call then , and he will go , " yes , mr. president , it is great honor talk to you . " -- "
it 's a great honor to talk to you also .
listen , you 're moving , i understand that you are leaving , you are going from indiana to mexico , right ? " -- "
yes"-- " well , i hope you change your mind . " -- "
well sir , we wo n't . "
now , you have to understand .
i will be hit by every lobbyist and every special interest group in america in order to not make the call , in order to let the deal die , like hillary rodham clinton .
hillary rodham clinton .
so -- crooked hillary .
so -- so look , here 's the story .
so normally , politicians   -- so they 're going to be calling , right ?
they 'll call and they 'll talk and they say , you know , this and that and they 'll say , " madam president . "
i do n't want to hear that .
i do want to hear it eventually because i want to see a woman become president , but it ca n't be her .
she 's a disaster .
she 's a disaster .
she 'll set you back a long way , women , if that happens .
it 'll be a long way before it happens again .
you better be careful what you wish for .
so here 's the story .
they 'd say to hillary -- they 'd say , " you ca n't do that .
they gave you $ 2 million . "
or , " you ca n't do that .
your lobbyist paid you a fortune and raised millions of dollars . "
or your -- she 'll go , " you 're right .
i ca n't really do that . "
and that 's the end of it , ok ?
that 's the end .
so they move to mexico , they 'll sell their goods , we have our 1400 people unemployed , and i 'm talking about times thousands , times thousands of jobs , millions of jobs .
million of jobs .
now , here 's the difference .
me , they call . "
i do n't care . "
who is it ?
i know half of these guys anyway .
i do n't care .
what do i want to take his call for ?
ok ?
does nothing for me .
you know , i spent 60 billion   dollars so far in my campaign , right , 60 .
and i 'm spending -- last week -- last month , i guess it was -- somebody said -- i thought it was two million and they said it was 3.8 million .
it 's really good when you do n't know that it 's 3.8 , right ?
no , i thought i put up two   something .
and i said , oh will you put up two million ?
it was actually 3.8 million .
and i said to myself , you know , it 's great when you can put up 3.8 million instead of two million and you do n't care .
that 's the way it is .
i do n't care .
i do n't care .
and i 'm continuing , but i 'm raising a lot of money .
we 're raising a lot of money for the republican party and it 's coming in big league and it 's coming in in small doses and that 's something no other republican 's going to be able to do .
mike pence was just saying it 's an amazing thing .
we raised like 27 million dollars for a partial month last month and we 're doing equally well this month of -- and i think the average price was -- the average cost was like $ 61 or $ 64 , something like that .
and that does n't happen .
that happens for bernie sanders because it 's a different kind of mentality and thinking .
and by the way , poor bernie .
poor -- he just wants to go home and go to sleep .
please .
no .
he wants to go to sleep .
who can blame him ?
who can blame him ?
who can blame him ?
he wants to go home .
did you see he left very early last night ?
he 's exhausted .
but we 're going to get the bernie people out of him , a lot more than people think , because i know the trade .
he was right about one thing , trade .
he said we 're being screwed on trade and he 's right .
he 's right .
what 's happening with trade is right .
i will talk about it a little bit more .
then we 're going to talk about the border , we 're going to talk about our depleted -- you know , little things .
but look , bernie really hurt his legacy because if he would 've gone all the way and if they would 've had some kind of a march and then he goes and he goes back to being -- i think it 's a lot better than the way he sold out to hillary clinton .
he sold out .
he sold out .
i mean , other than trade -- and the problem is he knows trade 's no good .
the difference is i 'll do something about it , big league .
because i like the trade , but we 've got to make great deals .
somebody said to me , well , are you a free - trader ?
yes .
are you a fair trade ?
yes .
i 'm everything .
i could name 10 different forms of trade .
i know every one of them .
hey , the wharton school of finance right here in this great state , right ?
but -- but the best school , best school , number one , best school .
ok .
so , here 's the story .
so i can name all of them .
so one of these characters back here -- look at all of them .
you know , for a group of people that said why are you campaigning ...   ... boy , do we have a lot of people back there .
you know what ?
for a group of people that asked me this morning : sir , this is n't traditional that you would be out on the stump .
why are you campaigning ?
man , a hell of a lot of people showed up for this , did n't they ?
and look at it .
unbelievable .
unbelievable .
is n't it unbelievable ?
by the way , i have to tell you , they are the most dishonest human beings you 'll ever meet .
i really mean it -- the most ; the most dishonest human beings you will ever meet .
so , especially if you 're like a republican or conservative , it 's forget it .
it 's forget it .
these are really bad people .
now , 25 percent of them are fine ; 50 percent are not great ; and 25 percent are among the worst people you will ever encounter in your life .
they lie .
they lie .
they lie .
you know the story where they never show the size of the crowds .
they never do it .
they never do it .
unless a protest -- you know , i do n't have protesters .
people are so .
i always say the safest place you can be is at a trump rally .
it 's the safest place .
the safest place .
true .
true .
so , we 're going to bring it all back .
it 's going to all come back .
it 's going to come back bigger and better than you 've ever seen it before .
you 're going to have jobs flowing in , believe me .
you 're going to have the carrier 's of the world say i think i 'm not going to leave because now we 're playing with a different kind of mentality .
they 're not going to leave .
because they 're going to say , " we 're not leaving . "
now , if they want to go to another state , that 's different .
you 've got to all sort of negotiate with each other .
good luck , folks .
good luck -- our congressman .
good luck .
but you know , when they start leaving our country for another country , because we 're the stupid people , that 's not going to happen , ok ?
that 's just not going to happen .
so if you look at what 's going on right now in a place not so far away , a place that i happen to love called philadelphia .
i love it .
you 've got people that are fighting and trying to make their point .
and they do n't know what 's happening .
because remember when i ran and everybody said , well , trump won , like all of these people , all these professional politicians , and some very good people like ben carson , who 's great ; he endorsed me -- great people .
but very capable people .
and i wrote it down .
they have these signs .
ok ?
they have n't mentioned isis .
they do n't want it mentioned .
why ?
because they created it .
so they do n't mention isis .
i told you before , they do n't mention our police or our law enforcement .
and they would n't have those doors open for two minutes if it were n't for the police .
they would n't have them open for two minutes .
right ?
they would n't have them open .
their new name , which is the joke of all time , is that crooked hillary is a change maker .
do you see change ?
you know , they probably paid $ 2 million to the guy who came up with that slogan .
and i came up with crooked hillary all by myself .
zero , no money .
but change maker -- she 's a change maker .
so she 's been doing this for like 30 years plus and she 's going to be a change maker , right ?
she 's not going to change because the special interests and her lobbyists will never ever let her change , believe me .
they will never let her change even if she wanted to and she does n't want to , okay ?
look at tpp .
so tpp , transpacific partnership , right , a horrible deal that she was totally in favor of .
she said it was the gold standard not long ago .
it 's the gold standard of trade deals .
well , remember this .
the worst deal ever signed from an economic standpoint in the history of our country , right , it 's nafta .
it was signed by who ?
bill clinton .
who by the way gave a speech last night but he did n't mention my favorite chapter , he left one chapter out . "
i met a girl .
i met a girl . "
you know , it 's funny , when he started the speech last night , he said , " i met a girl . "
and i said , " that 's politically incorrect . "
and i saw rachel maddow give him hell over that , " it 's not a girl . "
but he said it , " i met a girl , " and a lot of people thought that was nice .
but i said " watch " , and rachel maddow knocked the hell out of him because he said , " i met a girl " , it 's supposed to be " i met a woman . "
i do n't know .
maybe we will fight for him on that one , right ?
and did n't he say , " i then grabbed her " and i said , " this is getting a little crazy now , what 's going on ? " -- "
i grabbed her . "
and then when he said that , i knew that my favorite chapter would happen .
and it did n't happen .
he did n't talk about the kinds of things we want to hear about .
but what are you going to do ?
so look , here 's the story , they call her a change maker , she 's not a change maker .
she wants to keep it just the way it is because it 's a rigged system .
she was very , very disloyal .
now the last person that i like is debbie wasserman - schultz .
this person is a disaster .
and she has been for a long time .
we will take our reince priebus any day , right , we will take him .
reince priebus is a great guy , and he 's done a great job .
and we had a great convention , and i 'll tell you what , cleveland did a fantastic job .
they did a fantastic job .
but think of how disloyal hillary clinton was to debbie .
think of it .
this was her -- crooked person .
this was a dishonest person .
this was a person that was rigging the system for her .
she rigged the system -- carson never had a chance .
his people never had a chance .
i knew that .
i was saying -- i 'm the one that came up with the term rigged system , and i said it a year and a half ago pertaining to my system .
and frankly , had i not won all of these states by massive landslides , i would n't be standing here .
you 'd have some stiff .
and there 'd be 10 people in the office .
you know what ?
you 'd have a different kind of a guy .
there 'd be about 12 people sitting in the first row .
our two congressmen would n't be here .
they 'd say , " we do n't want to be here . "
it 'd be a whole different thing and you 'd be down 12 points instead of up seven in the state of pennsylvania , right ?
right ?
that 's the way it is .
but here 's the thing .
i 'm a loyal person .
when cory   had a problem , i was loyal .
i stuck with her .
everyone said cory   should be fired .
why ?
i looked at her tape .
what happened ?
i 'm a loyal person .
ok ?
i 'm a loyal person .
you 've got to be loyal to people if they do nothing wrong .
now , in her case , she did a lot wrong , but she did it -- you know , she knew .
hillary clinton knew what she was doing .
she knew the system was rigged , as soon as she got caught because the e - mails came out -- and as soon as she got caught , hillary clinton said , " you 're fired .
get her out of here .
get her out of here . "
that 's what we have .
it 's weakness , it 's disloyalty and this woman -- she wanted so hard -- remember , she went the other day in front of the florida delegation .
oh did they rough her up .
but she deserves it .
look , she 's a dishonest person .
she deserves it .
but she rigged the system against bernie in favor of hillary and hillary dumped her like so fast .
so fast like i 've never seen before .
and that 's not what it 's about .
loyalty can be a wonderful thing , and in this case , i thought it was incredible what happened .
now , the things that were on those e - mails were incredible .
you talk about race , religion .
women , by the way , if i ever said the things that are on those e - mails , i would 've been run out of town and probably , had i gotten the nomination , i would 've been forced to come to scranton , stand right here and say i 'm getting out of the race .
they were the worst things and they 're trying to sluff   them off .
they 're trying so hard to sluff   them off .
and then i see her campaign manager -- i do n't know .
young guy , nice guy , who knows ?
and he 's on television and he said that russia hacked them .
what ?
no , no .
he said russia hacked them .
i 'm trying to think of how does he know that , right ?
so he goes -- i think it was one of the sunday talk shows , right ?
and he goes , russia hacked them .
and then goes like -- i said , " how does he know ? "
he did n't really know but he said russia -- i could -- and then he said , " trump .
trump .
yeah trump . "
i 'm sitting there watching .
i 'm saying , " what did i do ?
what did i do ? "
what did i do ?
what ? "
trump . "
i wish i had that power .
man , that would be power .
so he talks about russia 's hacking .
the only thing he did n't say is what was on the e - mails was   .
that 's what the problem is .
what was on the e - mails was the horror .
but i 'll never forget it .
i 'm sitting .
i 'm watching every -- you know , falling asleep .
he 's a boring guy .
and he said russia with e - mails -- probably was china or somebody else .
might be a 400-pound person sitting in bed .
ok ?
might be .
some of the greatest hackers of all time .
but he said russia , and then he said trump .
and i -- it reminded me of jon lovitz .
you ever see the liar jon lovitz , right , in saturday night live ? "
yeah , yeah .
i went to harvard .
harvard , that 's right . "
this was like -- yeah , russia hacked .
yeah .
yeah , it was trump .
trump .
that 's -- i 'd say whoa .
what ?
now , these are lying , bad people , folks .
these are bad , bad people .
these are bad , bad people .
and they 're incompetent people .
and we want to turn our country around .
we want to make great trade deals .
we want to have strong borders .
we want to have the wall .
we want the wall .
we 're going to have the wall .
because we 're going to stop drugs from pouring into our country and people from pouring into our country .
we want the wall .
all right .
i 'll give you a quiz .
do you want the quiz ?
who 's going to pay for the wall ?
who ?
100 percent , 100 percent .
you know , i have these clowns .
and you can hold it -- just , i mean , honestly , you hold me to it .
i have these clowns in the back , these pundits .
and they 're saying , mexico 's never going to pay for the wall ; mexico -- do you know how much money they make from us each year ?
and i 'm not including with the drugs .
i 'm leaving that out .
no .
which really is a terrible thing , because when i won new hampshire , the new hampshire people were unbelievable -- my first victory was in new hampshire .
where , by the way , i hear i have a seven point lead , you know ?
you know , i 've got to tell you .
it 's funny .
i have people , politicians , they 're running .
and some of them embraced me , like these two characters , ok ?
but some of them said , oh , trump , he 's too controversial .
and then i run .
i do n't care if they -- you know , if they endorse me or not , it does n't make any difference to me .
i think i do better -- i might do better without endorsements .
but i have states -- the great rob .
stand up , rob .
will you please ?
take a bow for two seconds .
so , and if i do n't win this state , you 'll never be standing up again .
that i can do .
mike ?
you better believe it .
so i have these politicians , and they 're running .
you know , they 're senators .
and they say , no , no , we do n't want anything to do with trump ;   controversial .
do you endorse ?
well , we support him , please do n't ask me that question .
then the poll comes out where i 'm leading that senator , whoever it may be , by a hell of a lot .
and all of a sudden , we love mr. trump ; he 's great for america .
this is what we deal with , folks .
ok ?
this is what we deal with .
but in new hampshire , i 've got a nice lead , supposedly .
i mean , a poll came out , seven points , eight points , more -- something like that ; a very good lead .
we 're doing well .
we 're doing well in states .
and remember this , if a person on the stage with me , and i speak well of all of them now , because it would be nice if the party unified .
i do n't think it matters from my standpoint .
i really do n't .
i do n't think it matters , but it would be nice .
i do n't know why , but it would be nice , because we have to win .
but i will say this .
we open up states , meaning me , meaning you .
you know , we 're together .
i 'm a messenger .
i 'm a messenger .
that 's all i am .
believe me .
believe me .
i 'm a messenger .
it 's what i am .
that 's what i am .
you know , i was using this phrase for the last couple of months , and i use it again : america first .
i use another one -- but i use another one .
i use another one : the forgotten man .
now , i have to add " and woman , " but there is an whole thing going around .
it 's called the forgotten man .
it 's the forgotten men and women .
we have forgotten men and women who work hard , who are making less money than they made 18 years ago , who are working much harder than they worked 18 years ago , and now their older .
they ca n't afford their health insurance - who hate looking at what 's happening .
they ca n't stand the fact that a priest in france has his throat cut and he lies dying on the ground .
they ca n't stand the fact that we are letting thousands , and thousands , and thousands of people pour into our country from areas of the world .
we are going to have problems like you 've never seen , i am very good at prognostication , folks , you 're seeing that everything i 've said has all come true pretty much .
and hillary clinton wants 550 percent more than obama -- of people coming in from that area of the world .
we do n't have documentation , we do n't have paperwork , we do n't really know who they are .
i 've spoken to the best law enforcement people in this country and they say , " there is really no way of saying who they are and where they come from , " okay ?
they even stole our passport machine , did you see that ?
they stole our passport machine some of people , they 're going to cause problems .
and with me , we 're going to do safe zones , were going to help people .
were going to get the gulf states to pay because i do n't want to pay .
with our country , we are $ 19 trillion -- and is going to be $ 21 trillion very soon .
we are going to build safe zones , and we are going to get the gulf states that we protect , they would n't be there -- they have nothing but money and they 're going to pay for this .
and we are going to build them in syria and were going to take care of people .
but you know what ?
we 're not going to pay for it because we ca n't pay for it .
this is n't 40 years ago , this is n't 20 years ago , this is now .
and we are going to make our country so strong , and were going to re - negotiate our military deals .
you know , i 'm taking a lot of heat where they say , " nato " , all i said is , " we have many countries , there are 28 countries in nato , right ?
there are five that are paying their way . "
the others -- you do n't get it straight .
they say back there , " donald trump does n't like nato . "
well , i think it 's great , i just said , " it was obsolete . "
wolf blitzer on cnn asked me a question .
he 's fine .
he said , " what do you think of nato " ?
you have to understand , i have been a businessman but i have good common sense in business .
and so , i said , " nato is obsolete because it 's not covering terrorism . "
and everybody smiled and laughed , and thought it was funny , three days later they are now saying , " trumps right , it 's not covering terrorism " and then a few weeks later , check out the wall street journal .
a few weeks later-- front page says , " nato to open up terrorism division . "
i said , " great . "
--and to appoint the great guys , one of their good guys , who knows .
who the heck knows if he 's any good ?
we need your help , father .
so that was right .
then i said the second thing so i said , " it 's obsolete , " so they 're working on that .
i like it , i think nato is fine , but we have to adjust .
you ca n't go so many years with no adjustments , so now they have that .
i also said because i heard this , that people are n't paying their fair share , they 're not paying their way .
and then these stupid people , they say , " but we have a treaty . "
they said , " what would happen if russia or somebody attacks ? "
i said , " i do n't know .
have they paid ?
have they paid ?
have they paid tell me ?
have they paid .
well , they have n't paid .
well they said , " we have a treaty . "
well , i said , " they have a treat too that they have to pay . "
we are going to end up in world war iii protecting people - and these people ca n't pay .
we are going to protect them -- and there 's an article right here that says -- cover , trump is right .
five countries out of 28 are paying their way .
so i want them to pay .
and here 's the story : they will pay if asked by the right person .
they 'll pay .
they 'll pay .
and hillary clinton said , " we will protect our allies at all costs . "
well , how the hell can you get money if you 're going to say that ?
and we need money .
we have massive , massive deficits .
we need money .
we need money .
so it sounds cold , it sounds terrible .
and then tonight , you 'll listen to obama saying , " donald trump wants to give up nato . "
he does n't say it right .
i want to keep nato , but i want them to pay .
i do n't want to be taken advantage of .
we do n't want to be the stupid people anymore , ok ?
we do n't want to be the stupid people anymore .
we 're protecting countries that most of the people in this room have never even heard of and we end up in world war three and the country -- you know , just come on .
give me a break .
now , if they live up to their obligations , as they should -- and by the way , if they do that , they 'll have more spirit in a certain way .
ok ?
but they have to pay .
same thing with japan and germany .
can you believe -- a lot of people -- before i ran , did anybody know that we were protecting and paying for a large portion of the protection of japan , which sells us cars by the millions and germany and saudi arabia and south korea ?
we sort of knew because we have 20,000 soldiers on the border .
so i said here it is .
you 've got to pay -- got to pay .
so i talk about japan .
love japan .
many friends in japan .
great country .
they sell us cars .
i mean , you talk about rip - offs .
you want to see a trade imbalance ?
we sell them wheat , they sell us cars .
we sell them beef and they do n't even take the beef because their farmers say , " we do n't want american beef , " right ?
even though it 's the greatest beef in the world , they do n't want it .
they do n't want it .
so we sell them beef , they sell us cars .
it 's the greatest trade imbalance .
you 've got to see it .
it 's like the floor is us , the ceiling is japan .
we 're not doing anything about it .
we do n't do -- but on top of it , we protect japan .
so a general gets on , sent obviously by obama , and he said , " mr. trump does n't understand .
he knows nothing about defense . "
i know more about offense and defense than they will ever understand , believe me .
believe me .
than they will ever understand .
than they will ever understand .
so i said -- and this is a general .
now , if he says this number , it 's actually lower .
he said , " does n't he understand that japan pays for 50 percent of its production and its -- of the work we do ? "
ok .
they pay for 50 percent of the defense that we give them , of the military protection that we give them .
so the newspaper calls up and they say , " mr. trump , sir , they pay for 50 percent of the military . "
i say , " why are n't they paying for 100 percent of their -- why ? "
and the reporter goes , " oh , never thought of that . "
they do n't think of that stuff .
and germany .
who has a mercedes ?
half the people in the room .
but look ...   but look , germany .
now , i do n't mind and i understand all the reasons why and we do n't want them to arm and all that stuff .
but you know , the man that we know so well who 's always threatening everybody in the region , north korea , if he all of a sudden gets a little more frisky than just words , we end up in a massive war protecting somebody .
now , here 's our treaty with japan .
again , i love japan .
i respect japan .
i respect what they 've been able to negotiate .
i think it 's great .
but here 's our treaty with japan .
if they get attacked , we have to protect them , essentially world war three , right ?
if we get attacked , they do n't have to do anything .
ok ?
they do n't have to do anything .
no good .
no good .
then they 'll say , donald trump -- you 'll hear it tonight ; they have all these guys lined up -- donald trump does n't know about -- i know so much .
now , if we ...   and i actually saw it today on television .
i saw a couple of people .
they called me -- one guys calls me -- he 's a teacher at a big college : could i come up to your office with my students ?
i said , oh , this is just what i want .
oh , i 'm so busy .
he comes up .
i treat him nice .
it 's a while ago -- comes up , treat him nice , take pictures with all these students .
yeah , yeah , yeah .
goes back .
then i see him on television today -- i know nothing about -- because i can not tie the fact that they 're not paying into the -- why ?
why ?
am i right ?
i mean , you know , give me a break .
so , people agree with me , but they do n't tell you the story .
a lot of them said , headlines , donald trump does n't like nato ; he wants to get out of nato .
they do n't say what we 're talking about .
so when they hear what they 're talking about , everybody says , you know , you 're right .
so right in a headline , in a major newspaper two days ago , five countries out of 28 are paying their way .
the rest of them are n't .
some are paying nothing .
because there 's nobody to ask them .
there 's nobody to ask them .
so we 're not going to be the stupid country anymore .
we 're not going to be led by stupid people anymore .
and we 're going to do such ...   i mean , think of this .
i had a moment where i said we 're going to renegotiate nafta .
everyone said , oh , that 's terrible .
i -- what 's wrong with renegotiating , right ?
we 're going to renegotiate the nafta deal .
it 's draining our jobs .
everyone said , oh , donald trump wants to renegotiate ; he 's against free trade .
i just want good deals .
that 's all i want .
but all i want is good deals .
call him whatever you want , right ?
but there was a big story -- donald trump is going to renegotiate nafta ; is n't that terrible ?
i said , let me ask you a question .
so , i 'm a good negotiator .
so we get in a room with these folks .
i tell them pretty tough stories because i mean it .
because you always have to be prepared to walk .
you have to be .
you can not go into a negotiation unless you 're prepared to walk .
i 'm prepared to walk from a bad deal as a bad deal anyway .
so i 'm prepared .
you guys are i guarantee it prepared to walk .
you 've lost half of your businesses .
i mean , i 'm not going to go into it , but i look at scranton -- pennsylvania has lost one in three manufacturing jobs .
right ?
look at these numbers .
look at these numbers .
look at these numbers .
scranton has lost 43 percent of its manufacturing jobs since bill clinton signed nafta .
it 's not -- this is just -- 43 percent of your manufacturing jobs .
so i do n't think you 'll be hard to convince .
i mean , you 're smart people .
but look , why would anybody be upset about wanting to renegotiate deals , make them better .
why would anybody care ?
so i say i want to renegotiate nafta .
and every -- the newspapers --   the newspapers , they say , that 's terrible .
and i 'm trying to figure out why .
they have the national review and some of these conservative groups -- he wants to renegotiate this .
he says we 're losing a fortune on these deals .
so if i negotiate these deals , and i make them from bad deals to good deals and maybe even great deals , why would anybody be upset ?
they 're upset about it .
i do n't get it .
but i do n't care because i 'll do it .
ok ?
i 'm going to do it .
but -- but nobody understands .
now , today or yesterday , hillary clinton said , first time ever in her life , right ? "
i am going to renegotiate trade deals . "
not one mention of my name in the article .
not one mention .
not one mention .
tpp , gold standard , right ?
she had the gold standard .
she then saw me on television knocking the hell out of it because they do n't -- they do n't talk about currency manipulation and devaluation .
they do n't talk about many of the problems .
plus , you know what ?
i want to make a deal not a massive number of countries .
i want to make a deal one - on - one , individual countries .
nice and simply .
nice and simple .
nice and simple .
one , two , three .
you we do n't like .
you 're bad .
four , fix .
no good .
six .
these deals are so complicated .
so it 's a 5,000-page document that the only people in congress that read are our two congressmen .
and i promise you , they did n't read them either .
ok ?
do n't worry .
so this is a 5,000-page document that nobody read .
remember obamacare ?
remember when obama came out , it was thousands of pages and they went to congress and nobody read it ?
and then , you had the wise guy from one of the good schools and he said it was a con job .
he said it was a con job and everybody was going to just go after that guy .
and you know what happens ?
a couple of weeks go by , they 'll forget .
but i remember and i -- i will bring it up .
remember the guy ?
he said that obamacare was a con job .
remember that ?
it was all a big con .
and two weeks go by and they -- sort of fades , and then four weeks go by it 's over .
but it 's not over with me .
so here 's the thing .
i want to do individual countries because what happens is when you do a lot of countries , number one , too complicated .
you have all -- you 've got to see the lines on this thing .
i looked at it -- 5,000 pages .
you 've got to see the things .
it 's here , here , here .
it 's like the craziest thing .
impossible .
and if the country -- one of the countries is bad , you ca n't get out because it 's such a complicated web .
i want to make trade deals with individual countries .
nice and simple .
nice and beautiful .
nice and beautiful .
and if the country misbehaves or takes advantage of us , like they always do , we just send them a notice . "
sorry , here 's your 25-day notice . "
ok ?
we 're breaking off -- and you know what they 'll do ?
they 'll call up and -- " what do we have to do to keep it going ? "
ok ?
we 'll make a better deal .
it 's what we do .
so look .
folks , we are going to make this country so strong again .
we 're going to build up our military ; it 's totally depleted .
we 're going to build a wall .
we 're going to take care of our veterans .
our veterans are our great people .
we 're going to take care of our veterans .
we 're going to take care of our vets .
they 've been forgotten .
so many people have been forgotten .
thank you .
thank you .
thank you .
thank you .
i just ask you this one thing .
i did n't need this and neither do you .
sitting in this room is about 200 degrees .
ok ?
the only good thing is you lose a lot of weight .
but look , what i ask you is this .
you have to go november 8th and you have to vote or we 've just all wasted our time .
this is a movement , but it 's only really a movement if we win .
i -- i tell the story a lot about people that tell me what you 've done has never been done in politics before and all that stuff .
i say no , it does n't mean anything .
if i knew that i was n't going to win , i would n't even waste my time doing it .
i would n't waste my time .
they said , " no , no .
in terms of history , what you 've done has never been done . "
i said , " it does n't mean a thing unless we win . "
ok ?
does n't mean a thing because we ca n't do what we 're going to do .
and it 's so simple .
we 're going to make thing fair .
we 're going to make things fair .
so i only asks you one thing .
get every person you know .
we have to win the state of pennsylvania .
and i ca n't believe she has many fans here .
i ca n't believe she has many fans here .
i do n't believe she has many fans here .
and the miners and the steel workers and the executives and the professors , we 've got them all .
we have to get out there .
we have to vote .
we ca n't sit back because this is a really vital state .
and you 're going to see because she 's got a billion dollars to blow and she 'll put on these crazy ads , much of which is wrong .
i 'd go into it , but i do n't want to even bother .
but they 're wrong .
they 're false .
but she 's going to put on all these ads , and you know what ?
they 're false ads .
thank you , darling .
i love you , too .
look at her .
i love them .
but look .
look .
thank you .
she 's going to put ads .
you know , when i was running in florida , i won in a landslide .
i went through two weeks of ads .
i was down there .
i said this is the most incredible thing i 've ever seen .
you could n't see -- i was dying to see an ivory soap ad ...   but there was n't , because trump was -- all negative ads and i won in a massive landslide .
so somehow , people understand the truth because they 're really phony ads and false ads and vicious .
but here 's the story .
come november 8th , you have to get out and vote because it is a movement and it 's a movement like nobody 's seen .
they 're talking about it all over the world .
we 're on the cover of time magazine every two hours .
many covers of time magazine because of what 's happened .
and you know , my whole life , i 've been on time magazine i think a couple of times .
my whole life .
not so bad .
and the last number of months , i think it 's six or seven times , right ?
that 's pretty good .
so you tell me .
what 's more important , real estate or politics , right ?
but what really is more important is making america great again , and that 's what we 're going to do .
i love you .
thank you very much .
get out and vote november 8th .
i love you .
thank you .
thank you .
thank you , everybody .
thank you .
wow , wow .
thank you .
thank you , everybody .
unbelievable .
thank you , everybody .
thank you .
i am thrilled to be back in washington , state of washington .
great , great , great people .
thank you very much .
thank you .
i want to thank -- i want to thank if i could because they worked so hard , and , you know , outside right now they have over 8,000 people trying to get in .
and we set the record .
i do n't know how old this building is , but it 's not brand new , and we set the record for attendance tonight .
so i just want to thank you .
thank you very much .
so they 're going to be pouring in as we speak unless you 'd like me to come back in a half an hour and we 'll start .
no ?
no ?
all right .
i want to thank susan hutchison who is in the audience some places and done a great job .
brian dansel -- where is brian ?
brian is over there some place .
i want to thank don benton -- senator benton .
he has been amazing .
he said , " you should come here .
we 'll fill that place up so fast . "
and he was right , so i want to thank don and doug ericksen -- senator doug ericksen , so i want to thank all of them .
amazing -- they 've done an amazing job .
we are going to work very hard over the next 70 days , and we 're going to win the state , and we 're going to win the white house .
we are going to take back the white house .
you know a republican would never come to the state of washington , and you know on television they said , " i wonder why he 's going to the state of washington , " because you know what , republicans are n't winning , but we 're going to win it that 's why i 'm here .
that 's why i 'm here .
and this love affair began about three months ago when i came up here , and we set record crowds , two events , massive , massive crowds .
and i said , " why do n't the republicans win that state ?
i think we 're going to win washington state , " so that 's .
that 's why i 'm here .
that 's why i 'm here .
and i do n't know if you saw it , but poll numbers came in today that are phenomenal .
we 're leading in florida .
we 're leading in north carolina .
we 're leading on a national basis in some of the polls .
los angeles times , we 're two or three points up .
we 're doing really well .
folks , i 'll tell you what it 's all coming together .
and when you see crowds like this , people fully understand why .
i will tell you that .
thank you .
so , we are going to have a great victory for the people -- people .
remember , for the people .
it 's going to be a victory for every citizen whose voice has not been heard , and that 's a lot of people .
it will be a win for the voters , not the pundits , not the journalists ... ... not the lobbyists , not the global special interest that take care of these politicians and get whatever they want .
and they are the ones that are funding my opponent 's campaign -- millions and millions and millions of dollars , and they have total control over crooked hillary clinton , believe me .
total control .
this is going to be your victory .
it 's going to be your victory .
it 's going to be your victory .
we 're going to create the new american future our children so desperately deserve .
in this new future , millions of workers on the sidelines will be returned to the workforce .
they 've been taken out of -- they are going to return and they 're going to return quickly , believe me .
crumbling roads , and bridges , and airports will be replaced with the infrastructure our country needs and deserves .
our infrastructure is going to hell .
frankly , i hate to say it , our country is going to hell , and we 're not going to let it happen .
families trapped in welfare will be provided with jobs and opportunity .
government will become lean and mean except -- except it will have a big fat beautiful heart .
we will have an effective government , a responsible and honest government for a change .
our border will be protected .
our children will be safe .
people do n't talk about the inner - cities , but i 'm talking about the inner - cities .
they do n't talk about the inner - cities .
the democrats have taken advantage of african - americans .
they take their vote .
they win the election , and then they say , see you in four years .
thanks a lot .
not me .
we will rebuild our inner - cities and provide safety and peace to all of our citizens .
american values and culture will be cherished and celebrated once again , but to achieve this future , we must break free from the bitter failures of the past of which there have been many and reject the same insiders telling us the same old lies because they are lies , and i know these people well , believe me .
one area where honesty is badly needed is on the subject of economic and living conditions for african - american citizens in the united states .
thank you .
and thank you to law enforcement and our police .
thank you .
millions of african - americans in this country have succeeded greatly and their contributions to every area of our life and now -- and they have done so much .
and now throughout history , we should celebrate and cherish that success .
but -- but this includes tremendous , tremendous and amazing achievements in art , science , sports , music , business , et cetera .
it includes millions of african- american entrepreneurs , innovators , and the millions of african- american workers in our middle class .
but -- but we must also talk about those who have been left behind , the millions suffering in disastrous conditions in so many of our inner - cities and neighborhoods afflicted by total poverty , drugs , and horrible , horrible violence that we watch every single night .
every single night , you turn on the news and you see the violence and it 's horrible .
no group in america has been more harmed by hillary clinton 's policies and the policies of democrats who have run our inner - cities for literally 50 , 70 , 80 , 90 , even 100 years .
nobody has been hurt more than african - americans .
there is no better evidence of the fact that hillary clinton 's immigration policy , which brings in illegal immigrants and -- well , that is a true statement .
it brings in illegal immigrants and refugees to take jobs from our hardworking african - american and hispanic citizens and they want those jobs .
instead of providing free health care and jobs to millions of refugees from around the world that we have no idea even where they come from , we should rebuild our inner - cities and provide jobs to struggling americans that have been struggling for years and years .
thank you .
tonight i 'm asking for the vote of every african- american and hispanic citizen in this country who wants to see a better future , who wants to see real positive change .
the inner - cities of our country have been run by the democratic machine for so long .
these democratic policies , the policies of hillary clinton ...   these democratic policies , the policies of hillary clinton have produced only poverty , joblessness , failing schools , broken homes , and rising crime .
and it 's only getting worse .
they do n't care about you , remember that .
they do n't care about you .
they want your vote , and they do n't care .
they have used you for decades and decades and decades , and they will continue to use you .
nearly four in 10 african - american children live in poverty .
think of that .
four in 10 are living in poverty .
this includes 45 percent of children under the age of six .
fifty - eight percent of african - american youth are not working .
meanwhile , another two million hispanic - americans have been added to the ranks of those in poverty since 2009 -- not a long time ago .
in detroit , half of all its residents do not work -- half .
in milwaukee , where i just left , almost four in 10 african - american men between the ages of 24 and 54 do not have a job .
here in the state of washington , 65 percent of latino children and 60 percent of african - american children live in low income households .
chicago just had the most violent month in 20 years .
more than 2,800 people have been shot in chicago since just the beginning of the year .
you look at war - torn countries are safer than living in our inner - cities by a lot .
it 's not even close .
it breaks everybody 's heart .
we can not let this violence continue .
we ca n't let it happen .
it will and it must be ended .
under a trump administration , it will indeed end .
it will be my priority to work with communities , local police , state police , and federal law enforcement to dismantle the gangs and to liberate our citizens from violence , and poverty , and fear .
i will appoint the best judges , and prosecutors , and federal investigators who will make this their personal mission , and so many people want to do that .
there is one thing which can no longer be denied .
if you keep voting for the same people , you will keep getting the same horrible results .
remember that .
and hillary clinton has been doing this stuff for 35 years and nothing 's happened .
just remember , nothing 's happened .
to those suffering i say , " what do you have to lose by voting for donald trump ? "
i will fix it .
i will fix it .
i will fight for you as no one ever has before .
they do n't fight for you .
they do n't fight for you .
let me also tell you what you have to gain -- jobs , opportunity , security , safety , great education , and many other things -- many , many other things .
thank you .
this means very much and just so much to me .
i believe every child in this country in detroit , in baltimore , in chicago has the right to live out their lives in safety and in peace .
in the wall street journal today , heather mac donald of manhattan and the manhattan institute just wrote an important article about the soaring crime and it is soaring like you 've never seen before in our inner - cities .
and the responsibility of democratic politicians for creating this horrible problem -- big article , highly , highly respected person .
the article is called " black lives matter to donald trump . "
true , true .
she writes that , " mr. trump 's call to restore law and order recognizes the right of inner - city residents to enjoy the same freedom from fear that the rest of america now really takes for granted . "
freedom from violence is one of the greatest civil rights of our time , so too is the issue of school choice .
what a difference it will make .
what a difference it will make .
we will fight for the right of parents to send their kids to the school that they believe gives their kids the best shot at success .
i will not accept and neither will you a future in which children -- and think of this -- children of color , any color in this country are not fully included in the american dream .
our whole country loses when we leave millions of talented aspiring americans on the sideline , which is happening all of the time .
we want to give everyone a chance to contribute their full talents to our economy and to the greatness of our country .
remember -- and most people do n't know this -- the republican party is the -- right , you know what i 'm going to say .
right ?
the republican party is the party of abraham lincoln .
not bad , not bad .
it 's also the party of freedom , equality , and opportunity .
people have forgotten it so long now it is the democratic party that is the party of slavery , the party of jim crow , and the party of opposition .
by the way , is there any place better to be than a trump rally , right , any place ?
nothing makes me more honored and proud than to be the nominee of abraham lincoln 's republican party , and we 're going to do our job .
our party will fight to bring hope to every forgotten stretch of this country .
once again , we will be one american nation -- one american nation .
we will be one united people , and we will have one really great future again , believe me .
and a great future will be built on these three critical words -- jobs , jobs , jobs .
this will include a complete revitalization of our manufacturing sector , which has been absolutely so badly hurt by hillary clinton 's policies -- so badly hurt , devastated .
we 're bringing jobs back to our country .
we 're not going to let people take our jobs anymore .
we 're not going to let our jobs go to other countries anymore .
there will be retribution .
there will be a price to pay .
we are going to renegotiate the horrible nafta trade deal probably the worst deal ever made in terms of trade .
and we 're going to keep out of the trans - pacific partnership , a total disaster .
and we 're going to stand up to china and fight for every last american job .
we 're not going to be ripped off any longer .
thank you .
the destruction that nafta started will be finished off if the trans - pacific partnership is approved .
it is a disaster -- a disaster for our country , a disaster for our workers .
we wo n't let it happen .
we can not let it happen .
these are very , very quiet protesters , i will say .
i will say one thing , when bernie sanders had his protesters out , they had a lot more energy .
they really do .
much better , they were much better .
they felt it a little bit deeper in the heart .
but that 's just the beginning of what we 're going to do for the american worker .
on taxes , we 're going to provide massive tax relief to all working people and lower the tax rate ...   ... on small business from 35 percent to 15 percent .
low and middle income parents will also be able to fully deduct the average cost of child care from their taxes -- a very important thing .
on horrible , horrible regulations which are taking over our country , i am going to direct every agency and department head in my government to identify all needless and job - killing regulations and they will be removed .
we will have a temporary moratorium on new regulations to allow our economy to grow .
i mean , our economy is a disaster to allow our economy to grow .
economic growth for last quarter has been revised downward to 1.1 percent , a number that you ca n't even imagine .
just so you know , if china goes to seven or eight percent , it 's almost like a national catastrophe .
and what they do is they devalue their currency .
they do lots of other things and they suck more blood out of our country , and we allow them to do it , folks .
and they get back on track , and we keep going down .
not any longer .
and believe me , we have the cards .
they do n't .
we have the cards .
we have all the cards .
meanwhile , our trade deficit in goods with the world is now nearly $ 800 billion .
think of that .
almost $ 800 billion trade deficit for the year .
you really say to yourself , who negotiates these deals ?
i know , i know , political hacks and politicians negotiate them .
no longer .
we will further bring back our jobs by unleashing an american energy revolution , lifting restrictions on oil , and coal , and natural gas , and all sources of american energy .
this will create millions of jobs and lower the price of energy and your electric bill and every other bill for the american household .
we 're also going to secure our border and stop the drugs from pouring in and destroying our country .
and i 'll be talking about that tomorrow night in arizona , big speech on immigration .
we 'll be talking about that , arizona tomorrow night .
the seattle area recently experienced the largest number of heroin - related deaths -- think of it -- in 20 years -- the largest number in 20 years .
it 's getting worse .
it 's getting horrific .
and not only heroin , they have drugs now pouring across the border that most people have never even heard of .
we have to stop the drugs from poisoning our youth and poisoning our community .
additionally , we are going to stop the syrian refugees from entering the united states , and instead build a safe zone overseas .
amazingly , hillary clinton wants a 550 percent increase in syrian refugees coming into our country .
so , i thought i 'd maybe do this if you 'd like .
you know , we talk about syrian refugees , we talk about refugees , we talk about some people hate our values , hate our country .
and i took something that was a song by al wilson , the snake .
has anybody heard the snake ?
should i do it or not ?
are you sure ?
yes ?
all right .
so this really has to do with people coming into our country that ca n't be properly vetted .
we have no idea where they 're coming from .
there 's no paper work .
you know , our government says you have paper work .
there 's no paper work .
and i believe in safe zones and we have to help people out , and we have to have other people .
you know , we 're almost up to $ 20 trillion in debt , so we have to have other people like the gulf states .
it 's called " other people 's money , " but i believe very much that we have to help and we 'll build safe zones over in syria and we 'll help the people .
we have to do that .
but if you look at what happens on a daily basis in germany , what she 's done to that country is unbelievable .
if you look at what 's happening in france , it 's no longer friends .
friends of mine that used to love to go to paris , they say we 're not going to paris anymore , it 's no longer paris .
you see what 's happening in different countries and you see what 's happening in our own country whether it 's orlando or whether it 's san bernardino or whether it 's any one of many different places .
and i read this and i said it 's so .
it was n't drawn for that reason , but i said this really represents what it is when we allow people to pull into our country , we do n't know who they are , but we know -- we just know bad things are going to happen .
it 's only a question of when bad , bad things are going to happen .
so , i 'm going to read this to you .
it 's called the snake .
and a lot of people like it because it represents the truth .
it represents what 's going to be happening .
this could be the great trojan horse of all time .
did you see today where they announced tens of thousands of people coming in , and we have no idea even where they 're being relocated ?
so , on her way to work one morning , down the path , along the lake , a tender - hearted woman saw a poor half - frozen snake .
his pretty colored skin had been all frosted with the dew . "
oh , well , " she cried , " i 'll take you in and i 'll take care of you . " "
take me in , oh , tender woman .
take me in for heaven 's sake .
take me in , oh , tender woman , " sighed the broken snake .
she wrapped him up all cozy in a curvature of silk and had laid him by the fireside with some honey and some milk .
now she hurried home from work that night .
as soon as she arrived , she found that pretty snake she 'd taken in had been revived . "
take me in , oh , tender woman .
take me in for heaven 's sake .
take me in , oh , tender woman , " sighed the broken snake .
now she clutched him to her bosom , " you 're so beautiful , " she cried . "
but if i had n't brought you in by now you simply would have died . "
now she stroked his pretty skin and then she kissed and held him tight .
but instead of saying thank you , that snake gave her a vicious bite . "
take me in , oh , tender woman .
take me in for heaven 's sake .
take me in , oh , tender woman , " sighed the vicious snake . "
i saved you , " cried the woman , " and you bit me .
heavens , why ?
you know , your bite is poisonous and now i 'm going to die . " "
oh , shut up , silly woman ... "    ... said the reptile with a grin . "
you knew damn well i was a snake before you took me in . "
get ready , folks .
it 's not going to be pretty , going to be a bad deal going on -- bad , bad deal .
and i just thought that was very representative of what 's going to be happening -- not good .
remember i said , now if on november 8th you go and you vote for donald trump for president , you can forget about it because it 's not going to happen .
we 're not taking them in .
we 're not taking them in .
thank you .
thank you very much .
another major issue on this race is foreign policy .
hillary clinton has made one bad foreign policy decision after another , beginning with the support for going into the war in iraq in the first place , which , by the way , i opposed .
her tenure as secretary of state may be regarded as the most disastrous such tenure in united states history .
she was horrible -- horrible .
look at the world before and after she became secretary of state .
pre hillary , in early 2009 , iraq was seeing a reduction in violence .
libya was stable .
syria was under control .
the group we now know as isis was close to being extinguished .
iran was being choked by sanctions , right , right ?
now , fast forward to the present time after hillary , here is what it looks like .
iraq is in total chaos .
syria is in the midst of a disastrous civil war and a refugee crisis that now threatens europe and the united states .
isis has been unleashed onto the world viciously .
iran , the world 's top state - sponsor of terrorism has been put on a pass to nuclear weapons and was given a $ 400 million cash ransom payment .
and that 's not to mention the $ 150 billion that they 're getting back .
this is the legacy of hillary clinton -- death , destruction , terrorism , and weakness .
america deserves a better legacy .
all of you deserve a better future and a country that runs so much smarter .
i am the change agent .
this is a movement .
no matter where we go anywhere in this country , we have crowds like this .
we have people that love our country .
they want to see our country heal .
they want to see our country be smart .
they want to see our country get better .
hillary clinton is a defender of the status quo .
while our country lost badly under hillary clinton , she cashed in big time -- made a lot of money .
bill clinton speaking fee surged .
while hillary was secretary of state , bill was paid almost $ 50 million for speeches during her tenure and increased a 44 percent over the previous years .
then there was all of the money funneled into the clinton foundation from foreign governments and corporations .
it was pure and simple pay - for - play .
just look at what she did with ubs , the big banking concern , or russian uranium .
a disaster relief in haiti -- haiti has been a catastrophe , and the money that was spent and the money that was missing -- unbelievable -- and so many other examples .
but the only way to learn the full depth of her public corruption is to read the 33,000 emails that she deleted .
they 're gone .
it 's very sad .
and not only deleted , folks , this was after -- this was after she was subpoenaed by congress to produce .
and not only that , she bleached with somebody said they never even heard of , in a very expensive fashion , used chemical so that nobody will ever be able to see them .
who does this ?
who does this ?
hillary clinton said under oath that she turned over all of her work - related emails .
but we now know that is just one more clinton lie .
the fbi found thousands of work - related emails she never turned over , and then another 15,000 emails were just discovered a few weeks ago .
now today another 30 emails were discovered by the state department that hillary clinton failed to turn over .
these were emails about benghazi .
it just never ends with the clintons .
there 's only one way to get justice in this totally rigged system , and it 's a rigged system when they did nothing about the crimes that she committed .
it 's a rigged system .
remember that .
the only justice we 're going to get is a tremendous victory for everybody in this room and this nation on november 8th -- a big , big vote .
thank you .
thank you .
in a trump administration , the state department will work for the country not for hillary clinton 's donors and special interest .
under hillary clinton , it 's the powerful protecting the powerful -- politicians defending politicians , insiders fighting for insiders .
i am fighting for you .
that i can tell you , i am fighting for you .
the government will work for citizens once again .
the era of division will be replaced with a future of total unity .
we 'll love each other as a country again .
we 're going to do it by emphasizing what we all have in common .
we will proudly promote our culture as americans , the best anywhere in the world .
it 's time to break with the failures of the past and fight for every last child in this country to have a better future and a future that they deserve .
so this is the change that i 'm promising all of you -- an honest government , a thriving economy , a just society for each and every american , and jobs -- lots of jobs .
i am asking for your vote so i can be your champion in the white house .
together , we will make america wealthy again .
together , we will make america strong again .
we will fix our depleted military and we will take care of our vets .
we will appoint the proper judges to the united states supreme court .
we will protect and save our beautiful second amendment .
we will repeal and replace the horror known as obamacare .
we will make america proud again .
we will make america safe again .
we will make america great again .
god bless you .
good night .
thank you .
what a place .
have you been seeing what 's happening with those polls ?
they 're like rocket ships .
they 're like rocket ships .
i tell you it 's been great .
i love ohio .
i love ohio .
i worked in ohio , did well in ohio , gave me confidence to go out with life .
right at the beginning i was in ohio , so we love it .
thank you everyone for coming .
in four days , we are going to win the great state of ohio and we are going to win back the white house .
new polls just out have us with a very substantially lead in ohio , nationwide .
many of the states , we 're looking great in florida , we 're looking great in north carolina , we are looking great in the state of pennsylvania , we just left new hampshire , we have a lead in new hampshire .
these very dishonest people back there , the media , they 're getting a little worried .
they 're getting a little bit worried , this was n't supposed to happen .
this was not supposed to happen .
you can vote early in person or you can show up on november 8th .
who has voted ?
whoa , not great .
but you 're saving it for november 8th i think , correct ?
you want to be traditional , right ?
real change begins with immediately repealing and replacing horrible obamacare .
it 's just been announced that the residents of ohio are going to experience massive , massive problems with their obamacare , you know about that i guess , right ?
you know about it .
it 's a serious problem , it is a serious problem and you 're going to have numbers , in the great state of arizona it 's gone up 116 percent , okay , 116 percent .
so you 're going to have a lot of problems , we 're going to work on it very hard , 88 counties in ohio are losing at least three obamacare insurers a year , okay ?
so next year , you 're going to have almost , almost nobody even to negotiate with by next year but it 's not going to matter because if we win the election , you 're not going to have obamacare to worry about .
you 're not going to have obamacare , nothing to worry about believe me .
and we are going to have great healthcare at a much lower price and it 's going to be something you 're going to be very proud of .
right now , it 's an international joke , obamacare , it 's an international joke .
premiums are surging , companies are leaving , insurers are fleeing , doctors are quitting , i know so many doctors , they 've quit and generally speaking , deductibles are going through the roof , some higher than others , we have deductibles i 've heard as high as $ 15,000 or $ 16,000 .
yet hillary clinton wants to double down on obamacare , making it even more expensive .
i 'm asking for your vote so we can replace obamacare and save healthcare for every family in ohio , but more importantly because we do n't want to think of ourselves , for every family in the united states .
it 's a big problem .
it is a big problem .
real change also means restoring honesty to government , so we ought to start by getting rid of hillary clinton .
the fbi now has multiple open criminal investigations going on hillary clinton , lots of bad things are happening , lots of really bad things are happening , but i 'll tell you what , you 're going to be amazed when it 's all finished , when you look at how it 's all fleshing out .
the system is a beautiful system when it works , we have a rigged system so many times , you see this .
i mean , you have things going on that are incredible , that includes a discovery of another 650,000 emails and also a criminal investigation into her pay for play corruption at the state department , amazing .
last night it was just confirmed that the 650,000 emails include brand new emails not previously seen by authorities , likely including classified information .
hillary is now facing major problems with perjury .
the fbi agents say their investigation is likely to yield perhaps an indictment .
i love them .
i love them .
the reports also show that the political leadership at the department of justice is trying as hard as they can to protect their angel , hillary , this is no angel .
they want to protect their angel .
did we ever have a situation like this , seriously ?
first of all , forget about as of last friday with the new 650,000 emails that was found , forget that .
she should have been disqualified for running for president from the first batch of emails and from all of the crimes that have been committed .
i mean , take a look at the first batch , why do we even have to go ?
now , we 're doing it , " oh , look what we found . "
how many times do we have to do this ? "
i believe the fbi wanted to do it and she was protected by friends of hers at the department of justice .
that 's the department where as you know the attorney the general was on the airplane , now they say it was for 45 minutes talking about the grandchildren and talking about golf for 45 minutes .
i do n't think so .
i think they were talking about a position , in other words , a continuation of a position .
i think that 's what they were talking about folks .
hillary has engaged in a criminal massive enterprise and cover- ups like probably nobody ever before .
remember john podesta said she has bad instincts .
and as you know as i was getting off the plane , they were just announcing new wikileaks and i wanted to stay there but i did n't want to keep you waiting , i did n't want to keep you waiting .
let me run back into the plane and find out .
i did n't want to go - oh , there were some beauties coming out and i 'm saying , " do i listen for another " - you know , you can listen for hours .
but think of it , john podesta , her top person , said she has bad instincts .
who the hell wants a president where the person that knows her best said her instincts are bad .
now bernie sanders said she has bad judgment , but at least he was running against her , right ?
but the person working with - i tell you what , i would fire podesta very quickly if i were hillary , he should be fired .
and honestly , should n't huma be fired ?
huma .
i mean , can you imagine , " did you get rid of all the emails ? " "
yes , ma'am , they 're all gone .
yes , ma'am . "
this has gone now for months . "
did you get rid of the emails ? " "
yes ma'am , they 're gone .
we deleted 33,000 of them , they 're all gone .
i think we 're in the clear . "
and then they find out going through a pervert 's file , anthony weiner , anybody in new york knows all about anthony weiner .
and i predicted it a year ago , did you hear me , right ?
and i said all the things i said and they all said , " what a horrible thing to say . "
i turned out to be right and even some of these very dishonest people in the media said , " trump really called that one . "
i called a lot of them .
i called a lot of them .
but can you imagine huma - i got rid of them , they 're all gone .
thirty thousand , did n't i do a good job ?
and then they find out , " uh - oh , we got bad news boss .
i think they went on the cloud , " you know the cloud ?
never disappears off the cloud .
so those people when they advertise the cloud , " never disappears . "
she said , " boss , we have bad news for you , they just found 650,000 emails . "
can you imagine ?
and i 'll tell you , some of those emails , all - i would bet anything , some of those emails are so bad , they 're so classified , they 're beyond classified .
they have emails there that are beyond classified .
and it 's all coming down because i 've always had a lot of confidence in the fbi , i tell you .
we have amazing people in the fbi and they 're not happy .
they 're not happy about what 's happening and they 're not happy about the way they 're being pushed around .
and you do n't push them around for long , believe me .
she created an illegal email server to shield her criminal activity and corrupt pay for play and then she illegally destroyed 33,000 emails after - this the big key , after , that 's the key word , after receiving a congressional subpoena , so after .
so she gets the subpoena and she says get rid of it and that 's fine .
and yet , they put a four star general last week , james cartwright , highly respectable , current four star general , they may put him in jail for up to five years for doing nothing by comparison .
general petraeus suffered horribly , reputation destroyed for doing nothing by comparison .
they took the kid who wanted some pictures of the submarine , that 's an old submarine , they 've got plenty of pictures , if the enemy wants them , they 've got plenty of them .
he wanted to take a couple of pictures , they put him in jail for a year .
i saw his mother the other night on television .
i tell you what folks , we 've never been in a situation like this and if she 's allowed to run for president then general cartwright should put in jail for doing peanuts .
and he said he did it - and he said he did it for - he said that he lied for national security purposes .
who knows ?
but he did nothing by comparison to what she 's done .
if she were to win , it would create an unprecedented constitutional crisis .
she is likely to be under investigation for a long time concluding probably in a criminal trial .
hey look , we all want to go through a process and we want to make sure everyone is guilty properly , guilty properly , everything has to be perfect , but she did things where - and we have a trial , have to go with , but she 's guilty .
she 's guilty .
she took the emails and that 's the least of what she did .
she got rid of emails , that 's the least of what she did .
if she ever got into the oval office , hillary and her corrupt friends would rob this country blind .
my contract with the american voter begins with a plan to end government corruption .
i want the entire corrupt washington establishment to hear and heed the words we all are about to say , we all - are you ready ?
is n't it amazing how this phrase has gone up ?
i did n't like it , i thought it was corny , i do n't know where they really sort of a corny phrase i did n't like it .
when we win in november 8th , we are going to washington , d.c. and we are going to drain the swamp .
i thought it was corny and then i went to one rally and another and they 're all screaming , " drain the swamp " but frank sinatra did n't like my way , he did n't like until he sang it , the audience went crazy , sang it again , became number one , all of a sudden , he loved it very much .
at the core of my contract is my plan to bring back our jobs .
ohio has lost one in four of its manufacturing jobs since nafta , deal signed by bill clinton and supported by crooked hillary clinton .
america has lost - this is one of the hardest things to believe because it does n't seem physically possible .
seventy thousand factories since china entered the world trade organization , another bill- and hillary - backed disaster .
we 're living through the greatest jobs theft in the history of the world , it 's true .
it 's the single greatest jobs theft , you take a look at what 's happened not only in ohio .
you look at upstate new york , you look at pennsylvania , you look at north carolina , you look at south carolina , you look at what 's going on , look at new england , boy they got hit .
general motors lay off 1,151 workers in moraine and moved their jobs to mexico , china , and various other countries .
faurecia laid off 356 workers in troy , anybody from troy ?
good , do you still have your job ?
and moved their jobs to mexico .
delphi laid off 5,805 , what 's with delphi ?
you know about that , right ?
five thousand eight hundred and five workers in dayton .
boy oh boy , that 's a lot of jobs , and moved their jobs to mexico .
we have a one - way highway going into some of these countries especially mexico .
everything goes in , i always say , they get the jobs , the plants , the money , we get the drugs , we get the unemployment , it 's a one way street .
not going to happen anymore folks , it 's not going to happen anymore .
there have to be consequences .
when that happens , there 's going to be consequences .
we 're going to fight - oh , do n't worry about it , we 'll build the wall , it 's going to be a great wall too .
it 's going to be a great wall .
and every time i see a delphi and every time i see these companies leaving , that wall gets a little bit higher , it 's going up .
it 's going to be a great wall .
we 're going to fight for workers and we 're going to fight so delphi and these other companies do n't leave us , and there 's going to be consequences because the people got a raw deal and they deserve so much better .
a trump administration will stop the jobs from leaving ohio and from leaving america and we 'll stop the jobs , i 'll tell you what , like you 've never seen before , it will happen quickly .
the theft of american prosperity will end .
if a company wants to fire their workers , leave ohio , move to another country , build their big beautiful factory , ship their products back into the united states , we will make them pay a 35 percent tax going through a very strong wall , it 's going to be a very strong wall .
and you know what 's going to happen ?
they 're not going to leave , not going to leave .
now , the politicians could do something about this .
how long have we been talking about this , 15 years , right ?
it got really bad over the last five or six years , really bad .
it 's gotten to be catastrophic , catastrophic .
but they know this .
i mean some do and some do n't , some are not exactly - i wo n't say it , some are n't too bright .
some are n't too bright .
and some are getting tremendous amounts of money from donors and from people that want to see those companies leave , they have reasons for the companies to leave , including ownership interest in those companies .
the problem is , the politicians are working for those donors , they 're not working for the american people , they 're not working for all the people that got fired from what were good jobs .
so what 's going to happen is they want to leave and the ones who do leave , that 's okay too because the country will make a fortune because that 's going to be called a consequence , we can stop it dead .
and as we see speak right now , you have leaders in your company going out right now as we 're speaking , you have leaders going out trying to negotiate deals to leave ohio and other places , go to mexico , go to another countries .
but do n't worry about it , because if i get elected , there 'll be very little negotiation .
a trump administration will renegotiate nafta and if we do n't get the deal we want , we will terminate nafta and get a much better deal for our workers , i want free trade , i want fair trade .
you know , everyone wants free trade , we keep calling it free trade .
well i want free trade too but i really want fair trade , fair for this country and for our workers .
that 's what it 's going to be , we 're going to have fair , fair trade .
we will also immediately stop this job killing trans - pacific partnership from happening , that 's going to be , that 's another nafta potentially .
as part of our plan to bring back jobs , we 're going to lower taxes on american business from 35 percent to 15 percent .
we will massively cut taxes for the middle class .
we will also unleash american energy including shale , oil , natural gas , and clean coal .
we 're going to put our miners back to work , we 're going to put our steel workers back to work .
we will cancel billions of dollars of global warming payments to the united nations .
by the way , nobody even knows what happens to that money .
i could tell you i have some pretty good ideas , but nobody even knows what happens and we will use that money to invest in america , that includes projects like improving interstate 71 does anybody like that idea ?
you got to like it a lot otherwise , let 's save the money .
you know , we owe $ 20 trillion , okay ?
if you like the idea of improving the interstate ?
i mean , it 's not exactly - you 're not thrilled by it , let 's not do it then , let 's save the money and replacing the brent spence bridge in cincinnati , you like that ?
which is critical to the region , you like that one better .
you know , we should do that .
before we do a project , have a big rally , how do you like doing the interstate ?
people go , " ahhh " how do you like doing the bridge ?
oh , we love it .
it 's not a bad way actually .
we will also rebuild our inner cities .
we will become a rich nation once again .
you know , our inner cities are in terrible shape , the african - american community has been absolutely mistreated by the people running the inner cities for so many years , up to a hundred years , unbroken and we 're going to fix and invest in our inner cities , we 're going to bring our jobs back into the inner cities .
the crime is unbelievable , it 's staggering , the crime .
thousands and thousands of shootings in chicago just since the beginning of the year , we 're going to fix our inner cities .
jobs back , good education , and safety .
and i say to the african - american community , i say to the hispanic community , and i 've said it , " what the hell do you have to lose ?
i mean , what have you got to lose ? "
we 're going to make our inner cities wonderful places , safe , good education , and jobs .
and you know , the democrats for years they 've taken advantage , " we want your vote .
we want your vote .
we want your vote . "
you give them the vote and then they 'll say , " so long folks , see you in four years . "
that 's what happened .
i will fix your inner cities and you 'd be so proud of them , you 're going to be so proud of them .
to be a rich country , we must also be a safe country .
murder rates have experienced the largest single increase in 45 years .
now , the dishonest media has attend to that , they do n't want you to know that .
firearm - related deaths to police officers are up 45 percent .
just now , just a couple of hours ago , two new york city police officers , supposed to be two great people were shot in the bronx , badly , badly shot .
we send our thoughts and prayers to the officers and their families .
just happened moments before i left the plane .
unbelievable .
a trump administration will protect those who protect us and we will stop this tremendous surge in murder .
we will also keep america safe from terrorism .
hillary clinton wants a 550 percent increase in syrian refugees flowing into our country , that 's above the thousands that are coming in now under the obama plan , 550 percent above the thousands already coming in .
her plan will import generations of terrorism , extremism , and radicalism , and it 's something we ca n't allow to happen .
they 'll be in our schools , they 'll be in our communities and honestly , we want to take care of people and we have to and we 'll help them .
we 'll build safe havens , we 'll get the gulf states who have nothing but money and they have n't done their job , they will pay for it , we 're not paying for it .
we have 20 trillion , we 're not paying for it .
when i 'm elected president , so we will take care of it .
we want - everybody here wants to take care of it .
but we do n't want to end up like france , you see what 's happening in paris and nice , you see what 's happening in germany , the problems - we have enough problems in our country .
we will suspend the syrian refugee program and we will keep radical islamic terrorists the hell of our country .
and we have a president - by the way , all he does is campaign .
should n't he back like trying to get jobs and working on isis and maybe not giving a four month notice that we 're going into mosul to attack them ?
you saw that whole situation .
we will be attacking mosul in four months .
i say , " why ?
do n't tell that , i do n't want to hear that . "
because we are going to capture the leaders of isis by attacking mosul .
you see what 's going on , right ?
i say it all the time .
and every military leaders , general flynn who is great , general kellogg , they 're all saying , " you 're so right . "
and we 're going to attack .
so we have a president frankly does n't know what the hell he 's doing , he does n't what .
look at what 's happening with so many things , whether it 's jobs , but why is he spending all his time campaigning for somebody under federal investigation ?
all he does is campaign and campaign .
he ought to be back in the oval office , he ought to be back there working , he ought to be back there working .
now i have a lot of good suggestions out there with that .
so we 're going to make our country strong again .
we 're going to build up our military which is still badly depleted , so badly depleted .
you know , these are the greatest people there are , and we have old equipment , we have old fighter jets , we have old planes and guns and everything .
the enemy has newer and better equipment than we do in many cases .
recently they had a documentary on the jets , they 're 18 , 19 years old .
you saw it , a lot of the people saw it .
where they ca n't replace the parts , they ca n't replace the parts .
they have to go to plane graveyards and plane museums because they 're do n't make the parts anymore .
so all of these things are happening , we are going to have a top - notch , modern military , we do n't have a choice , we do n't have a choice .
we are going to do something else .
how many vets are in the audience ?
wow , that 's a lot of vets .
we are going to take care of our vets and we 're going to take care of them properly .
we have illegal immigrants coming into the country that are taken better care of than our vets , and that 's not going to happen , that 's not going to happen .
our vets are waiting on line for five days , six days , seven days , ten days to see a doctor for a simple procedure or a simple prescription it 's not going to happen anymore .
it 's not going to happen .
you know that and this is a number , two numbers are the hardest to believe .
that we lost 77,000 factories , that i told you about , 77 .
i thought they meant 700 factories or 7,000 , 77,000 .
the other one is that we have a suicide rate of 22 vets a day .
i said , that ca n't be right .
you mean 22 a year ?
no , 22 a day .
and a lot of that is because of the horrible , horrible situation that 's taking place run by the veterans administration .
and this has been going on for years .
and hillary clinton said it 's fine , it 's just fine the way it is .
you know that .
she says it 's just fine the way it is .
and that 's i think during the debates it was very interesting and i did win the debates , in all fairness .
did you see where she said , all the time , i 'm in debate prep .
hillary clinton is debating , i mean , she 's in debate prep .
she is in debate prep .
she was in there for weeks .
you know what is was , it was really an excuse for her to go sleep and rest .
she was in debate prep .
and i kept hearing and i felt guilty .
she 'd slept like a week and half before and she was in debate prep , she was n't in debate prep .
and the truth is if you do n't know the subjects so well that you have to prep for two weeks you 're the wrong person anyway .
but it was really an excuse for her to sleep and to rest , okay .
but we did well , so we did win the debates , right , every poll .
every single poll said we won the debates .
but i learned something in the debates , because she 's saying we will fight isis , we will do this , we will do that .
we do n't like what you did with taxes .
donald trump .
i said , well , that 's okay , why did n't you change the tax code ?
by the way , all of her friends do the same thing , it 's all rightm but why do n't you change the tax code ?
you were there , you were a senator , the secretary of state , you 're with -- i mean you were the wife of a president .
she does n't like it , you know , so like what ?
she 's like a critic , she complains but she 'll never do anything about it .
she said we 'll get rid of isis .
well there was no isis when she became the secretary of state .
isis formed during her tenure , right ?
it came out of the back - end because the way they got out of iraq was unbelievably stupid and isis formed .
now they 're in 32 countries .
she has zero chance of getting rid of isis .
i have 100 percent chance , 100 percent chance .
we have no choice , this is like we 're living in medieval times .
this is n't like it 's war and people get shot and people get killed and it 's horrible .
this is people 's heads are chopped off by the hundreds and by the thousands , and if you 're a christian you have no chance .
and it 's very hard , you know , if you 're in syria , i 've heard this for years , even before the migration .
if you 're a christian it was almost impossible to come into the united states , almost impossible .
and yet these people were under this horrible , horrible rule and they were being decimated and killed , and by the way , the evangelicals , christians , jews , catholics , i have such tremendous support it 's unbelievable .
it 's unbelievable .
so we 're going to do things that are going to make you very proud .
we 're going to be strong again .
a trump administration will also secure and defend the borders of the united states .
and as i have said , when these young attractive people started screaming they want the wall , we will build a wall that will make you so happy , for that group over there .
a lot of youth here .
we 're going to build a great wall and mexico is going to pay for the wall .
and the reason -- we 're going to have a great relation -- i was with the mexican president a short while ago , very nice , we had a great meeting .
but mexico is beating us at the border , they are killing us on trade .
we have a trade deficit with mexico that nobody would believe .
it 's a fraction of what we 're talking about with respect to the cost of the wall , because a lot of politicians ask me the question , how are you going to get mexico to pay ?
i said , well , when you see the trade deficit , billions and billions of dollars .
and if you look at the cost of the wall then you will understand how easy it 's going to be .
so we 're going to build a wall and it 's going to be a great wall .
and mexico is going to pay for the wall , we 're going to stop those drugs from pouring in and poisoning our youth .
we are going to stop it .
and it will be a great wall .
maybe someday they 'll name it after trump , who the hell knows .
i really do n't want it on the wall but that 's ... we received the first ever endorsement from our ice and border control officers .
it 's just a report that as a result of our open borders violent transnational cartels have spread into all 50 of our states .
you 've read that .
more than 90 percent of those arrested are here illegally , so 90 percent of the people that are here doing the things that you and i know they 're doing are in our country illegally .
they 're killing innocent americans and others , threatening schools and totally destroying communities .
a government that will not protect its people is a government unworthy to lead , unworthy to lead .
and when you think of it -- think of it with respect to radical islam where you have a president that wo n't mention the words , and you have a candidate that would n't say radical islamic terrorism .
how can you solve the problem if you refuse to acknowledge it ?
hillary will never protect your family which is why she can never lead this country , but that 's only one reason why .
the other reason why is that she 's guilty of so many crimes .
and that 's why it 's a rigged system , because she should not be allowed to run .
and when you look at what 's going with her protection , you 'll understand exactly what i 'm saying when i say rigged system .
you can ask bernie sanders about a rigged system .
the mistake he made -- when he endorsed hillary clinton , he made a deal with the devil and his stock went way down .
and we are going to get a lot of the bernie sanders people supporting us , because he was right about one thing , he was right about the borders and trade , and you know what , i 'm much tougher on trade than he was ever , ever , a lot of his people are coming forward , should 've never made a deal .
yes , he would have gone down as a great presidential in political history had he not made that deal .
and now he just goes out and speaks before small crowds .
and then you see wikileaks , all the bad things they say about him .
that alone should just stop him , that alone should stop .
and just like i said , that 's why hillary should fire podesta - how do have people working that say these horrible things about you ?
boy , i love reading those wikileaks .
the immigration officers warned in their letter when they endorsed me that hillary 's plan is the most radical immigration proposal in united states history .
it would lead to the loss of thousands and thousands of lives .
and they know what they 're talking about , folks .
as secretary of state hillary clinton allowed many , many , many people , the most dangerous and violent criminal aliens to go free , because their home countries refused to take them back .
now , i do n't blame their home countries but when we catch drug lords , killers , gang members and we bring them back to their home country , i give you my word there wo n't be one instance where that country does n't take those people .
and we are going to have a plan because they keep coming back , and back , and back , and back because we 're weak and we 're ineffective .
when they come back , five years in jail , when they come back again , more than five years in jail , and when they come back a third time much longer than that .
let me tell you , folks , they 're never coming back .
it 's a very simple solution .
they 're never coming back .
they come back 12 times , 13 times , they look at us and they laugh .
hillary supports totally open borders , there goes your country , and strongly supports sanctuary cities like san francisco where kate steinle was murdered by an illegal immigrant deported at least five times .
here in ohio , 60-year - old margaret kostelnik   was murdered in cold blood by an illegal immigrant last july in nearby concord township .
earlier that day her illegal immigrant killer attempted to rape a 14-year - old girl and shot another woman while she was with her children in the park .
police had encountered the illegal immigrant more than three weeks before the crime spree , but federal authorities refused to take him in , just refused take him into custody .
he was set free and then he went out and killed margaret .
and people that knew him by the way were begging , begging that he 'd be incarcerated .
but our weak immigration policies are responsible for many , many deaths , many deaths .
a trump administration will end this nightmare of violence .
we will protect american lives .
we will cancel all federal funding for sanctuary cities .
we will stop illegal immigration , deport all criminal aliens , and dismantle every last criminal cartel , and it will happen within the first weeks of my presidency .
when we win , you will finally have a government on your side , fighting for your community and protecting your family .
we will also repeal the obama clinton defense sequester and rebuild our so badly depleted military .
we will build new advanced aircraft at places like wright - patterson air force base .
you like that one .
i like it too .
okay .
i 'm honored to have the endorsement of more than 200 top admirals and generals and more than 22 medal of honor recipients , they were with me last night .
we were in fort bragg .
that was an amazing evening .
we had 21,000 people last night , the most incredible , brave people you 've ever seen .
hillary brought death and disaster to iraq , syria , libya , she empowered iran , and she unleashed isis across the world .
that 's what she did , through incompetence , through gross incompetence .
she and obama unleashed isis .
now she wants to start a shooting war in syria , in conflict with a nuclear armed russia that could easily lead to world war iii .
she 's an unstable person , folks .
i know my people .
she 's an unstable person .
look at the way she handled this email mess .
do you want that handling our country ?
hillary and our failed establishment have spent , listen to this one , this is the number , $ 6 trillion in the middle east that we never win that go on forever , we never win .
i wonder what general macarthur would say .
i wonder what general george patton who is spinning , they 're spinning in their graves .
they 've made us less safe .
they 've shipped our jobs and our wealth to other countries , and they 've left our borders wide open at home .
we send our troops to fight and die and defend their borders but we do n't care about our borders , we 're more interested defending the borders of countries that a lot of people have never even heard of .
it 's unbelievable .
think of it .
we fight to defend the border in some place far away , but we do n't even have borders in our country .
that will change on november 8th .
and by the way , the truth is i want people to come into our country .
we are going to have , he just said it , a big and beautiful door .
we 're going to have the big , beautiful doors but they are going to come into our country legally , really .
they are coming into our country legally .
and the process is going to be speeded up and it 's going to be brought into a modern age .
it 's now archaic .
people on line for 10 to 12 years , but people are going to come and we want people to come into our country , but they are going to come in through a process , they are going to come in legally .
a trump administration will never ever put the interests of a foreign country before the interests of our country .
i 'm not running to be president of the world , believe me , i 'm running to be president of our great united states of america .
and from the day i take office it will be always america first .
to all americans , i say it 's time for change and it 's time for new leadership .
can you imagine four years of hillary clinton ?
i mean , seriously , forget about running , forget about the race , can you imagine four more years of isis , four more years of high taxes , four more years of nothing but problems , in addition to all of the legalities that she 's done , aya - yay , i do n't even like to think about it .
just think about , in closing , what we can accomplish in the first 100 days of a trump administration .
we are going to have the biggest tax cuts since ronald reagan .
she is raising taxes , very seriously .
you saw her tax increase , it 's massive .
you know , we are the highest taxed nation in the world and she wants to raise taxes .
we are going to eliminate so many different things , but our taxes are going to weigh it down .
and we 're going to get rid of all unnecessary job - killing regulations .
we are going to cancel every illegal obama executive order .
we will protect religious liberty , rebuild our military , and we are going to take great care , as i 've said , of our veterans , provide school choice and put an end to common core , we 're bringing education local .
we will support the great men and women of law enforcement .
we 're going to save our second amendment which is under siege , and appoint justices to the supreme court who will hold , and you know this .
this is one of the most serious things .
justice scalia died very unexpectedly .
we have one .
the next president could appoint as many as three or four , i mean there 's even a scenario , it could be five .
if we do n't get this right we will not have a country .
many people think it 's like the most important thing .
so we are going to appoint justices to the united states supreme court who will uphold and protect the constitution of the united states .
for all those people that do n't even mention that , it 's one of the really important elements to what we 're doing and one of the very most important things that we are going to be doing .
it is time to cut our ties with the failed politicians of the past .
hillary clinton is a candidate of yesterday .
we are the movement of the future .
we are fighting for every citizen who believes that government should serve the people , not the donors and not the special interests .
we are fighting to save everything , honestly , we 're fighting to save everything .
we 're not just looking at having a strong military and having -- we are fighting to save everything , our country is a total mess .
you just take a look .
you just take a look .
we are also fighting to get rid of sanctuary cities .
we are fighting to get rid of sanctuary cities .
we are fighting to save the next worker from being laid off when their job is shipped unexpectedly to another country .
we are fighting to save our government from crime and corruption .
you look at what 's happening , our government is being eaten alive .
cronyism , and kick the crooks out of washington d.c. do n't let the pundits , the politicians or the media tell you what kind of a country you have .
do n't let them limit your dreams , because they want to limit your dreams .
you can have any future you want .
all we have to do is stop believing in our failed politicians and start believing in america again .
i am asking you to reject the cynics and to dream big , because with your vote -- we are just four days , can you believe it ?
four days , this started on june 16th of last year .
it seemed like it was never going to end .
seventeen people , 17 people , one by one , by one , they said donald trump is inexperienced .
i 've been in politics all my life but i 've been on the other side of the equation i must say .
but one , by one , by one and then they disappeared .
some great people , ben carson supporting us , incredible .
mike huckabee .
so many great , i mean , so many great , almost of them , great people , and we actually do have a very unified republican party , i will tell you , but most importantly we 're going to make such great decisions for this country .
we 're going to make such great -- you 're going to be so proud .
so think of it , june 16th of last year , and now it 's four days away from the change you 've been waiting for your entire life .
you 're going to think back to this day and you 're going to say that was a great day .
that was a beautiful day .
i even like mr. trump 's plane , made in america by the way , it was great , made in america .
and they do n't make them like that anywhere else .
but you are going to say this was a very , very important day because it led to your vote on november 8th or whenever you do it , before that is fine , just as long as you do it , do it any time you want , but do it .
and our country started winning again .
we started winning with trade .
we started doing things properly .
we built up our military .
we knocked the hell out of isis .
we started winning again .
we took care of healthcare .
we got great healthcare at a much , much , much lower cost , it 's unacceptable , but we started winning again .
together we are going to make america wealthy again .
we will make america so very strong again .
we will make america safe again and we will make america great again .
thank you very much , everyone .
thank you .
god bless you , everybody .
god bless you .
get out and vote .
thank you .
thank you , everybody .
thank you .
thank you .
thank you , ladies and gentlemen .
that 's a great honor .
boy , what a crowd .
we 've been all over today , north carolina and pennsylvania , and we have had crowds you would n't believe it .
congressman duncan from tennessee said the greatest thing he 's ever seen -- he 's never seen anything like this .
and i 'll tell you what , it 's really been -- it 's really been a great honor .
and in 18 days , we are going to win the state of pennsylvania and we are going to win the white house .
but you have to get out november 8th .
you have to get out -- you just have to get out and vote .
otherwise , we 've all wasted a lot of time and energy .
i 've wasted time , energy and money .
so you 've got to get out .
we 've got to turn this thing around .
what 's going on in our country today is a disgrace .
our opponents have spent more money than ever before in the history of campaigns raised from special interests , and yet , we 're leading in polls from rasmussen to the l.a. times to investor 's business daily ...   leading nationwide , leading -- just came out , just came out .
we 're leading nationwide .
together , we 're going to deliver real change that puts america first .
we 're going to renegotiate our terrible , absolutely terrible , horrible trade deals , end illegal immigration , stop the massive inflow of refugees , reduce surging crime , cut taxes big league , cut regulations bigly , end common core , bring our education local ...   ... and repeal and replace obamacare .
disaster .
your premiums are going up 70 , 80 , 90 percent and it 's only going to get worse .
and hillary clinton wants to do it more so .
we 're going to repeal it , we 're going to replace it with something much better at a fraction of the cost .
your jobs will come back under a trump administration .
your incomes will go up under a trump administration .
your taxes will go way down under a trump administration .
your companies wo n't be leaving pennsylvania under a trump administration , that i can tell you .
there will be consequences .
we 're also going to rebuild our badly depleted military .
we have the greatest people on earth , but they 've let it go .
our navy is the smallest it 's been since world war i. my plan will be to build 350 ships .
we need a 350-ship navy .
it 's much lower than that right now , smallest since world war i. can you believe that ?
this will be the largest effort at rebuilding our military since ronald reagan and it will require a truly national effort and do we need that or what ?
the philadelphia navy yard is a perfect example .
i went to school in philadelphia .
i know philadelphia very well .
i will instruct my secretary of the navy to study locations like philadelphia with a long history of service to our military and proximity to vibrant , private industry and find ways to involve them in this national effort .
it 'll happen .
as our fleet is rebuilt , we 'll need to invest in recruiting the skilled american craftsman .
that we need , like welders and pipe fitters and so many more , people that do n't have jobs , the greatest people .
we 'll establish centers of excellence in places like philadelphia and port smith , new hampshire and hampton rhodes , virginia to produce the master craftsmen we need to rebuild our fleet and many other things .
we will rebuild our navy and we will do it with american steel made right here in pennsylvania .
and you see what 's happened to our steel industry .
as part of our plan for bold change to make your life better , we will also rebuild our massively depleted infrastructure ; our roads , our bridges , our tunnels .
it 's all falling apart .
we have $ 20 trillion in debt and our roads and infrastructure are a disaster .
obama - clinton doubled the national debt in eight years .
but instead of rebuilding america , the money was all lost and america 's infrastructure is like that of a third - world country .
we spent $ 6 trillion in the middle east and it 's in far worse shape now than it was 15 years ago , think of it .
we spent $ 6 trillion .
we could have rebuilt our country two times over .
imagine if we had spent this money rebuilding the inner cities of philadelphia .
instead , we spent trillions on foreign countries and left our towns and cities to crumble .
how smart are our politicians .
these are stupid people , stupid people .
we defend other countries ' borders , invest in their resources , but abandoned their own .
think of it .
we fight for other countries ' borders , and yet our body is like a sieve , like water pours through .
we 'll have strong borders .
we 're going to have the wall , do n't worry about the wall .
we 're going to have the wall , that i can tell you .
we will build the wall and who is going to pay for the wall ?
that 's right .
they may not know it yet ; they 're paying for the wall .
and i met with the president of mexico , nice guy , two months ago and we had a good meeting .
just the beginning , but we had a very good meeting , believe me .
and it 's very unfair .
we have a highway that goes right into mexico .
they 're taking our plants , they 're taking our jobs , they 're taking so much .
we 've lost so much .
look at philadelphia .
look at pennsylvania .
look at what 's happened to pennsylvania , the jobs .
look at the steel industry in pennsylvania .
it was the greatest in the world and now it 's not so good .
it 's going to be good again ; it 's going to be great again , not good ; it 's going to be great again .
the plan i 'm proposing targets substantial new investment here at home to fix america 's transportation , drinking water and other vital infrastructure .
this can be achieved through a focus on public - private partnerships , proven financing programs and tax credits that incentivize companies to make major job and wealth - producing investments in your local economies .
it should be done .
this means help for projects like the pennsylvania turnpike as well as the pennsylvania portion of the appalachian highway system .
it needs help , needs help , not in good shape .
amazing what it looks like now compared to 10 or 15 years ago , is n't it ?
look at your whole lives compared to 10 or 15 years ago .
my plan will also help pennsylvania upgrade , replace bridges in the commonwealth that have been deemed structurally deficient .
it 's amazing what percentage are structurally deficient .
i said before sometimes , you just want to swim and just relax and swim across the river , get there safely .
some are very , very dangerous .
we 're also going to unleash -- thank you ; i love you too .
he sounds like a rough guy , but i love him .
in my own way , i love him .
we 're also going to unleash the power of american energy right here in pennsylvania ; shale , oil , natural gas and clean coal , clean coal .
we 're going to put our miners back to work , folks .
and we 're putting pennsylvania back to work .
and we 're going to put the special interests -- and who knows more about special interest than me ?
but we 're going to put them out of work .
we 're going to renegotiate nafta , stop the tpp , which is a disaster , and stand up to foreign product dumping and currency manipulation that make it impossible for your companies to compete .
your city has lost one - third of its manufacturing jobs since bill clinton signed nafta , a deal strongly supported by hillary clinton .
listen to this number , and i 've been saying it 's a typo ; 70,000 -- not 7,000 or 700 or seven -- 70,000 factories have shut down or left the united states since china entered the world trade organization .
that was another clinton mess .
and 100,000 jobs have been lost since she produced the deal , the great deal with south korea .
just a few miles from here , there 's a very famous bridge that says trenton makes the world tanks .
under a trump administration , i can promise you we are going to start making things in america again .
we are going to start making things in pennsylvania again .
your products will be sent around the world , not your jobs .
right now , your jobs are dissipated .
we 're going to start making things again .
do you remember it used to say made in the usa or made in america ?
where do you see that anymore ?
you do n't see it .
hillary is controlled by special interests who want to ship your jobs to other countries .
she 's the most corrupt person ever to run for the presidency of the united states .
she bleached and deleted 33,000 emails after getting a congressional subpoena , lied under oath to congress , lied to the fbi , obstructed justice , made 13 iphones disappear , some with a hammer .
and now , we just learned that two boxes of evidence are mysteriously missing .
and we just had a four - star general , highly respected , general cartwright , you heard what happened yesterday .
he could go to jail for five years because he supposedly told a lie to the fbi , one lie .
and i do n't know that it was even a lie .
i do n't know that our general cartwright -- this is a four - star general .
this happened yesterday .
could go to jail for five years .
and there have been nothing but lies to the fbi .
now from wikileaks , we 've just learned she tried to get $ 12 million from the king of morocco for an appearance , one appearance .
more pay for play .
that 's why i 'm proposing a package of ethics reforms to make our government honest once again .
it 's time to drain the swamp in washington , d.c. 

  is there any place more fun to be than a trump rally , right ?
one new proposal i 'm outlining today will help us put the corrupt regulation industry out of business .
they are killing your steel .
they are killing your energy .
they 're really , really hurting our country .
and we need regulation .
we need regulation for safety and we need regulation for the environment .
but we do n't need what 's happening with the regulation industry , that i can tell you .
i will work with congress to require that for every one new regulation , two old regulations must be eliminated .
we 're losing $ 2 trillion in economic activity a year to regulations .
the only people getting rich are the lobbyists , the lawyers and the special interests .
i 'm also going to push for a constitutional amendment to impose term limits on all of our members of congress .
it 's time .
not only will we in government -- well , do you think it 's time ?
right ?
not only will we end government corruption , but we 'll end economic stagnation .
my plan lowers are business tax from 35 percent to 15 percent and lowers taxes for everybody straight across the board , everybody as individuals , and simplifies our tax code .
we 're also going to rebuild our inner cities .
african - americans and hispanics living in the inner cities are suffering .
the violence is unbelievable and unbearable .
you walk to the store with your child and you get shot .
there 's no education .
there are no jobs .
there 's no safety .
nearly 3,500 people have been shot in chicago since january 1st , the beginning of the year .
homicides are up nearly 50 percent in washington , d.c. and more than 60 percent in baltimore and it 's getting worse .
murder in the united states is up more , think of it , is up more than at any time over 45 years , the highest level in 45 years .
you do n't hear that from these dishonest people back there , meaning the media .
look at them , look at them , the most dishonest people .
they are the most dishonest people .
they are dishonest people .
we 're living in a rigged system , and believe me , they 're a big part of the rigging , those people , believe me .
they do n't tell the truth .
so to the african - american and hispanic voters suffering in inner cities and other places that are so riddled with crime , with no jobs , with no education or very poor education , i say what do you have to lose ?
i will fix the inner cities .
i will fix education .
we will bring back jobs .
we will make the inner cities safe .
some of the inner cities are as dangerous as the war zones you read about in the middle east .
we will do a great job .
we will also make our nation rich again .
we have to do that .
we have to do that .
but to be a rich country , we must also be a safe country .
national security begins at the border .
speaking in secret to a foreign bank , hillary clinton said her dream is for totally open trade and open borders and she denied it .
and she denied it the other night in the debate .
but she turned out to be wrong .
who won the debate ?
that one -- honestly , that was not close .
except for a couple of dishonest groups , they would say , oh i think she won , i think she -- give me a break .
hillary 's plan includes an open border with the middle east , meaning generations of radicalism and terrorism spreading and growing within our shores , not good .
she even wants a 550 percent increase in syrian refugees over obama 's numbers to come pouring into our country .
she wants 500 -- think of it , 550 percent more than the thousands that are already coming in .
the great white horse , you watch folks , it 's a great white horse .
so let me state very clearly the fact that if i 'm elected president , i am going to keep radical islamic terrorism the hell out of our country .
we will also stop the crisis of illegal immigration .
boy , what spirit .
pennsylvania , i love pennsylvania .
i got a good education in pennsylvania , my kids got a good education in pennsylvania .
smart people in pennsylvania , tough and smart and sharp and people that do n't like what 's happening to their country , that 's who 's in pennsylvania , i 'll tell you .
a trump administration will secure and defend our borders , believe me .
and yes , we will build the wall .
we have the honor of being the first ever endorsement from our ice and border patrol officers ; 16,500 border patrol and ice just last week endorsed us .
they 've never endorsed a presidential candidate , never .
it was just reported that a man deported from our country 10 times in six years has been charged with raping a 12-year - old girl .
in august , texas police arrested a serial illegal immigrant rapist who had been deported five times .
one victim included a 68-year - old woman with a cane who took his offer to drive her home .
he left her on the side of a dirt road in absolutely horrible , horrible condition .
a 64-year - old air force veteran , marilyn ferris , was raped and beaten to death with a hammer by a repeat offending criminal illegal immigrant who should 've been deported many times , but never was under the obama administration .
if i 'm elected , we will impose tough new mandatory minimum federal prison sentences for anyone who illegally reenters the country after previously being deported .
they wo n't come back .
and we will swiftly remove and deport all criminal aliens from this country ; the gang members , the drug lords .
we 've got some bad dudes and they 're preying on our citizens and that 's not going to happen .
it 's going to be one of the first things we do .
either we win this election or we lose the country .
and believe me , this is the last time we are going to have a chance to win .
this is it , folks .
this is it .
it 's the last time .
a victory in november will be a victory for you , the american people , and that 's what it is .
i did n't need to do this .
i did n't need to do this .
it 's a lot of work .
i did n't need it , but i 'm doing it .
and i know the other side .
i 've been on the other side for a long time , i know it .
but i also saw that this country was going bad .
it was going in the wrong direction , just going in the wrong direction .
i love our country and we 're going to pull it off .
we 're going to make it great again .
we 're going to make america great again .
here are some of the amazing things we 're going to be doing for our country starting in 2017 .
we are going to have the biggest tax cut since ronald reagan .
hillary clinton is going to raise your taxes a lot .
she 's going to raise your taxes .
that came out loud and clear in the debate , going to raise your taxes .
we 're going to lower your taxes bigly , not only the business taxes , we 're lowering everybody 's .
we 're simplifying the code .
who knows the code better than me ?
we 're simplifying the code .
we 're simplifying the code .
the only one that 's going to do badly is h&amp;r block .
they wo n't do so well .
they 're not going to be so happy .
we 're going to eliminate every unnecessary job - killing regulation .
we are going to defend religious liberty , which is under siege , under siege .
religious liberty is under siege .
we are going to provide school choice to every low - income child in america and we are going to end common core .
we 're going to support the great men and women of law enforcement .
we will save the second amendment , also under siege .
we 're going to appoint justices to the united states supreme court who will uphold and defend the constitution of the united states .
for the next 18 days , you have to get every last person you know out to the voting booths .
you have to do it or we 've wasted so much , november 8th .
this is our one magnificent chance to reclaim our country , the country we love for we the people .
i am going to fight for every citizen of every background from every stretch of this nation .
i am going to fight for every child living in poverty .
i am going to fight for every mom who lost her child to illegal immigration and drugs and gang violence , and that 's a lot of people and these are great people .
the remembrance project , think about the remembrance project .
look it up , credible people .
i am going to fight for every community whose jobs and factories have been ripped out of our states like pennsylvania and shipped to mexico and other countries all over the world .
that 's not happening anymore .
i am going to fight for every person in this country who believes government should serve the people , not the donors and not the special interests .
i am going to fight to bring us all together as americans .
we 're a divided nation .
we are going to be a nation of spirit .
we are going to love everybody .
there 's love in this room .
we 're going to love everybody .
imagine what our country could accomplish if we started working together as one people , under one god , saluting one american flag .
you are going to look back at this rally for the rest of your life .
you are going to remember this day in 10 and 20 and 30 years from now .
this is a movement like you and the media have never , ever seen before .
there has never been anything like this .
too bad they wo n't write and speak honestly about it .
it would actually make for much better television .
you 're going to look back at this election and say this is by far the most important vote you 've ever cast for anyone at any time .
you 're going to be proud of your country again .
we 're going to make great deals and bring back jobs .
we 're going to have a strong military .
we 're going to take care of our great veterans .
we 're going to take care of our veterans .
if we win , the change you 've been waiting for will finally arrive , just remember .
we 're going to do so much .
and remember the inner cities , the african - american community , just remember what i 'm saying .
we will do such a great job .
those communities have been ruled by democrats for in some cases over 100 years unbroken .
we will do such a great job .
we have to get everybody together .
we have to get out and vote .
we 're going to have -- believe me , this is brexit times five ; you watch what 's going to happen .
we will make american wealthy again , we will make america strong again , we will make america safe again and we will make america great again .
thank you , everybody .
i love you .
god bless you .
god bless you .
november 8th , get out and vote , november 8th .
thank you , everybody .
well , general thank you very much for being here mike , we really appreciate it .
and we really appreciate all of those generals and admirals that today endorsed me .
we have ... 

  the use of the fighters ... 

  almost 90 .
and these are our fighters , these are our fighting generals and they 're actually a lot more to come .
but i really appreciate everything from you and all of them .
we have great respect for those people .
these are great , great people .
so if you look at the veteran 's situation , i have been so involved over the last year - and - a - half and before that in seeing what 's going on with the v.a. and it is a disaster .
and i 've become so friendly and helped the veterans in so many different ways .
but it 's such a big problem and we have no clue .
hillary clinton said everything 's working just fine .
she does n't know that people are standing on line for seven days to see a doctor .
and dying , mike .
they 're dying on line .
and we came out with a plan , a 10-point plan and it 's on the website and you 'll see it if you want .
most of -- i 'm sure most of you have already seen it , but it 's been really praised by the veterans and the veterans groups .
and the fact is the v.a. is a -- the veterans administration and waiting and all of the problems and you do have some good doctors in there , but people ca n't get to see the doctors because the administration -- the bureaucratic workings of the veterans administration are a total disaster .
and what i 've done and what i 've looked at -- and you know all about the rate of suicide and all of the problems and numbers that honestly are not even believable when you hear 22 people a day , 22 people a day .
these are numbers that you would n't even think are believable and a lot of it is because of the fact that they ca n't get better .
they ca n't -- they have no service whatsoever .
and it 's been really , really badly handled .
one of the things that i 've done is we allow when that wait is so long and so horrible -- and sometimes , by the way , a simple procedure or simple prescription , just a very simple thing can make a person 's life wonderful health wise .
and they ca n't get to see the doctor -- they ca n't get to see the doctor .
and we have a plan where if you have a wait , you 're going to leave , you 're going to go across the street or down the road or a few miles away , you 're going to see a doctor , a really good doctor , you 're going to get taken care of 100 percent or you 're going to go and you 're going to go to a local hospital , whether it 's public or private .
you 're going to get taken care of and your government is going to pay your bill .
and you 're going to be all set .
it 's going to be very good .
every simple .
it should have been done a long time ago .
the female veterans have been like the forgotten people and i think it started because it was -- you know , obviously a while ago , there were far fewer and they have n't increased that capacity and now you have tremendous numbers of female vets and we are going to do procedures that they 've never done .
and we are going to help the female veteran .
they have not been helped .
they 've really been left behind , even more so than our male veterans .
they 've been left behind .
and it 's just not going to happen .
we 're going to straighten it out .
we 're going to give them also the right -- if things are not being done right , they 're going to have the right to go to a local doctor or physician or a local hospital .
and again , whether it 's public or private , whichever one is most convenient and whichever one is better frankly , and they 're going to get themselves taken care of whether it 's male or female , and that 's so important .
and the other issue that 's so important is mental health because the mental health problem is such a massive -- it 's such a massive problem in the v.a. , and that 's something we 're going to devote a tremendous amount of time to .
and it 's not just amount of money .
you know , the money they 're spending is tremendously -- it 's a huge amount of money that they 're currently spending .
but there are people that are incompetent in the v.a. , and they have people that are stealing .
you 've seen that .
if you look at phoenix and what 's gone on in phoenix where they ca n't even fire the people , they found people that are stealing and found people that are very dishonest , they ca n't even get rid of them .
all of that 's going to change .
the v.a. -- you 're going to be so proud of what you have .
i mean , we 're going to take it and you 're going to be so proud of what you have , believe me .
look , she 's a disaster in so many different ways , folks .
disaster .
i do n't even -- i do n't really even think she believes in herself .
you know , she was brought so far left -- she was brought so far left by bernie and the group -- and i think we 're going to get a lot of the bernie people because of trade , if you want to know the truth .
a lot of the bernie people are coming with us .
because the one thing he was right about is the fact that our country 's being ripped off like never before on these trade deals that are disasters .
nafta has been a disaster for the united states .
it 's destroyed our country .
and that 's one thing he got right .
and a lot of people liked him because of trade more so than anything else .
but when it comes to immigration , first of all , she thinks that everything is more or less fine .
she wants to allow a 650 percent increase over and above what obama 's allowing to come in from syria and the middle east .
650 percent .
and he 's already allowing thousands and thousands of people in .
and we do n't know where they 're coming from .
you people know because we 're military people -- we do n't know where they 're coming from .
we know -- you see the damage that one person can do , you just have to look anywhere .
you see the damage that -- whether it 's orlando or whether it 's two people that just got married or they 're married and they 're , you know , from san bernardino -- you see in san bernardino they 're getting thrown a party , a shower party or a baby party , and then a short while later they go and they kill 14 people in the group .
look , we 've got problems , folks .
we have to figure it out .
and if we do n't figure it out , we have to be careful and vigilant and strong .
and she wants to allow a 550 percent increase .
you know , i was -- very interesting , i was saying she wants to allow 500 percent more coming in from that region and the press said i was wrong .
i said , " oh , what 's the real number ? "
550 .
so that time , it was true .
they said the number was too low .
but as long as they can prove me wrong , they 're happy .
but 550 percent increase in people coming from syria and that part of the world and we ca n't do it .
i want to build safe havens , and we 'll have other people build them , by the way .
we 'll have other people fund them .
we 'll lead the charge .
but , you know , barack obama has -- has doubled during his fairly short period of years -- he 's doubled our national debt , doubled it .
it 's going to be close to $ 20 trillion when he leaves .
$ 20 trillion .
so , we have to get rid of at least a good portion of that .
so we 're going to have other people , we 're going to have the gulf states pay for this , because we 're going to build safe havens .
i mean , look , we all have big hearts .
we just ca n't allow these people into our country until we find out what 's going on .
we ca n't do it .
we ca n't do it .
very good .
by the way you have illegal immigrants -- i hate to say this in this room , because you have a lot of vets in the room .
but you have illegal immigrants that she wants and he wants treated better than veterans .
you have these people are treated better than people that are in this room .
you know it .
they are treated better than veterans .
and let me tell you , folks , they 've got their priorities mixed up .
that 's going to change so fast , ok ?
that 's going to change .
good .
general , we have a couple of people -- by the way , mayor rudy giuliani of new york .
what a great man .
stand up .
stand up , rudy .
rudy -- whoa .
they love him .
we love what he did .
he took a city that was a disaster , he took new york city and he made it great .
think of it , made it great again , right ?
he made it great again .
so , rudy , great to be -- to see you .
and eric trump 's wife laura is here and she 's done a fantastic job .
laura has been working very hard , in particular in north carolina , but helping also with virginia .
we have some people in virginia , mike rabino   and the group .
they have done -- they have been amazing and hopefully we can get everybody registered because we have to win .
virginia is a very important state .
we have to win virginia .
thank you .
ok .
so speaking of disasters , the iran nuclear deal .
and iran -- iran has -- i mean , we 're talking about putting nukes into the hands of an ayatollah that says death to america , death to israel and they continue to fire ballistic missiles all the time in violation of this deal .
but iran has engaged in growing hostilities , has increasingly shown it continues to have nuclear ambitions .
and as president , what are you going to do about iran ?
first of all , if you look at the policies of hillary clinton and barack obama , they have created what will be a world power .
not -- you know , they 're talking about a regional power .
this is going to be a world power .
they have become rich , they have become powerful .
the deal is one of the worst negotiated deals of any kind that i 've ever seen if you look at it , you study it .
we gave them $ 150 billion .
how about the $ 400 million in cash that we gave them flown in -- obviously for hostages .
that was the big lie also , just like obamacare was a big lie .
this was a big lie .
and 400 -- think of it , $ 400 million in cash and they kept the hostages .
remember , it had the nothing to do with the hostages but the hostages were n't allowed to leave the airport until such time and then they came .
whoever heard of $ 400 million in cash , different denominations , different countries , all different money from different countries .
who even has the power to authorize something like this ?
so what we 've done is created a monster .
we 've created in three years , four years if you look at -- if you take a look at iran from four , five years ago , they were dying .
they had the sanctions , the , they were being choked to death and they were absolutely dying , they were n't even going to be much of a threat , they did n't have anything going and now they 're a power .
we 've made them a power .
overnight we 've made them a power .
number one , they 're highly threatening to the state of israel , they are so bad for israel .
obama has been so bad to israel .
but they 're a great threat .
and they 're a threat to us .
and they 're going to have nuclear weapons and this path , in my opinion , is going to be a quicker path to nuclear weapons .
the deal is grossly incompetent .
and then i do n't know if you saw the other day we have the little boats going out and they 're making all sorts of horrible gestures .
they learned the gestures , i guess , they studied the united states and they gave those kind of gestures to our sailors and our captain on the boats and i bet those guys wanted to blow them out of the water .
i 'll bet you .
i 'll bet you they wanted to blow them up .
and so you see these four little boats circling , circling , going around , you know , taunting , taunting .
it 's like they 've been emboldened .
here we are , we made a deal that 's such a great deal for them and they now feel power .
they feel power .
remember the sailors -- the 10 sailors who were a little bit off , they were in the water ?
so instead of saying , " hey , you 're in our water , please go over there , " they humiliated our country , they humiliated those 10 people .
and this -- and the only reason we got them back -- of course , you would have gotten them back very fast if i was president , that i can tell you .
but the only reason we got them back was the payment the following day was due .
a lot of the money the following day was due .
and stupid they 're not .
and they wanted to get that .
but just think of what 's going on .
here we are , we 've made this deal , we just -- we made them a power .
and we also happen to have given them iraq , because iraq -- you know , i always say iraq and iran were very similar militarily and they 'd fight , fight , fight .
and then they 'd rest .
they 'd fight , fight , fight .
and then saddam hussein would do the gas and somebody else would do something else and they 'd rest .
we knocked out the one .
and a lot of people do n't realize that iraq has some of the greatest oil reserves anywhere in the world .
and so iran is going to get whatever isis already does n't already have , and probably take that too by the way .
what we 've done to create a major , major power through really stupid leaders -- stupidity -- is just shocking .
it 's one of the dumbest deals i 've ever seen .
john kerry 's a terrible negotiator , but somebody ...   but do n't forget , this was a deal that crooked hillary clinton wanted .
she wanted this deal .
this was a very important deal .
and she wanted that deal .
and most people do n't even get it .
you know , normally you understand a deal .
you say , " yeah , i understand , we get this " -- we get nothing .
we get nothing .
this was a deal at the highest level of incompetence .
the deal with iran was at the highest level of incompetence .
so we 'll -- we 'll solve that problem if i get the chance , believe me .
and if i get the chance , you 'll be very happy -- you 'll be very happy .
well , first of all , it would n't have started if we had proper leadership .
because what happened ...   we should n't have been in iraq , but we should n't have gotten out of iraq the way we got out , where literally they announced we 're going to leave by a certain date .
i mean , the enemy could n't even believe it .
actually , a lot of people thought it was a little bit of a deception , because they could n't believe anybody would say it .
it turned out to be true .
and we should have left a small force , relatively small force .
as much as i did n't want to be there , we should have left a small force .
and really isis just evolved out of all of the turmoil , all of the weakness , all of the stupidity of decisions from hillary clinton , from barack obama .
and isis started off in a small area and now i read the other day they 're in 28 different states or nations .
twenty - eight , think of it .
so they 're spreading rapidly .
a report came out where they were told within the government that they want to try and minimize isis and minimize , but the fact is they know it 's actually gotten very much out of control .
and we have to do something about , we ca n't allow the chopping off of heads , the drowning of people in steel cages , the viciousness , the violence , we have to knock out isis .
we have to knock them out good .
and we have to get countries that are affected by isis .
i mean a lot of people say as an example russia you know hillary likes to play tough with russia .
putin looks at her and he laughs .
ok ?
he laughs .
putin -- putin looks at hillary clinton and he smiles .
boy , would he like to see her .
that would be easy .
because just look at her decisions .
look how bad her decisions have been .
virtually every decision she 's made has been a loser .
but would n't it be nice -- honestly , because russia does n't like isis any better than we do .
would n't it be nice if we actually got along with russia and you could knock them out together ?
would n't that be a good thing ?
as opposed to , you know , tough talk .
she tries to do the tough talk and then she leaves .
you know , she goes .
i watched it yesterday on the airplane , talking tough about russia .
then she turned around and sat down , you know .
which by the way , was n't even played on the national media .
was n't that incredible ?
was n't even played .
so we have to get along with people .
we have to get along with certain nations , very importantly .
because it would be awfully good to have russia and others with us on major attacks on isis .
well , that 's it .
and you know cyber is becoming so big today .
it 's becoming something that a number of years ago , a short number of years ago was n't even a word .
and now the cyber is so big .
and you know you look at what they 're doing with the internet , how they 're taking recruiting people through the internet and part of it is the psychology because so many people think they 're winning .
and you know there 's a whole big thing .
even today 's psychology where cnn came out with a big poll that big poll came out today that trump is winning ; it 's good psychology you know .
it 's good psychology .
i know that for a fact because people that did n't call me yesterday , they 're calling me today .
so that 's the way life works right ?
but i think we 're doing very well .
and i really think the state of virginia ; so many different places have been so incredible .
so i thank you very much .
but cyber has been very , very important .
and it 's becoming more and more important as you look .
and a lot of it does have to do with ideology and psychology and lots of other things .
you know we 're in a different world today than we were in 20 years ago and 30 years ago .
and one of the biggest problems and one of the reasons we have to knock them out is because the weaponry is so powerful today .
you know in the old days you could have said , well look they have rifles , we have rifles .
we shoot .
they have uniforms , we have uniforms .
this is a whole different war .
the weaponry is so powerful .
and we have to beat them over there .
we 're allowing people to come over here .
we 're allowing , think of it , you military people .
we 're allowing people to come over here .
and , you know , i used to watch the migration and i 'd see people with cell phones .
i 'd say , " where do they get cell phones ? "
and some of those people had very horrible things on their cell phones including the isis flag .
and you say " what are we doing ? "
what are we doing ?
but we 're allowing people to come here and we do n't know do they turn on us ?
are a small percentage of them bad ?
because if a small percentage is bad , that 's not acceptable .
it 's not acceptable .
we ca n't take the risk .
just a small percentage can do such damage , so we ca n't take the risk .
so , general , the bottom line is we have to get very tough and we have to get very smart , or we 're not going to have much of a country left , i can tell you that , right now .
good .
look , we have a problem .
it 's called isis .
isis is fighting syria .
now we 've built up iran to be a big power .
iran is on the side of assad , syria .
russia is on the side of assad , syria .
so , we built these people up , we build -- we created this -- this strong power in iran which , seriously , folks , you know better than anybody , four years ago , they were dying , they were gasping for air , and all we had to do was let them sit for a little longer -- in fact double up your sanctions .
you would n't have had -- you could have really negotiated a deal .
how kerry never left -- that deal was incredible .
everybody knows it was bad .
they 're dancing on the streets all over iran and , literally , they 're all celebrating , you know , shouting , " death to america .
dumb americans . "
what they 're saying is incredible .
they 're saying , " death to israel . "
this is in the middle of the negotiation .
if i had a negotiation like that i 'd say , " let 's check this negotiation , something 's not going very well . "
we just kept going right through .
he never left the table once .
if you would have left that table and said " i 'm sorry , you guys " -- first of all , we should have gotten our hostages back before we started the negotiation , ok ?
hundred percent .
and we should have said very nicely , with respect , " sorry , folks , until you do it " -- and then you leave the room because they 're going to say " no , we 're not giving your hostage back . "
say " that 's ok , do n't worry about it , " then you get up , you leave .
you get back to your plane , you double up the sanctions .
they will call you before you arrive back in washington or wherever you 're going , turn the plane around in mid - air , your hostages are coming back .
ok ?
not $ 400 million in cash that we have to give .
believe me .
and it 's 100 percent , it 's 100 -- it 's not like 99 percent , it 's 100 percent .
you leave , you say very nicely -- i always tell my -- you know , the story of my father , who was a very good negotiator , he taught me so much .
and he 'd say -- are you listening to this , ivanka ?
but he 'd say " son " -- he thought i was too tough with things , right ?
he said " son , take the lumps out . "
did you ever hear this story ? "
take the lumps out . "
my father , fred .
said , " just nice and easy , nice and easy .
just relax , take the lumps out . "
and so , i was thinking -- see , in the old days i would have said , " we 're not giving you anything , " you know , i would 've made the room very angry .
now i just say " sorry .
we owe $ 20 trillion .
we do n't have the money .
we ca n't do it .
we ca n't do it . "
.
we do n't -- by the way .
how do we pay them all this ?
we keep the $ 150 billion , but with the hostages you say , " we have to have it back .
look , our people want the hostages ; your people do n't care . "
their people probably did n't even know -- they did because they played up the hostages because that 's a sign of , you know , the big brave iran .
so , what happens is you say , " we have to have the hostages back . "
they will say , " no . "
you leave the room and you double up the sanctions .
within 48 hours , you 'll have your hostages back .
believe me .
but they did n't do that .
kerry never walked .
the only time he walked is when he entered a bicycle race .
can you believe this guy ?
seventy - three years old .
it 's true .
he fell off his bicycle and he broke his leg and he was out of the negotiation for three or four weeks .
and they probably did better in the negotiation when he was n't there .
that 's the only time that he left .
he should have left the negotiation and doubled up the sanctions and get what he wanted .
that deal is a disaster for us .
it 's a shorter road to nuclear weapons and it 's an incompetently negotiated deal .
so these are the things that we 're stuck with , folks , but we will fix them .
well , it 's more of the same .
i mean , it 's just another place they 've taken over .
this was a hillary clinton deal .
we could have done a minor attack .
you know , he was begging , he wanted to make a deal , he wanted to do whatever .
and this was just -- gadhafi was so strong on wanting to -- you know , because he knew what was going to happen .
but she was unyielding .
and frankly , it 's a total disaster libya right now .
you know , they have among the finest quality oils anywhere in the world .
their oil is so valuable , so good .
and you know who 's got a lot of that oil right now ?
isis , isis has it .
so we knock them out and isis now is all over libya and they 've taken over the oil .
remember -- i 've been saying this for years , folks , keep the oil .
should n't have been there .
if you get out , keep the oil .
and we should 've kept the oil and we did n't .
we did n't keep the oil anywhere , we got out .
we spent -- i 've been saying $ 2 trillion for years .
i know one thing , it 's now -- i 'm hearing $ 4 trillion .
i mean , you look at what we 've spent , $ 4 trillion to $ 5 trillion , in the middle east .
and think of it , what do we have ?
less than what we had 15 years ago .
it 's a disaster .
it 's a total disaster on top of which you have the migration which is destroying europe .
look at merkel .
i mean , what happened to her the other day in the election is incredible .
and i knew that was going to happen .
i mean , how could -- what , she 's supposed to be popular ?
germany is a disaster now .
france is a disaster .
i have friends -- they love , you know , the city of lights , right ?
i said to one of my friends the other day , " so how was paris this summer ? "
he always goes -- he said , " i do n't go there anymore . "
he said it 's not the same place .
it 's a totally -- that 's not paris anymore .
we 're destroying our planet .
we 're destroying what 's going on .
we 're destroying ourselves .
and you look at the election results from merkel , they were so bad .
and people were saying , " oh , i think she 'll be ok . "
i do n't think she 'll be ok .
i was saying -- two weeks ago , i said , why would she be ok ?
millions of people go into germany .
the crime is unbelievable .
the problems they 're having is unbelievable and hillary clinton wants to be the merkel of the united states , ok ?
i do n't think so .
i do n't think it 's going to happen .
i 'll tell you what , i do n't think it 's going to happen .
well , first of all , as i predicted years ago , iran is really controlling iraq .
and they 're in there now and they have -- we have just -- you know , they 've wanted it -- for decades and decades and decades they 've wanted it .
and we gave it to them .
we gave it to them .
because you had two militaries that were equal .
i was saying before , they fight , fight , fight , they rest .
they fight , fight , fight , they move 10 feet this way , 10 feet this way , they go home and rest .
we 've handed it to them on a silver platter .
you know , when i say about the deal that we made for them or with them on , you know -- on the whole -- you know , the $ 150 billion deal , i always said that 's one of the best deals i 've ever seen .
not really .
the best deal is we have given them iraq , with among the largest and finest oil reserves in the world .
we 've given that to iran .
we 've handed it to them .
what we 've done is incredible .
if we would 've -- if our presidents would 've just stayed home and gone to the beach , or even gone out and played golf every single day , played two rounds a day ...   ok , which obama almost does , but ...   but i think he 's played three -- look , golf is wonderful .
i think he 's played 300 rounds of golf or something like that -- more than 300 .
that 's more golf than many members of the pga tour .
ok .
so look , it 's a very serious problem .
but honestly , if they would 've just done nothing , we would 've been in much better shape .
forget about much better shape ; it would n't even be close .
the middle east now is a total catastrophe , between the migration and all of the problem -- and all of the death .
and i 'm talking death on both sides , folks .
i 'm talking death on both sides .
look at the people .
you know they blow up a city and they say two people were wounded .
all right ?
you know the real numbers , ok .
the real numbers are astronomical , astronomical .
and we started this whole thing .
and i 'll tell you what , we are going to solve the isis problem , but we have to also get back -- and we have to solve it big league and strongly and swiftly .
but we have to get back to rebuilding our country , because our country is going to hell .
our infrastructure is a disaster .
our roads , our bridges , our tunnels , our hospitals , our schools -- i mean , we go into afghanistan and build a school .
they blow it up .
we build it again , they blow it up .
we build it a third time , it 's still there , barely .
and yet if we need a school in virginia , or we need a school in brooklyn , new york , or we need a school in iowa , there 's no money .
ok , there 's no money .
what are we doing ?
what are doing ?
so , one of those things .
one thing , general , i have to say , the people in our military are amazing .
they 're amazing .
the people .
and we do n't take care of them properly , because the vets are not being taken care of .
and we do n't take care of them on the field either , because the equipment is old and tired and , you know .
a friend of mine has a son who 's been in iraq for quite a while , you know , going back and forth to different places over the middle east .
and the thing that -- i talked to him -- he 's a fine young man and has n't been wounded badly .
i do n't think he 's been really , you know , very much affected in that way .
but he said , the thing that is most discouraging to them over there , soldiers , is when he looks at the other side having better equipment than they do .
because , you know , we give the equipment to people that we think are on our side .
and then a bullet 's fired and everyone drops their weapons and runs and they come and pick up the weapons .
i always talk about the 2,300 humvees , armor - plated .
if our young people would have had those humvees they would n't be walking around without legs and arms right now believe me .
believe me .
but they take them .
they just take them .
so and he said it 's so discouraging for our soldiers when they look and they see the quality of equipment that the other side has .
isis , but the other side has .
and they see it 's better than what we have , and it 's our equipment that they 've taken .
it 's a very , very sad thing .
and those kids , they 're incredible people .
but they really lose their spirit when they see this kind of thing .
believe me .
well it 's not that they 've done some unbelievable things but they 're in the process of doing some unbelievable things , believe me .
i mean they 're very belligerent .
they have no respect for our country , none whatsoever .
and we have a situation that 's a potential catastrophe .
we have somebody that truly does have nuclear and nuclear capability .
the carrier maybe is not there yet , but it soon will be .
we have a man who is i mean he 's took over 25 years old i guess or around that , and now it looks like he 's getting more and more hostile .
and what i would do very simply is say , china this is your baby .
this is your problem .
you solve the problem .
china can solve that problem .
and remember this ...   it 's a big problem .
china has virtually totally control over north korea .
but they say they do n't because they want to tweak us .
look at our president .
they would n't even give him stairs to come out of air force one .
ok ?
all right ?
and they probably say on that , gee we could n't get them there , you know ?
when i saw that yesterday , did everybody see that ?
where he could n't get off the plane ?
so he had to get off on the kind that drop down .
but that 's really meant for the crew .
and so that when they fix the plane , they go up on those stairs .
the whole thing is just , it 's insane .
you know it 's interesting with the president because i saw that yesterday with the stairs .
he went to saudi arabia and the top people did n't greet him right ?
he went to cuba and castro , the brother , was not there to greet him .
and i said to myself , you know if that happened , i 'd land , i 'd hear he 's not there to pay respect to the country , not to him , to pay respect to our country .
i would say thank you very much folks , that 's ok .
close it up , boom .
let 's go back to washington .
i would .
i would .
let 's go back to washington .
and the scene on the airport tarmac yesterday where this young woman is fighting with these chinese people , they 're saying this is our country , this is n't your country .
wow .
wow .
and just so you understand , we are very good to china .
and i have great respect for china .
i make a lot of money with china .
china 's great .
i do n't hold it against them .
i hold it against our leaders for allowing this to happen with the trade and the trade deficits .
the trade deficits are massive .
$ 500 billion trade deficits .
i hold it against our leaders .
i respect china .
i mean , our people should be doing that to them .
but it does n't work out that way .
so , you know , nothing against china .
i have -- the largest bank in the world is a tenant of mine .
i sell condos to people in china .
i sold to everybody .
but -- but that we allow this to happen , and then we land on air force one -- and i was saying , in the history of air force one , which is long and distinguished , these are the only three times where incidents like this have taken place .
think of it .
lands in cuba ; does n't have high officials to greet him .
lands in saudi arabia , which we protect -- if we did n't protect saudi arabia , they would be gone , ok ?
they would be gone .
but lands in saudi arabia , and they do n't have the high officials to greet them -- the highest officials .
and i said to myself , " that 's probably the only time in the history of air force one where it goes into a country , lands , and you do n't have the appropriate officials to greet , " right ?
i really believe that .
and then you 're talking about a long history .
but then , yesterday , they wo n't give them stairs to get off the plane .
it is hard to believe , yes .
it 's such a long answer to that question .
it could go on for days .
phones , iphones , whatever they were , and just banging the heck out of them .
how about the acid wash of the e - mails that did n't mean anything ?
how about the 33,000 missing e - mails that were acid washed -- acid washed ?
and rudy was telling me , nobody does it because it 's such an expensive process .
ok , 33,000 .
now , these e - mails had to do with the wedding , i give that five ...   ... the wedding , and the other thing , of course , was the yoga classes , right ?
now , look , look , folks , this is a very sad time , i 'm telling you , for justice in this country .
it 's a very sad time .
i 've never seen anything like it .
never seen anything like it .
i mean , go a step further .
how about , i guess it was july 4 weekend -- the interview takes place on july 4 weekend with no taping , no tape recorder , no nothing , and right on the weekend , when everyone is , like , away or not watching , and then the information that they wanted was released on friday before labor day weekend , friday afternoon ?
everyone 's away .
no , no , this is a very sad situation that 's going on here .
this is a very sad situation .
i 've never seen it like this .
we 're like a third world country .
we 're like a third world country .
never seen anything like it .
but on november 8th , we will cure this problem .
ok , first of all , it 's not like we have a choice , ok ?
you know , somebody says , " oh well , we do n't have to spend " -- we do n't -- we 're not going to have a country if we do n't have -- this is one of the most dangerous times that we 've ever had .
some countries are going -- are -- you look at what 's going on with the weaponry being produced or bought by some countries , and it 's unbelievable .
and we 're not keeping up .
so this is n't like , " oh gee , well let 's invest it someplace else or let 's do this or that . "
when we build weapons , we 're also employing people , remember that .
so this is n't just a one - way street .
we 're employing a lot of people and when we have fighter jets -- i do n't know if you saw the documentaries .
about a month ago there was a documentary on the fighter jets .
they 're so old , that we ca n't get parts for them anymore , so they go to the plane graveyards and the museums where they have the planes in these museums .
and they take parts off the planes in the museums .
and then we have our young men and women flying these planes and they were complaining .
they said , " you know , when i came in , our planes were new and great , " and now they 're retiring , they 're getting ready to leave -- and some of them would like to stay .
but they 're getting ready to leave , and they look at , you know , using old parts -- literally from plane graveyards and museums is where they get the parts .
this is not the united states that we know , folks .
this is not the united states that we want .
this is not the united states .
so we 're going to rebuild our military .
we 're going to rebuild it with -- with the finest technology in the world , because we have the finest technology .
we have the finest technology but we 're not paying for it anymore .
and frankly , we 're paying for too much , and sometimes we 're going to companies that are political and we 're getting things that are n't as good -- you know this for years -- things that are n't as good as similar equipment that 's better for less money .
because they 're politically connected , the companies .
so , you know , i 'm -- i 've spent a tremendous amount of money .
we 're going to announce very soon how much we 've raised .
we 've raised a lot .
but i 've spent a lot .
i 've put -- i put more than $ 60 million into the campaign and ...   ... and i 'm going to be spending a lot more over the next two- month period .
think of it , we 're down to 63 days .
hard to believe .
who would 've thought -- this started on june -- this started on june 16th last year and now we 're down to 63 days .
and i must say , with your help , and with everybody 's help , we 're gon na -- we 're gon na do something .
we 're going to make america great again .
you know it 's about make america great again , so .
so i just want to thank everybody .
really amazing people .
and rudy , i want to thank you very much .
and laura and ivanka for being here .
and of course a truly great general right here , mike , thank you .
thank you .

with great people , thank you very much .
thank you .
we are making very big progress , i can tell you that .
and in iowa , virtually every poll has us ahead and we are going to win iowa .
so i just wanna thank you , i love being back here , i have so many friends in iowa .
and i 'll tell you what , i enjoyed the primaries and i 'm enjoying this even more , so thank you very much .
thank you very much .
spending time here really has been one of the -- really -- and i can say this , one of the great , great joys of campaigning .
and especially with all of the friends we 've developed so it 's fantastic .
but here 's what 's most important .
together , we 're gon na win iowa in november .
to be specific , november 8th , we have to be specific and we 're going to win the white house and we are going to make america great again , ok ?
we 're going to make america great again .
the white house will become the people 's house that will happen .
we will tackle and fix the problems that have gone unsolved for years and believe me , there are many of them .
we 're going to fix our crumbling infrastructure , renegotiate our horrible trade deals , they are disastrous .
free children from failing government schools , eliminate government waste and create a fair , simple and efficient tax code to add millions and millions or new jobs , which we need .
prosperity will rise , poverty will recede and wages will finally begin to grow and they will grow rapidly .
if they do n't , i 'll be very disappointed in myself , i will tell you .
this is a campaign about big ideas designed to help everyday people .
in recent days , we 've rolled out one new policy idea after another on taxes , on school choice -- so important -- on foreign policy , on defeating terrorisms , on rebuilding our military , on veterans care and unleashing american energy .
oh we 're having a good time , we 're having a good time .
go ahead , go ahead .
there 's always one .
thank you , men .
all right you can get them , thank you .
thank you .
thank you very much .
that 's great .
that 's all right .
single person .
they 'll end up with more publicity than all of you put together .
so we 're going to unleash american energy , we 're going to put those jobs back like you have not seen in your lifetimes , you have not seen before .
by contrast , hillary clinton is running a policy - free campaign .
she offers no ideas , no solutions , and only hatred and derision .
it 's true .
you saw that .
i 'm running to be a president for all americans , democrat , republican , independent , everyone .
whether you vote for me -- right ?
whether you vote for me , or whether you vote for someone else , i will be still your greatest champion .
right ?
our support comes from every part of american and from every walk of life .
we have the support of cops and soldiers and carpenters and welders and accountant 's and lawyers , the young and the old , and millions of working class families all over this nation .
we cover everybody .
this is a movement like nobody 's ever seen before .
it really is .
it 's a movement ...   they 're considering it a great phenomena .
i consider it a great phenomena if we win on november 8th .
that 's what i consider .
well my opponent slanders you as deplorable and irredeemable , i call you hard - working american patriots who love your country and want a better future for all of our people .
her comments displayed the same sense of arrogance and entitlement that led her to violate federal law as secretary of state , hide and delete her e - mails .
i mean , think 33,000 e - mails .
and that 's just one batch .
it 's a lot of wedding talk .
it 's a lot of wedding talk .
put classified information in the reach of our enemies , lied to congress and sell government favors and access through the clinton foundation .
it 's this attitude of arrogance that explains why hillary clinton made 13 phones disappear , including with a hammer - so the fbi could n't see them and why she bleached her e - mails after a congressional subpoena - that 's after the subpoena came .
this is n't before .
that 's after the subpoena came .
now the people who destroyed the e - mails are all pleading the fifth amendment in front of congress today .
how you seen ?
have you seen what 's going on in front of congress ?
fifth amendment , fifth amendment , fifth amendment .
horrible .
horrible .
and will anything happen ?
that 's going to be the question .
we 're going to find out .
anyone watching today 's hearing in congress knows that hillary clinton 's actions are far more corrupt that we ever imagined .
it 's happened today .
this is far bigger and a far bigger scandal than watergate ever was .
but with watergate , we had justice , we had a justice department that went after the people .
here 's something that just - nobody 's ever seen anything like this , folks .
what we 're witnessing is a first .
we 've never ever seen anything like this .
this is a scandal that threatens national security and that involves a multimillion - dollar pay for play scheme between the secretary of state and her foundation .
whether it 's her e - mails , her disasters in iraq , libya and syria , or her failures on the economy , of which it 's been disastrous , hillary clinton lacks the judgment , temperament and moral character to lead this country .
she does .
you know it .
everybody knows it .
everybody knows it .
everybody knows it .
in the words of a secret service agent posted outside her office , she simply lacks the integrity and the temperament to serve in the office . "
from the bottom of my soul , " he said , " i know this to be true . "
the policies of hillary clinton have produced death , destruction overseas .
it 's been disastrous .
no matter where you look , everything she 's touched has been a disaster and produced only failing schools , rising crime , job loss , shrinking incomes , and tragic poverty at home .
you want four more years of it ?
i had a feeling you might say that .
it 's so sad .
to see what 's going on in our country is so sad .
one in five american households do not have a single member in the labor force .
another 14 million people have left the labor force since 2009 .
and the national debt has doubled to nearly $ 20 trillion during the obama years .
i 'm running to reverse these policies and to create a future of prosperity for all americans -- all americans .
that includes , you 'll be happy to hear this , our family farms right here in iowa -- family farms .
the farmers are being left out in the cold .
family farms are the backbone of this country .
we are going to end the epa intrusion into your family homes and your family farms .
we are going to protect the renewable fuel standard , corn - based ethanol ; eliminate job - killing regulations like the waters of the u.s. rule ; and provide desperately needed tax relief .
our plan lowers the tax rate on family farms , down to 15 percent from 35 percent .
and you watch your farms grow .
you watch businesses all over the country grow .
you watch jobs come back .
it will be a beautiful thing .
and remember this , the double taxation of family farms at death .
you want to leave your farms to your children ?
it 's a disaster because it does n't happen .
so helping to ensure that the family farm , we have to make and we have to continue the tradition in iowa .
we want it to continue to thrive with your family .
and you 'll be looking down your family and you 'll be proud .
ok ?
so we 're going to take care of that .
my economic agenda can be summed up in three words : jobs , jobs , jobs .
that means we 're going to negotiate trade deals to protect our farmers , help them export their goods , and make money doing it .
because the way it is now , it 's impossible , and grow family farming in america .
we 're going to grow the farms .
my first day in office , i 'm also going to order a review of every single regulation issued over the last 10 years .
all needless , job - killing regulations will be canceled .
millions and millions of new jobs will come pouring into our country .
we 're going to lift the restrictions on american energy , which means lower electricity prices for our farmers and a half a million jobs a year at least , probably a number much higher than that .
and that will just be the beginning .
also , on my first day , i 'm going to ask congress to send me a bill to immediately repeal and replace disastrous obamacare .
this will instantly save another 2 million jobs at least , probably more than that .
by the way , remember jonathan gruber ?
anybody remember that name ?
people forgot , a long time ago but some people remember , i see that .
jonathan gruber was the architect of obamacare .
and he said -- remember they got him i guess on a cell phone or somehow , but they got him .
he said the lack of transparency was essential to passing the legislation and then he talked about , like , and i quote , " the stupidity of the american voter having to do with obamacare " -- " their stupidity , " an exact quote , " the stupidity of the american voter . "
now , this is what we get .
this is the hateful attitude of insiders like mr. gruber and hillary clinton .
and the voters have had enough of this .
on november 8th , we 're taking back our country , november 8th .
another major reform is going to be school choice .
and by the way , we 're getting rid of common core .
we 're bringing it local .
bringing it local .
totally getting rid of common core .
common core is a disaster .
all you have to do is look at the ranking of schools and see that we pay the most per pupil .
not even close .
and we 're down on the bottom of the list so ca n't do that .
gon na be a lot of changes , really good changes .
i 've outlined a plan to provide every disadvantaged child in america the freedom to choose the public , private , magnet , religious school of his or her choice .
this will help lift millions of poor african - american and hispanic children out of poverty .
the poverty is beyond belief .
you do n't think of it with this country .
the poverty is beyond belief .
it 's time to break up the failed democratic control over our inner cities and provide real hope and opportunity to every single community in this nation .
we have to bring everybody with us , everybody .
our policies on taxes , trade , regulations and education will grow incomes , boost jobs , and reduce poverty for african - american and hispanic communities .
we have to do it .
we have to being these communities into a great system and we have to bring these communities back .
we have to do it .
we need a new civil rights agenda for our time , one that promises safe neighborhoods , great education and a secured job .
nearly four in 10 african - american children live in poverty , including 45 percent of african - american children under that age of 6 .
45 percent .
fifty - eight percent of african - american youth are not working .
violent crime rose in america 's 50 largest cities last year .
homicides are up 50 percent in d.c. , and more than 60 percent in baltimore .
and everywhere else .
over 3,000 people have been shot in chicago since january 1st of this year , 3,000 people .
there 's a shooting , on average , every two hours .
to those suffering and hurting i say , " what do you have to lose ?
i 'll fix it .
vote for donald trump .
i mean that .
what do you have to lose ? "
" it ca n't get any worse . "
and i say this to -- i say this to the african - american community : it ca n't get any worse .
it ca n't get any worse .
forty percent poverty , 58 percent ca n't get jobs , youth .
it ca n't get any worse .
i 'll fix it , remember that .
and hillary just wants your vote and then she 'll say , " see you in four years . "
ok ?
bye - bye .
and you see what 's happened with our inner cities , where you ca n't walk down the street without being shot .
and you see the crime and all of the problems , what do you have to lose ?
i will fix it , believe me .
i 'll bring back millions of jobs , higher wages and great schools .
i will make your communities safe .
safety also means protecting our people from radical islamic terrorism , all right ?
i hate even saying this , but this just happened .
new video has just been released showing isis -- absolute butchers -- murdering innocent people in what has been called a syrian slaughterhouse .
the victims were dragged , then hung from meat hooks and then their throats were slit .
so we have no question , we 've got to name the problem , which hillary and , as you know , president obama , they wo n't do .
we 've got to name the problem and we 've got to solve the problem .
we 've got to solve the problem .
this is an evil , sadistic , monstrous enemy and we must keep these killers out of our country .
we know for a fact that isis is trying to infiltrate refugee flows -- no question about this -- and to recruit refugees after their entry into our country .
my opponent wants a 550 percent increase in syrian refugees over and above ...   then you 've got to vote for trump .
it 's very simple , very simple .
that 's a 550 percent increase over and above the obama administration .
thousands and thousands , 550 percent higher .
we have no idea who these people are , where they come from .
we have no idea .
we have no idea what we 're getting into .
we have no idea .
according to the senate subcommittee on immigration , her entire plan will bring in 620,000 refugees in a first term and cost $ 400 billion in lifetime benefits .
instead of providing free health care and jobs to refugees from around the world , we should rebuild our inner cities and help struggling americans get jobs all over our country .
and we all have a heart .
we all have a heart .
and so i support totally construction of safe zones in the region .
but we do n't want to pay .
we owe $ 20 trillion -- $ 20 trillion .
nobody even knows what it means -- $ 20 trillion .
so what we 're going to do is we 're going to get -- exactly -- we 're going to get the gulf states to pay for it .
we 'll lead it .
we 'll get them to pay for it .
they 've got plenty of money .
they just have nobody to ask them : you 've got to put up the money .
maybe tell them is a better statement .
at the same time as we rebuild our military , we are going to get our allies to pay their fair share .
only five of the 28 member nato countries meet their obligations to spend two percent of gdp on defense .
i will convene a summit of our european and asian allies to make sure everyone is sharing in the burden of security .
we are paying tremendous amounts of money to secure other nations , to protect and defend other nations .
we are going to be made whole .
we have no choice .
this is n't 30 years ago .
this is n't 40 years ago .
and i believe properly asked , we 'll be in a very good position and they will be very nice about it .
got to be properly asked .
and we 're going to then focus , and we have to focus , on radical islamic terrorism .
we 're going to be focused .
in all things , it 's time to put americans first .
we are doing that .
and we have to start taking care of each other , which we 're not doing .
tonight , i 'm going to roll out a plan to help our mothers and our families get affordable , quality childcare for their children .
and my daughter ivanka is going to be involved .
she 's the one ...   ... she is the one that has been pushing for it .
so , " daddy , daddy , we have to do this . "
and it 's true .
she 's very smart and she 's right .
on policy after policy , we 're going to provide opportunity , prosperity and security for all americans , which we do n't have now at all .
i 'm going to lower your taxes .
i 'm going to get rid of massive amounts of unnecessary regulations on business .
and in your life , we 're going to , as i said , repeal and replace obamacare .
i 'm going to appoint justices of the united states supreme court who will follow the constitution .
i 'm going to rebuild our very depleted military and take care of our great vets for the first time .
i 'm going to save your second amendment which is under siege .
and as you know , the nra endorsed me very early , earlier than anybody else .
and i 'm very honored by that endorsement .
but the nra , you know what they 're doing with our second amendment .
they 're fighting to save it .
it 's a very tough fight , another reason we need help and we have to have the help from the united states supreme court .
and if the wrong justices get appointed , starting with the great justice scalia , who unexpectedly passed away , so now we have a tie court .
if somebody takes his place , i think you can wave your second amendment , as you know it , you can wave it goodbye .
you can wave it goodbye .
so all of you that are big second amendment proponents and believers , you better get out there and you better vote or you 're not gon na have much of a second amendment .
november 8th .
i 'm going to stop illegal immigration and i 'm going to stop drugs from pouring into our country .
and yes we will build a wall and you 're right , mexico will pay for the wall .
they will pay for the wall .
we will build a wall , folks .
we got ta stop the drugs from pouring in .
we 've got ta build the wall .
the endorsement of all of the border patrol agents , first time they 've ever done that .
they 're endorsing a presidential candidate .
they said mr. trump , the wall is so necessary .
it 's a tool , for them .
another tool but one of the most important ones .
but they said to me the wall is so important .
and when i look at the drugs that pour in , pour in , they 're poisoning our youth .
you look at new hampshire , you look at pennsylvania , you look at ohio , you look at all the states .
one of the biggest things and in some cases their single , biggest problem is the drug inflow -- heroin .
we 're gon na stop the drugs from poisoning our youth and plenty of other people .
we will build a wall .
and i 'm going to -- so importantly -- renegotiate your horrible trade deals , especially nafta which is maybe the single , worst trade deal ever made by any country anywhere in the world .
its just a one - way street , right now , it 's a one - way street for jobs being ripped out of our country .
leaving the united states going to mexico and other -- it 's a one - way street .
we 're gon na have a nice , double - lane highway but much of the stuff is gon na be coming in the opposite direction at least for a long while until we can get ourselves even .
but remember this , bill clinton signed nafta .
so bill clinton signed the worst trade deal in the history of the world , folks .
i mean its not like -- its in the history of the world .
there 's never been a worse or a dumber deal for trade including tpp which is a disaster -- but tpp i do n't believe will be as bad as nafta .
and as you know , hillary clinton totally wants to approve tpp .
she said it 's the gold standard , then she heard of speech of mine and she said wow , i better say i 'm gon na reject it .
but we all know that if she wants , she would sign tpp -- as you know that , you know it -- she 'll sign the tpp .
and if she signs it , it will be catastrophic for not only iowa , for our country .
so we ca n't let that happen , we ca n't let that happen .
we -- in negotiating deals -- are going to do something very , very simple .
we 're going to put america -- but we 're going to put the american worker first , very simple .
it 's very simple .
it 's a very simple thing .
we do n't think in terms of this country -- it 's almost like i was thinking about it over the last couple of weeks , in particular .
it 's almost like they want these other countries to do so well , i 'm saying we are -- because nobody can make deals that badly .
but when you think about it , the reason they are bad is because of the donors , the special interests .
in many cases , they own these countries that are leaving the country and ripping us and we 're gon na stop it .
and it 's so easy to stop the globalists .
it 's so easy to stop .
and we 're going to stop it .
and i 'll tell you another thing , apple and our other major companies , will start making their iphones , their computers and other products in the united states , not in china , and not all over the world .
because we do n't make things here like we used to anymore .
we 're going to start making things in our country .
we 're going to start having the jobs , be jobs that are good for our country .
we 're going to rebuild our roads , our bridges , our tunnels , our highways , our airports , our schools and our hospitals .
american cars will travel the roads , american airplanes will soar the skies , and american ships will patrol the seas .
we do n't make ships .
american steel will send new skyscrapers into the clouds .
and american hands will rebuild this nation .
and american energy mined from american sources will power our great nation .
american workers will be hired to do the job .
we will put new american metal into the spine of this country , american metal and american steel .
i will fight for every neglected part of the nation .
and i will fight to bring us all together as one american people , which we 're not .
we are so badly divided .
imagine what our country could accomplish , if we started working together as one people , under one god , saluting one american flag , one american flag .
it 's time to break with the bitter failures of the past and to embrace a new inclusive and prosperous -- and i mean truly prosperous -- american future .
we could be better than we ever were , we can .
we can better , we can be greater than we ever were .
i know the people , i 've traveled , i 've seen thousand , i 've seen millions of people , incredible people .
we can be greater than ever before .
jobs will return , incomes will rise , and new factories will come rushing back to our shores .
once more , we will have a government , of , by and for the people .
we will make american prosperous again .
we will make america safe again .
we will make america great again .
thank you .
god bless you everybody .
thank you very much .
thank you .
november 8th .
thank you , everybody .

thank you very much , everybody .
thank you .
these are wild times .
these are wild times .
wow , what a beautiful building , and place , and all these people .
but honestly we always have a lot of people .
they just want to see this country do the right thing again , you know that .
we 're going to do the right thing .
we 're going to be a smart country again , very soon .
i want to begin by thanking my amazing wife , melania .
i do n't know if anybody saw her today .
she got up and gave an incredible speech and she -- she did a great job .
that takes -- takes a lot of courage , takes a lot of courage .
in five days we 're going to win the great state of north carolina and we are going to win back the white house .
great state , great people .
and the polls have been amazing .
one just came out , the rasmussen poll .
we 're three points up nationwide .
we 're leading in ohio , we 're leading in iowa , we 're leading in florida , we 're leading in north carolina , which is ...   we 're leading -- just came out two minutes ago , two polls , we 're leading in new hampshire .
we 're sort of leading all over the place , it 's a great honor -- it 's a great honor , honestly .
and this is not an easy thing to do , you know that .
but we had to do it .
you have to do it .
we have to do it .
we 're all doing it together .
so , i just want to thank you .
it 's like we have no choice , we have no choice .
well , hopefully , you voted or you 're going to vote early , but you 're going to vote .
but , remember , november 8th , so important .
and you get out there early , if you can .
real change begins with immediately repealing and replacing obamacare , you know that .
it 's just been announced that the residents of north carolina are going to experience a massive double - digit premium hike .
in the great state of arizona -- where i just left -- premiums are going up 116 percent , they 're not happy .
ninety - five of 100 north carolina counties will only have one insurer in the obamacare exchange next year , which is a catastrophe , frankly .
lots of luck in that negotiation , by the way , folks .
do n't worry about it , it 'll be dead .
we 'll kill it and we 're going to start all over again with a great one .
you 'll be spending a lot less money for much , much better health care , much , much less money .
in minnesota , where the premium increase will be close to 60 percent , the democratic governor said , the affordable care act is no longer affordable .
premiums are surging , companies are leaving , insurers are fleeing , doctors are quitting , and deductibles are through the roof .
you know , some people have 15 , $ 16,000 deductible .
yet hillary clinton wants to double down on obamacare , making it even more expensive .
it 'll be much more expensive .
did you ever see anything like what 's going on right now ?
if we do n't get rid of obamacare , it will destroy health care in north carolina and all over the united states , it will be the end .
i 'm asking for your vote so we can replace obamacare and save health care for every family in north carolina , and frankly in the united states .
real change also means restoring honesty to government .
where we have a problem with hillary .
there is important breaking news from last night .
it was reported that the fbi is conducting a criminal investigation into hillary clinton 's pay - for - play ...   ... corruption at the state department .
this is in addition to the fbi 's criminal investigation into her e - mails .
650,000 e - mails .
they say the federal bureau , that it 's likely to yield a very , very serious charge or an indictment .
i 'm just saying that 's what the newspapers are saying .
that 's what the reports say .
however , it was also reported that the political leadership at the department of justice is trying to protect hillary clinton .
telling fbi agents to stand down , and is interfering in the fbi 's criminal investigation .
perhaps that 's what happened the first time .
i would imagine that 's what 's happened .
further , it 's believed that no less than five foreign intelligence agencies successfully hacked into hillary 's illegal insecure server .
in other words , hillary 's corrupt criminal scheme put the safety of every american family in danger , that 's what 's happened .
hillary clinton is engaged in far - reaching criminal conduct and in an equally far - reaching criminal cover up , including the destruction of 33,000 e - mails , after receiving -- after -- after , can you imagine ?
can you imagine if i did that ?
they would say , he must immediately leave this race .
oh , boy .
thirty - three thousand e - mails were deleted after receiving a congressional subpoena .
that alone , folks -- that 's not the new group ; that 's the old group .
that alone is big problems , for which she got away with murder .
honestly , she has no right to be running , you know that .
no right .
but now she 's got bigger problems .
if she were to win , it would create an unprecedented constitutional crisis that would cripple the operations of our government .
she is likely to be under investigation for many years , and also it will probably end up -- in my opinion -- in a criminal trial .
i mean , you take a look .
who knows ?
but it certainly looks that way , certainly being spoken of .
americans deserve a government that can work and really has to work for them from day one , we 'll do that .
my contract with the american voter begins with a plan to end government corruption .
the plan includes a constitutional amendment to impose term limits on all members of congress .
it also includes a lifetime ban on government officials becoming lobbyists for a foreign government .
i 'd say that makes senses .
that sort of makes sense , right ?
i think so .
makes sense ?
i want the entire corrupt washington establishment to hear and heed the words we -- we , as a group -- all say right now , when we win on november 8th , we 're going to washington , and we are going to drain the swamp .
we 're going to drain the swamp .
at the core of my contract is my plan to bring back your jobs that have been taken away .
they 've been taken away .
north carolina has lost nearly half of its manufacturing jobs since nafta , a deal signed by bill clinton and supported by hillary .
the worst trade deal ever signed in the history of the world , believe me .
america has lost -- i never believe number when i give it -- but america 's lost 70,000 factories -- 70,000 .
you would n't think it 's possible .
seventy thousand factories since china entered the world trade organization , another bill and hillary - backed disaster .
we 're living through the greatest jobs theft in the history of the world , we are .
nobody has every lost jobs like we do .
defective contracts , negotiated by political hacks .
we have the greatest business people , greatest negotiators in the world in this country , we do n't use them .
we use political hacks that gave a contribution or a campaign contribution .
they end up getting jobs .
this is who 's dealing with china , with -- how about iran ?
how about the new iran deal done by ....   started by -- started by hillary clinton , and finished off by our great bicyclist , our great bicycle racer .
he 's in a bicycle race .
he breaks his leg in the middle of the negotiation .
i promise you , i will never enter a bicycle race .
i promise .
i swear , i swear .
i now have nearly -- and think of this one , 'cause i ca n't even believe it -- we have an 800 -- almost -- $ 800 billion a year annual trade deficit with the world .
ok ?
eight hundred billion .
who 's negotiating these deals ?
who 's -- who 's negotiating these deals ?
do n't worry , it 'll change -- it 'll change .
we 've got carl icahn , we 've got the greatest negotiators in the world , it 'll change so fast .
and these guys -- i have some of the best business leaders in the world .
they do it for sport , they do n't want money , they -- they 'll do it for sport .
the same special interests who shipped the jobs out of america are the people who 've given hundreds of millions of dollars to hillary clinton .
now , i just got back from florida .
i was begging for like a regular commercial , ivory snow , heinz ketchup , every commercial was a hit on trump , hit , hit , hit .
and almost all of them were untrue .
some were pretty good , actually .
but the most negative -- it 's horrible , and really i mean so much fabrication .
when you see the rusted out factories and empty buildings here , just remember hillary clinton 's policies and the policies of her people did this to you .
just look at the devastation .
pillowtex laid off 1,125 people , and took their jobs to mexico and other countries .
freightliner , one of your companies , laid off 500 people in mount holly , and moved their jobs to mexico .
you know , mexico , i was there three months ago .
i met with the president of mexico , nice guy , really good .
we 'll have a great relationship .
but mexico 's like a one - way street .
it 's a one -- they take the money , the jobs , the factories .
you know , we get drugs and unemployment is what we get .
flextronics ... 

  all right .
it 's a little early in this speech , but i promise , we will build the wall , believe me .
little early .
i was n't up to that part but , you know what , i wo n't be able to shut you up unless i say that , right ?
we will build the wall and what ?
mexico will pay for the wall .
flextronics laid off 312 workers in charlotte and moved their jobs to mexico and china and various other countries .
a trump administration will stop the jobs from leaving america , there will be consequences .
and we will stop the jobs , because you people have been affected much more than most , from leaving north carolina .
and i have great successful place in north carolina , in charlotte , right outside of charlotte .
right ?
trump national , it 's great .
lot of employees , i pay them a fortune , they 're very happy .
they do an unbelievable job .
it 's a real success .
look at this -- look at this .
my members , i have members , i have -- good .
do i do a good job ?
do i do a good job ?
wow , that 's fantastic , thank you .
that 's so nice .
i did n't know that .
sort of interesting .
i bought it for very little .
i did n't , you know , i just -- i bought it out of a bankruptcy , it 's this gorgeous job .
they did a good job , but they -- they got caught .
and i fixed it , ii spent a lot of money on it , right ?
i fixed it , and now it 's so successful and everybody loves it .
she said , on schedule , under budget .
it 's true , it 's true .
thank you .
she 's right about that .
that 's good .
well , it 's great to have you here .
thank you very much .
you know , it 's a great success , and it 's just a great state .
you know , it 's very interesting , so i have a lot of workers , they 're all over the country .
and when i buy things -- though i do n't think i 'm going to doing this too much longer , i 'm going to be running something else much more important .
but these workers , they travel .
they 're all over and they travel to different place , even to different countries .
they 're great , they 're crews .
and they 'll come in , and they came to north carolina .
and i said , how 'd you do , felix ?
how 'd you do , leo ?
how are you ?
how 's it going ?
they said , mr. trump , when we retire , we want to come to north carolina .
they loved it , it 's funny , they never said that .
they 've been to so many different places .
so there 's something about north carolina that 's special , and that area , that is so good .
so we love it .
the theft of american prosperity will end on november 8th , believe me .
from now on it 's going to be america first .
if a company wants to fire their workers in north carolina or in this country , move to another country , and try to ship their product back into the united states , we will apply a 35 percent tax to those .
and you know what 's going to happen , right ?
they 're not leaving .
they wo n't leave .
when that happens , they will not leave .
and if they do , that 's ok too , 'cause we 're going to make a fortune , all right ?
although their formula wo n't work -- their formula wo n't work .
it 's so simple to do , it 's so simple to stop .
and these people have n't wanted to do it .
a lot of reasons .
number one , in some cases they 're not smart .
but in other cases , they 're getting so much money from the special interests and the donors that want it to happen because they may own the company , et cetera , et cetera , that they 're not looking for the best interest of our company .
and you know what , i 'm going to have over $ 100 million in this campaign .
i do n't care about these people .
you know , the special interests ?
i used to be the ultimate special interest .
i mean in all fairness , i know the other side very well .
i also love our country , and our country was going bad .
it was going bad .
no more deals with iran where we give them $ 150 billion back .
where we give them $ 1.7 billion in cash .
how about that one ?
you know what that would be ?
that 's like you fill it up to the ceiling .
i tell you what , it 's hard to believe , so -- so we did this and we 're happy we did it .
and we 've created a movement , remember this , like nobody has ever seen in this country before , ever .
newt gingrich was on and he was talking , well , if you go back 150 years , there was a movement .
you know , i 'm saying , 150 years .
but it 's -- it 's been a great honor , i have to tell you .
it 's been a great honor and a great pleasure , and i 've gotten to know the people of this country , and they are unbelievable .
they 're unbelievable , right ?
they 're unbelievable people .
and we 're going to -- and i say it every once in a while , we 're going to have apple and other great companies start making their product in the united states .
ok ?
we 're going to do it .
a trump administration will renegotiate nafta and , if we do n't get the deal we want , we will terminate nafta and get a much better deal for our workers , much better .
and by the way , just to set the record straight because the crooked media -- you talk about dishonest people , these are the world 's most dishonest people .
i believe in free trade -- they have a very low rating right now , folks .
hopefully , i 've helped in that .
you could have done the greatest thing in the world , it 's like this total thing -- i 'm looking forward tomorrow to read those newspapers , or i 'm looking forward to seeing it on television .
something you do really , really well .
and then you see it and they say , man , that was bad .
boy , they made that look bad , you know .
they are bad people , i 'll tell you that .
and they try so hard , they try so hard to protect hillary clinton .
and you know what ?
i think the gig is up .
i do n't think it 's working any more , do n't think it 's working .
no , it 's not working too good .
we will also immediately stop the job - killing trans - pacific partnership .
that 's going to take the rest of your companies out .
as part of our plan to bring back jobs , we 're going to lower taxes on american business from 35 percent to 15 percent .
we 're the highest taxed nation in the world .
and we 're going to massively cut taxes for the middle class .
hillary clinton is going to raise taxes .
how can you do it ?
we 're the highest taxed nation in the world .
she wants to raise taxes .
not going to happen , folks .
we 're going to create something that 's so beautiful .
the biggest since ronald reagan -- biggest tax decrease .
we will also unleash american energy , including shale , oil , natural gas , and clean coal .
we 're going to put our miners back to work , and we 're going to put our steel workers back to work .
our plan will end the epa , which is a -- hey , look , it 's all wonderful , but it 's a disaster .
epa intrusion into your family farms and stop the double taxation of family farms at death .
you ca n't even pass them down to your children .
you ca n't pass small businesses down to your children .
very importantly , we will also work to rebuild from the damage , in your great state , caused by hurricane matthew , that was a rough one .
we will take care of our people .
we 're going to take care of the people of the united states .
we will become a rich nation again , but to be a rich nation , we must also be a safe nation .
hillary clinton wants a 550 percent increase in syrian refugees flowing into our country .
not going to happen .
her plan would mean generations of terrorism and extremism spreading in your schools and throughout your communities .
when i 'm elected president , we will suspend the syrian refugee program .
and we will keep radical islamic terrorists the hell out of our country .
sorry , we have no choice .
we have no choice .
right ?
a trump administration ... 

  great people .
a trump administration will also secure and defend the borders of the united states .
be nice , right ?
be nice .
it would be nice to have borders , do n't you think , right ?
and we will build the wall , as i -- we will build it .
it 'll be a great wall .
and the harder they fight , the taller it gets , ok ?
i give you that , i 'm telling you .
the harder they fight , the tougher it gets .
you know , they tried to build a wall in like ' 06 .
you know that .
and hillary clinton was in favor of it .
and they could n't get -- you wo n't even believe this story -- they could n't get their environmental impact statement approved .
did you know that ?
so here you have china in the south china sea , building one of the great , one of the biggest fortresses anywhere in the world , ripping the hell out of the sea .
excavators , they say the biggest ever used , ripping the sea .
they conceived of the idea -- listen to that .
you ok back there ?
no , no , they conceived of the idea , let 's say on a monday night , they started construction on tuesday morning , right ?
now they should n't be doing it , they 're not supposed to be doing it .
it against everything we sort of have with them .
but they -- boy , this is a great group .
say , whoa .
but china has no respect for us , and russia has no respect for us , and certainly no respect .
putin has no respect for hillary clinton .
he dreams -- he dreams of her becoming president .
you know who else dreams of hillary clinton ?
isis .
because isis formed while she was secretary of state in the vacuum that they left .
we should have never been in iraq , but we should have never gotten out the way we got out .
and that 's -- that was the birth of isis , now they 're in 32 countries .
and i watched her during debates , the debates -- did you see she had the debate questions to the other debate .
right ?
how about if donald trump had the debate questions ?
right ?
the electric chair , right ?
headlines , trump to leave race .
we demand trump get out now .
they had donna brazile ...   she cheated .
did you see her on television ?
she was unable to speak .
where did you get those questions ?
but she cheated , and they fired her from cnn , which they should have .
but why are n't they firing her from the dnc ?
she cheated .
now , but -- but i have a much bigger question , 'cause forget donna brazile .
she gave the questions to crooked hillary clinton , right ?
so -- and this is two or three times , do n't forget , they caught them like twice .
so they gave the questions , she gave them to crooked hillary .
why did n't hillary clinton report it ?
why did n't hillary clinton go to some ethics group ?
why ?
you know why ?
do you know why ?
do you know why ?
i know the answer .
you want to hear the answer ?
because she 's crooked hillary clinton .
right , very simple .
very simple .
crooked hillary .
and then she does these phony commercials about me , this and that , give me a break crooked hillary .
we received the first ever endorsement from our ice and border patrol office .
first time they 've ever endorsed a presidency .
they tell us the border crisis is the worst it 's ever been , and i can see that .
although a lot of people are probably flowing in because they think i 'm going to win , so they say , we better get this done right now .
the immigration officers warned in a letter that hillary 's plan is the most radical immigration proposal in united states history .
and that it will lead to the loss of thousands of lives , i see that .
it 's the most radical immigration plan in history .
as secretary of state , hillary clinton allowed many , many of the most dangerous and violent criminal aliens to go free because their home countries , very intelligently , would not take then back .
they did n't want killers , they did n't want drug lords , they did n't want gang members .
so we fly them into their country , and their country says turn that plane around -- or whatever they 're taking them in .
get out of here , we do n't want them , ca n't blame them .
but i promise you that never once -- whether it 's four years or eight years -- never once -- never once will we come back with somebody in that plane or whatever it may be .
when those people get out , they 're getting out .
and they 've hurt a lot of people .
hillary wants totally open borders , there goes your country .
and strongly supports sanctuary cities like san francisco ...   ... where kate steinle was murdered by an illegal immigrant , who had been deported probably more than five times .
in nearby landis , north carolina , 20-year - old , leanna newman and her unborn child were killed by an illegal immigrant drunk driver with two prior deportations .
leanna 's killer had two pair of dui convictions , three convictions for driving with a revoked license , a conviction for assault , and numerous other charges .
and people that knew him said , please incarcerate him .
a trump administration will impose tough mandatory minimum prison sentences for deported illegal immigrants .
very tough requirements , minimum sentences for deported illegal immigrants who come back into our country .
now , if they come back in and we tell them you 're out , good luck , do n't come back , but if you come back , it 's five years .
then if they come back a second time , it 's 10 years .
and then a third time , it 's 15 years .
guess what 's going to happen ?
they 're not coming back , right ?
they 're not coming back .
sort of simple .
it 's amazing what common sense can do , is n't it ?
we will also cancel all federal funding to sanctuary cities .
and this crime wave , it 's a tremendous crime wave , will come to an end .
we will repeal obama - clinton defense sequester , and rebuild our badly depleted military , which we need so much .
greatest people on earth in our military .
north carolina will be a major part of this effort , with new advanced flying beautiful planes .
is n't it nice to have nice , new planes ?
from seymour johnson air force base , anybody know it ?
yes .
marine battalions at camp lejeune -- i 've been to camp lejeune .
and more troops and resources we will supply for fort bragg .
i 'm honored to have the endorsement of more than 200 top admirals and generals , and 22 medal of honor recipients .
so we have many more coming .
they 're not thrilled with hillary , that i can tell you .
our new foreign policy will put america first .
hillary brought death and disaster to iraq , syria , libya , she empowered iran , and she unleashed isis with the vacuum -- through the vacuum , they came .
remember , obama called them the junior varsity ?
now she wants to start a shooting war in syria , in conflict with a nuclear armed russia , that could trigger world war iii .
she always talks about me .
see what i have is a winning temperament , i have a winning temperament .
hillary is an unstable person .
she is an -- i think she 's probably spent $ 500 million on phony ads .
the best thing i have is my temperament .
we know how to win -- we know how to win .
you got to know why you want to win too , she has no idea .
and she does n't win .
we do n't win any more as a country .
we do n't win at trade , we do n't win with our military -- we ca n't beat isis -- we ca n't beat isis .
isis will be defeated quickly , you watch .
and when we go in an attack a mosul , if we have to do it -- which we should n't because if we got out the right way , we already had mosul .
and i 've been complaining for four months , from the time i heard it .
we will be attacking mosul in four months .
i said , no , do n't tell me that , maybe they 're not meaning it .
the element of surprise , folks .
and you see how tough it is now .
we 're going to be attacking mosul because we think isil leaders are in mosul , and if we attack them , we will capture those leaders .
it 's four months , right ?
go .
i said , why are they saying this ?
these leaders -- i mean , look , let 's face it , they 're pretty smart people , right ?
so i said , why are they saying this ?
whatever happened to the element of surprise ?
why are they saying this ?
and then three months go , and then two months -- and then i hear , in two months , now it 's one month .
and finally about a week , two weeks ago , i heard next week at about 3:15 we 're going to start the attack .
these people are stupid , they 're stupid people .
and it 's turning out to be tough -- it 's turning out to be tough because they 're tough as hell , and they 're prepared .
they 're using human shields , can you imagine this ?
this is like not since medieval times .
chopping off heads , drowning people in steel cages .
we have to do it .
killing christians , if you 're christian , forget it .
killing everybody .
but why are n't we fighting the right way ?
why are n't we fighting to win ?
why are n't we -- why are n't we doing things right ?
hillary and our failed washington establishment have spent $ 6 trillion on wars in the middle east that we do n't win .
and now it 's our worst nightmare .
we 've spent $ 6 trillion , we could have built our country twice -- we could have rebuilt our infrastructure , our country , twice .
and forget about the $ 6 trillion , the lives that have been lost .
the tremendous number of lives .
is there a doctor in the house , please ?
a doctor ?
ok .
yes , take your time , please .
thank you , thank you .
these are great people .
some of these people have been here for seven hours .
ok , keep that fan going .
that 's good .
that 's good , darling .
you just take -- take it easy , take it easy .
she looks great .
she 's going to be good .
do we have a doctor , please ?
come on , let 's go .
come on , fellas , let 's go .
get a doctor .
ok ?
there we go , there we go .
she 's our greatest .
been here for seven hours that girl .
you take it easy , honey .
just take it easy and come back as soon as you feel good .
ok ?
we 're saving your place , and if they do n't let you in , i 'll get down there myself .
ok .
ok ?
thank you very much , fellas .
thank you , doctor .
they 've dragged us into foreign wars that have made us less safe .
they 've left our borders wide open , is n't it amazing ?
we fight for their borders .
we want borders , we fight for their borders , but our borders we leave open .
explain it .
and they 've shipped our jobs and wealth to other countries , our politicians .
to all americans i say it is time immediately for new leadership .
so , in concluding , just think about what we can accomplish in the first 100 days of a trump administration .
we 're going to have the biggest tax cut since ronald reagan .
we 're going to eliminate every single -- every unnecessary job- killing regulation .
the businesses , you 're -- they 're putting them out of business .
and hillary 's going for big , big tax increases , folks .
enjoy them .
we 're going to cancel every illegal obama executive order .
we 're going to rebuild our very depleted military with the greatest people on earth working in our military .
and speaking of great people , we are going to finally take proper care of our veterans , ok ?
it 's about time , about time .
we 're going to have school choice , and we 're going to put an end to common core once and for all .
we 're bringing our education ...   we will support the men and women of law enforcement -- these are great people ...   ... save our second amendment , which is under siege .
... and appoint justices of the united states supreme court who will uphold and defend the constitution of the united states .
it 's time to cut our ties with the failed and bitter politics of the past .
hillary clinton is the candidate of yesterday .
hey , can we take another four years of obama ?
i do n't think so -- i do n't think so .
remember three weeks ago ?
they had 800 people that they were going to deport .
rough ones -- these were rough ones , these were rough ones .
they were all set , and somebody made a mistake .
congratulations , they became citizens of the united states of america .
but that was n't the only mistake .
because of 800 , it became 1,800 people .
and i said that , he said , send them back .
i said , ok , reverse your error , they say , we ca n't do that , it 's against the constitution .
i said , really ?
these people -- these people .
we are the movement of the future .
we 're asking for the votes of republicans , democrats , independents , and first - time voters , and they 're all over the place .
you see that on the line .
november 8th , you got ta get and vote .
november 8th , november 8th .
you can send in some of those little things , but november 8th you got to be there .
who 's going to be there on november 8th ?
who 's already voted in some form ?
all right , get out there .
no matter how you feel .
if you are so sick , if your doctor gives you the worst prognosis , says , jimmy or jane , i 'm sorry to tell you , but you wo n't be around for two more weeks .
does n't make a damn bit of difference , you get out of bed and you vote .
we 're going to be around -- we 're all going to be around a long time , right ?
we 're fighting for every citizen who believes that government should serve the people , not the donors , and not the special interests .
we 're fighting to unlock the potential of every american community and every american family who hope and pray and yearn for a much better future for their children , for their family .
with your vote , we are just -- this is so hard to believe -- five days away from the change you 've been waiting for your entire life .
you 're going to remember this vote on november , right ?
you 're going to remember this vote -- thank you .
audience ; trump !
trump !
trump !
thank you .
you 're going to remember this vote because november 8th we 're going to start when -- even the psychology 's going to change , even though we 're not going to be there until january -- middle of january -- the whole psychology is going to change .
our country is going to start winning again .
and we 're going to start winning again .
it 's going to be the most important vote , and you 're going to be proud of your country again .
and hopefully you 're going to be proud of your president .
and remember this ...   ... this is a great moment , and i 'm the messenger , i 'm a messenger .
it 's a movement for all of us .
i 'm a messenger , and it 's a message of common sense , and it 's a message of so many different things .
but it 's going to be unbelievable .
it 's going to be unbelievable .
we 're going to make america wealthy again .
we 're going to make america strong again .
we 're going to make america safe again .
and , of course , we are going to make america great again .
thank you , everybody .
god bless you , everybody .
god bless you .
thank you .
wow !
what a great room .
on quick notice -- on quick notice , we did n't bring any so - called -- so - called " stars " along .
we did n't need them .
you know , the reason hillary has to do that is nobody comes for her deal .
she ca n't fill a room .
we can get stars .
we do n't need them because we just want to make america great again and we know what to do , right ?
we do n't need that .
that 's almost like a form of cheating , right ?
that 's like when she got the questions from donna brazile to the debate , right ?
and she did n't report it .
she went into the debate .
is n't that amazing , by the way ?
that took place and not one of the dishonest crooked media mentioned that .
nobody mentions it .
nobody mentions it .
they go after donna brazile -- who cares -- but nobody says , " wait a minute , she got the questions .
she went into the debate . "
nobody says anything .
why did n't she reported to ethics or to somebody ?
you know why , because she is crooked hillary , that 's why , folks .
in three days , we are going to win ...   ... the great state of nevada ...   ... and we are going to win back the white house .
we need you all to go and vote on tuesday and bring your friends and family to those polls .
we 're going to have a big , big victory .
they did n't get the kind of vote that they needed to stop us on tuesday .
you know what that means , right ?
they did n't get the numbers they were looking for .
you 're going to have a big , big day .
tuesday is our day in the state , so ...   ... tuesday , so you got to get out there .
we 'll never have this opportunity again , not going to happen again .
reno and northern nevada can carry this state and can carry us all the way to washington and the white house .
this will be our last chance , but do n't let crazy , broken harry reid and his corrupt political machine ...   ... decide this election for you -- crazy harry .
remember he said four years ago that he found out with surety that romney did n't pay tax and called him also lots of names , remember ?
and then it turned out he did pay tax , but the election was over , and they said -- " but you lied , " he said , " we won , did n't we ? "
you know , i was right about that , but that 's a political hack .
for instance , it 's being reported that certain key democratic polling locations in clark county were kept open for hours and hours beyond closing time to bus and bring democratic voters in .
folks , it 's a rigged system , it 's a rigged system and we 're going to beat it .
we 're going to beat it .
i 've been saying it 's a rigged system .
obama who does nothing but campaign for hillary because she ca n't campaign for herself , he 's out there and he said , " donald trump is hurting the foundations of our country by talking about rigging the election . "
excuse me , eight years ago he was talking about chicago and how they rigged the votes , ok ?
this guy give -- you know what i say to president obama , " give me a break . "
phony .
and it 's up to the great people of washoe county to get it done , get it done .
you got to get it done .
you are the people , you 're going to get it done .
and do n't forget , in this state , i 've spent hundreds of millions of dollars building things .
we have great success in this state .
i have great , great employees .
so i feel i have an awfully big state .
i come here all the time .
i love it .
but to do that and to win , you have to get every single person that you know to the polls with you .
you have to vote with your heart and i know you 're going to do that .
you have to vote with your soul to make america great again .
real change means restoring honesty to our government .
thank you everybody , thank you .
boy , a lot -- a lot of spirit in this room , huh ?
a lot of spirit , a lot of spirit .
the place is great .
the people here are great .
the people in this state , from day one , first time i came here many , many years ago , the people in this state are amazing , so great .
the state is going to have a very big impact or the outcome of our country -- forget the election -- on the outcome of our country , because if we win on tuesday , our country is going to start winning again .
we 're going to start winning again .
we do n't win anymore .
as you know , the fbi has reopened its criminal investigation ...   ... into hillary clinton , following the discovery of another 650,000 emails , probably including the 33,000 emails that hillary destroyed after receiving a congressional subpoena .
they are also ...   folks , folks , folks , she should n't be allowed to run .
ok ?
and i 'm not talking about what happened last friday , i 'm talking about right now .
she should n't be allowed to run .
when you look at general cartwright , four - star general , for doing almost nothing by comparison , could serve five years in jail .
that happened two weeks ago .
general petraeus destroyed their lives for doing nothing by comparison .
how about the young man took pictures of his submarine ?
he wanted to have some pictures .
the submarine is not like it 's a brand new submarine ; it 's many years old .
they put them in jail for a year , and she does all of these different things .
they 're also conducting a second criminal investigation into hillary 's illegal pay - for - play corruption at the state department .
there 's virtually no doubt that fbi director comey and the great , great special agents of the fbi will be able to collect more than enough evidence to garner indictments against hillary clinton and her inner circle despite her efforts to disparage them and to discredit them .
if she were to win this election , it would create an unprecedented constitutional crisis .
in that situation , we could very well have a sitting president under felony indictment and ultimately a criminal trial .
it would grind government to a halt , of course , that 's what we have right now under obama anyway .
we need a government that can work and work well from day one for the american people .
that will be impossible with hillary clinton , the prime suspect in a massive far - reaching criminal investigation .
her current scandals and controversies will continue throughout her presence and will make it virtually impossible for her to govern or lead our country .
now i do n't think it 's going to matter because she 's not going to win , but we 'll -- let 's ...   ... let 's go through the scenario .
by the way , does anybody speak better about this subject than our legendary mayor rudy giuliani ?
does anybody ?
huh ?
he 's the greatest .
come here .
special guy .
new york was crime - infested , filthy , dirty problems all over the place .
rudy came in .
he straightened it out ...   ... straightened it out .
thank you , rudy , for everything .
if she ever got into the oval office , hillary and her special interests would rob our country blind .
you see what 's going on ?
at the heart of this election is one simple question , will our country be governed by the people or by the corrupt political class ?
if we win , the corrupt politicians and her special interests will lose .
if they win , the american will lose .
it 's just that simple .
the political elites in this country have used their power to enrich themselves at your expense .
they have run the government for their benefit and they 've profited from your pain .
you see what 's happening .
and by the way , folks , you 're highly sophisticated .
and i always say i have the smartest people , smartest ...   ... the smartest .
and i have the most loyal people ...   ... by far , and that 's borne out in every poll they take .
in fact , they are very worried , you know , with all the polls that are happening .
we 're winning all over the place .
we 're winning in iowa .
it just came out , we 're seven points up .
we 're winning in ohio .
we 're winning in new hampshire .
we 're winning in north carolina .
i think we 're going to win the great state of pennsylvania .
based on turnout , i think we 're going to win florida .
and you know where else we 're going to win ?
right here .
so this is the choice on tuesday , either we will have a government run by the donors and the special interests who control everything and control crooked hillary clinton ...   ... or we will have a government run by you , the american people .
that 's what we 're doing .
there has never been a movement like this in the history of the united states .
and you know i could n't say that if it were n't true because of these very , very dishonest reporters back there in the media .
they would call us out for that .
there 's never been a movement like this , never been the crowds which they never show , by the way , they never show .
this was set - up so recently and look at all the people .
there 's never been the crowds .
there 's never been the enthusiasm , and there 's never been the loyalty that we have , never been in this country .
and someday they 'll start reporting it correctly , but i almost think it does n't matter because we get it , we get it .
total dishonesty .
and while they are there , show the cameras , show the crowds , fellas .
go ahead , show the crowd , show the crowd .
go ahead .
show the crowd .
spread those cameras .
they never like .
the only time they do it is where there 's a protester because that 's a negative thing .
it turned out that the protesters we used to have were bought for $ 1,500 a piece , and they were told to go in and incite riots .
and they cover the protesters .
but last night , obama had a protester ...   ... and nobody would listen to him .
he kept saying the same thing over and over -- nasty -- over and over and over .
but they never showed the protester with him because that 's a negative thing .
they just kept it on him , but it was a pretty bad scene .
let me tell you the way he acted .
if you want a government that will secure your borders , stop the massive inflow of refugees ...   ... lower your taxes , bring back your jobs ...   ... grow your economy and protect your family always .
vote for donald j. trump .
tuesday , that 's going to be a big day .
thank you , everybody .
what a crowd .
what people , what people .
greatest people in the world .
i 'll tell you , folks , this country all over , no matter where we go , no matter where we go , we were in hershey , pennsylvania , the other night , unbelievable .
we did numerous -- all over north carolina , unbelievable .
no matter where we go -- florida , texas .
remember last week , they were reporting texas is in play -- texas .
texas is in play , you know , like that was bad because she was supposed to win texas easily .
i said , " i 'm surprised texas is in play because i was there , we have this massive crowds . "
actually , rudy was there .
we had a line that must have been two miles long , getting in , and that 's because the place was small .
those were the people that did n't get in and so i said , " i 'm surprised . "
two weeks , texas is in play , unfortunately , that turned out to be a lie also , the media .
maybe they meant -- maybe they meant texas is in play for trump , i guess , because ...   ... the great state , great state of texas .
so , a man calls up , good guy ,   he calls up one of the .
he said , " yeah , i 've been hearing for three to four weeks texas is in play . "
well , we have the longest lines i 've ever seen and most of those people have " trump " on their shirt , and they have trump buttons and trump hats .
and to the best of my knowledge , they will not be voting for hillary clinton .
so , as soon as the media looked at this record - setting vote , they took texas is in play out of their vocabulary .
these are really dishonest people .
my contract with the american voter begins with a plan to end government corruption and take your country back from the special interests .
and i used to be on the other side until june 16th of last year .
i went from being an insider .
boy , did i become an outsider fast ?
well , that was the quickest outsider .
but you know what , i love this country .
i saw what was happening .
it was going bad .
we were really going bad .
if you look at the iran deal , $ 150 billion , look at a deal where we give these guys the number one terror nation , we give them $ 1.7 billion in cash -- cash ...   ... for hostages , which was a lie when he said it was .
remember it was supposed to be $ 400 million .
think of this , $ 400 million in cash , but that turned out to be wrong .
it was $ 1.7 billion .
you know what , $ 1.7 billion in cash , you could fill up that whole side of this big arena .
i want the entire corrupt washington establishment to hear the words of all of us .
when we win on november 8th , we are going to drain the swamp .
we 're going to do it .
we 're going to bring in the right people .
we 're going to really turn things around .
this is ridiculous what 's going on .
real change also begins with immediately repealing and replacing obamacare .
you know i should n't tell you this , you 've probably seen it , but i always use your state as the example for the premiums going up .
you know why ?
we think you have the highest in the country .
i do n't want to tell you that .
i do n't want to tell you that .
but i always use your state .
they 're all going up through , but you have the highest .
you 're going to experience a massive double - digit premium hike .
the great state , right , the great state that you live in is going up numbers i will not tell you .
in arizona -- i 'll give you an example -- they 're going up 116 percent .
ten of nevada 's 16 counties will have only one obamacare exchange insurer to choose from next year .
good luck with that negotiation .
good luck with that negotiation .
good luck .
and your numbers are going to be really high , but i 'm not going to depress you , but i know what they are .
i want you to be happy when you leave , but actually you will because we 're going to get rid of obamacare anyway , so you 're not going to have to pay .
do n't bother .
we 're going to have great health care at much less cost and it 's going to be much better .
what 's going on with obamacare is -- never had a chance to work .
and i said it before they even submitted it for a vote , and then obama started lying that you can keep your plan , you can keep your doctor .
he said it 28 different times .
and in all fairness , even the democrats that were n't going to vote for it got swayed by him .
they wished they did n't do it now , i will tell you .
premiums are surging , companies are leaving , insurers are fleeing , doctors are quitting , and deductibles are through the roof .
you have deductibles , sometimes $ 15,000 .
yet , hillary clinton wants to double down on obamacare , making it even more expensive .
i 'm asking for your vote so we can repeal and replace obamacare and save health care for every family in nevada ...   ... and for every family in this country .
at the core of my contract is my plan -- so important -- to bring back your jobs .
america has lost one - third of its manufacturing jobs since nafta , a deal signed by bill clinton and supported by hillary clinton .
america has lost 70,000 factories -- can you believe that number ?
i always thought it was a mistake .
i 've been saying that number now for two weeks , i ca n't believe it -- 70,000 .
i always think maybe 700 , maybe 7,000 -- 70,000 factories since china entered the world trade organization , another bill and hillary backed disaster .
we are living through the greatest jobs theft in the history of the world .
nobody has ever stolen jobs like other countries have taken them from us .
a trump administration will stop the jobs from leaving america so easily , and we will stop the jobs from leaving nevada .
the theft of american prosperity will end and it will end immediately .
we will renegotiate nafta , and if we do n't get the deal we want , we will terminate nafta and get a much better deal for our workers and our companies .
we will also immediately stop the job - killing trans - pacific partnership , which hillary clinton lied in the debate .
by the way , did i win those debates please ?
thank you .
she kept saying she 's in debate prep -- for weeks , she was in debate prep .
i kept saying , you know , i felt guilty .
i said there must be something to this debate prep .
she just did n't want to go out campaigning .
it was a good excuse .
i mean , when you 're doing this -- she 's doing it for 30 years , right ?
more .
i always say you 've been doing it for so long , if you want to change the tax code , why did n't you do it ?
you want to fight isis , why did n't you do it ?
i mean , she created isis really .
it came out of the vacuum .
now , isis is in 32 countries .
she wo n't do anything with isis .
but why do n't you fix the things you want to fix ?
you talk about it , why do n't you do it ?
you want to bring back jobs , bring back jobs .
in new york state , she said she was going to bring back jobs .
upstate new york , it became a total disaster .
everyone left .
you have to see it today .
greatest people , but you have to see what happened to upstate new york .
as part of our plan to bring back jobs , we are going to lower taxes on american business from 35 percent to 15 percent .
we are going to massively cut taxes for the middle class , the forgotten people .
and we will rebuild our inner cities , which are absolutely a shame .
watch out .
and for the african - american community and for the latino community ...   ... remember this , the inner cities -- so unfair -- the democrats have run them for over 100 years , in many cases , unbroken .
and every four years they come in and ask for your vote -- we want your vote .
and after you give them the vote and they win an election , they say , " see you in four years . "
they do n't do anything .
the crime is horrible .
you ca n't walk to a store and get a loaf of bread without being shot , in many cases .
you see what 's happening .
the crime is horrible .
the education is practically non- existent .
it 's so bad and jobs are gone .
there are no jobs .
and i say , we 're going to fix the crime .
we 're going to fix the education .
we 're going to bring back jobs .
we are going to rebuild the inner cities .
and the african -- it 's true , it 's not   going to be hard .
there were such potential .
we have such incredible potential in our inner cities .
we 're going to fix our inner cities .
and the african - american community , the latino community , you 're going to be so thankful you 're going to love it .
and i say to you and i say this because the democrats have let you down for decades and decades and decades , i say to you what the hell do you have to lose , right ?
what do you have to lose ?
i will fix it .
we are going to fix the inner cities .
we 're going to bring back jobs .
we 're going to make them safe .
there 's straighten out education .
we will become a rich nation once again , but to be a rich nation we must also be a safe nation .
hillary clinton wants a 550 percent increase in syrian refugees pouring into our country .
her plan will import generations of terrorism , extremism and radicalism into your schools and into your communities .
when i 'm elected president , if you vote , otherwise it 's not going to work out , you got to vote .
we will suspend the syrian refugee program ...   ... and we will keep radical islamic terrorists the hell out of our country ...    we got no choice -- we got no choice .
thank you .
a trump administration will also secure and defend the borders of the united states .
and yes , we will build a wall .
we will build a wall .
it 'll be a great wall , and it have big doors in it , and people will come through those doors but they 'll come through those doors legally .
we want people to come in legally .
and we 'll stop the drugs from pouring into our nation and destroying our youth and poisoning all -- so many people , so many people .
we 're going to stop the drugs from pouring in , believe me .
as secretary of state , hillary clinton allowed thousands of the most dangerous and violent criminal aliens to go free because their home countries very intelligently would not take them back .
they did n't want murders .
they did n't want gang members .
they did n't want drug lords , but i promise you this , when we bring them back to their countries , not once -- not once will they ever come back to us in this life , not once .
hillary supports totally open borders -- there goes your country and strongly supports sanctuary cities like san francisco where kate steinle was murdered ...   ... by an illegal immigrant deported more than five times .
thousands of americans would be alive today if not for the open border policies of obama and clinton .
on mother 's day in 2009 , carson city - born 17-year - old rene angulo was out driving looking for a job when he was shot in the head and brutally murdered by a previously deported illegal immigrant gang member , who everybody that knew this gang member said , " please get him out of the country .
please put him in prison .
he must be incarcerated . "
rene was pulled from his vehicle and left to die on the side of a road .
a good samaritan who thought there had been a car accident stopped to help and was violently shot .
the illegal immigrant killer had a previous conviction involving murder in carson city , but was released and allowed to roam free and did further damage after that .
other story after story , we could go for days and days and days , this story after story one worse than the other .
a trump administration will end this nightmare of violence .
we will protect american lives .
we will cancel all federal funding to sanctuary cities .
we will stop illegal immigration .
and by the way , i have tremendous support within the hispanic - latino community -- tremendous ...   ... because they came here -- they came here legally .
they want to see borders .
they have their jobs , which are great jobs .
they have their homes .
they want to keep their homes .
they want to keep their jobs .
they want other members of their families to come into our country and they will come in .
they will come into our country .
we 're going to have other members of your families come in .
they 'll go through a process , and it wo n't be a process like you have now where people wait 10 and 12 years before they get in .
we 'll have a streamlined beautiful process .
it will be efficient .
it will be efficient , not the way it is now .
so we 've had this tremendous outpouring of love from the hispanic community .
a certain radio station in new york said the owner of the station was in another show , and it 's all spanish , and he was being interviewed .
and he said , " you know , i do n't know about this whole thing with trump because everybody that calls us -- every single person is in favor -- is in favor of trump , so we 're going to have tremendous -- i think we 're going to have tremendous hispanic - latino support on tuesday , tremendous .
i think it 's going to be tremendous .
we have one of those guys from -- from the hillary clinton campaign .
how much are you being paid , $ 1,500 ?
all right .
take him out .
when we win the election on tuesday , you will finally have a government on your side fighting for your community and protecting your family .
by the way , folks , while we 're at it , great ...   

  ... very much .
thank you .
nobody said it was going to be easy for us ...   ... but we will never be stopped , never ever be stopped .
i want to thank the secret service .
these guys are fantastic .
they do n't get enough credit .
they do n't get enough credit .
they 're amazing people .
so let 's get back to repealing the defense sequester .
right now it does n't sound that exciting , but it 's very important because we 're going to rebuild our badly depleted military .
that means brand new modern aircraft for naval air station , and you know what i 'm talking -- fallon , who 's fallon ?
any ?
not far from here , the naval air station .
we have aircraft that 's 18 and 20 years old .
we have aircraft much older than that .
we ca n't even buy parts to some of our aircraft .
they 're so old , they do n't make the parts anymore .
i 'm honored to have the endorsement of more than 200 top admirals and generals and 22 medal of honor recipients .
now see those medal of honor recipients , when they saw that scene over there , they would have brushed off the secret service and they would have jumped in .
they 're incredible people , but we have now many , many more coming also to endorse the whole -- the whole campaign .
it 's been a beautiful thing .
hillary clinton brought death -- i love you , too -- and disaster .
and i want to thank all of these people , wow !
you were amazing .
thank you , fellas .
i saw what you are doing .
that 's a tough group of people right here .
thank you .
thank you .
it 's really great .
i saw that .
that was pretty amazing .
nobody messes with our people , right ?
nobody .
she brought death and disaster to iraq , and syria and libya , and she empowered iran and she unleashed isis across the world .
she created a vacuum and isis was formed .
now she is saying she 's going to get rid of it .
she has no chance of getting rid of isis .
we are going to get -- we get rid of it fast .
and when we go in to do something , we do n't announce it four months before we do it like mosul .
we do n't announce that we 're going into mosul to get the leaders who leave about two minutes after they hear the first announcement .
now we 're going to do things right , folks .
hillary and her failed establishment have spent $ 6 trillion on wars in the middle east , and now the middle east is in worse shape than it 's ever been by a factor of 10 .
they have dragged us into foreign wars that make us less safe .
they shipped our jobs and wealth to other countries , and they 've left our borders wide open at home .
we send our troops to foreign countries to defend their borders , but our politicians refuse to defend our borders .
figure that one out .
that will change on november 8th .
a trump administration will never ever put the interest of a foreign country before the interest of our country .
from now on , it 's going to be america first .
to all americans i say it 's time for change , it 's time for real leadership .
we 'll have real leadership .
just in finishing up , i want you to think about what we can accomplish in the first 100 days of the trump administration .
we are going to have the biggest tax cut since ronald reagan ...   ... and she is going to raise your taxes substantially .
we will eliminate every unnecessary job - killing regulation .
we will cancel every illegal obama executive order .
we will protect religious liberty -- have to do it .
rebuild our military , and we are going to take care for once and for all of our great , great veterans ...   ... for once and for all .
they 've been treated very badly .
we will provide school choice and put an end to common core .
we 're bringing education local ...   ... and support the great men and women of law enforcement .
great people , amazing people .
we 're going to save our second amendment , which is under siege ...   ... so important .
we have the nra total endorsement , earliest endorsement they have ever given , and appoint justices to the supreme court of the united states who will uphold and defend the constitution of the united states .
it 's time to cut our ties with the failed politicians of the past .
hillary clinton is the candidate of yesterday .
folks , she 's been doing this for 30 years and it 's only bad .
we are the movement of the future .
we 're fighting for every parent who lost their child to drugs and crime and gang -- right , right ?
and gang violence , so much gang violence .
we 're fighting for every community whose jobs and dreams have been ripped out and shipped to other countries .
no more , no more , no more .
and we 're fighting for every american who believes government should serve the people , not the donors and not the special interests .
i 'm asking you to dream big because with your vote , we are just -- can you believe this ?
three days away from the change ...   ... you 've been waiting for your entire life .
amazing .
you 're going to remember this day and you 're going to remember this evening , and you 're going to remember the vote that you cast whether you 've casted or whether you will be casting it , and you 're going to say it was the single greatest vote you ever have cast because that 's when your country started winning again .
we 're going to win with trade .
we 're going to win on the border .
we 're going to win the war on drugs .
we 're going to knock the hell out of isis .
we have no choice .
we 're going to win so much you 're going to get tired of winning , you 're going to say , you know , this guy is winning too much because you 're not used to winning because we never win .
we do n't win with war , we do n't win with trade , we do n't win on the borders .
you 're going to win so much you 're going to love it .
get out and vote .
get out and vote , because together we will make america wealthy again .
we will make america strong again .
we will make america safe again .
and we will make america great again .
god bless you .
thank you everybody .
god bless you .
thank you , and thank you very much .
thank you so much .
what a great honor and privilege to speak to you today .
the american legion is very , very special , so thank you very much .
i want to thank commander dale barnett , and your vice commanders , and your constitutional officers .
you have all done such an incredible job .
the fact is , you are incredible people .
the men and women of the american legion represent the best -- absolute best of america .
strength , courage , selfless devotion .
your organization and its members have done so much to defend our country , our flag , and to advance the cause of amnericanism , not globalism .
remember : american first .
america first .
you 're one group i do n't have to tell you to remember it also .
you know it .
we are in your debt very deeply .
i will never let you down .
together we 're going to work on so many shared goals , but i want to begin by discussing one goal that i know is so important to you .
promoting american pride and patriotism in america 's schools .
very important .
in a trump administration , i plan to work directly with the american legion to uphold our common values and to help ensure they are taught to america 's children .
we want our kids to learn the incredible achievements of america 's history , its institutions and its heroes , many of whom are with us today , i can tell you .
including , by the way , two special people , mayor rudolph giuliani and senator jeff sessions .
they 're right here .
we will stop apologizing for america .
and we will start celebrating america .
we will be united by our common culture , values and principles , becoming one american nation , one country , under one constitution , saluting one american flag , and always saluting it .
the flag all of you helped to protect and preserve .
that flag deserves respect , and i will work with the american legion to help to strengthen respect for our flag .
you see what 's happening , it 's very , very sad .
and by the way , we want young americans to recite the pledge of allegiance .
in addition to teaching respect for the flag we also have to make sure we give our military the tools they need to defend that flag and to deter violence and aggression from our foreign adversaries of which there are many .
we will rebuild our depleted military and pursue a state of the art missile defense .
we will do it based on those three very famous words -- peace through strength .
we will make sure our soldiers , sailors , airmen and marines have the best equipment , training , tools anywhere in the world .
nobody will be able to compete with us and we will ensure that they have the best medical care in the world , both in service and when they return home as civilians .
that will require a total reform of the veterans administration .
it 's in very sad shape .
i deal with veterans all the time .
we have tremendous veterans ' support , and the stories that i hear are so sad .
we 're not gon na have that anymore .
i 've laid out a 10-step v.a. reform plan that you can review on my website .
here are the basics .
i will appoint a secretary of veterans affairs whose personal mission will be to clean up the v.a. the secretary 's sole   will be to serve our veterans , not bureaucrats , not politicians but our great veterans .
i 'm going to use every lawful authority to remove and discipline who fails our veterans or breaches the public trust , which is what it is .
it 's a public trust .
i will appoint a commission to investigate all the wrongdoing at the v.a. , and there 's plenty , and then present those findings to congress as the basis for reforming the entire system .
we 're going to get you fantastic service .
it 's going to happen , believe me .
we 'll ensure every veteran in american gets timely access to top- quality care including the best care in the world for our female veterans .
the veterans health system will remain a public system because it is after all a public trust .
but never again will we allow any veteran to suffer or die waiting for care .
that means veterans will have the right to go to a v.a. facility , or the right to see a private doctor or clinic of their choice , whatever is the fastest , and best for veterans .
people are not going to die waiting on line to see a doctor .
it 's not going to happen .
the veteran will be in total control .
should i have the honor of serving as president , we 're also going to start facing the world with confidence again .
we are going to uphold the laws of the nation and defend our sovereignty and security , and we are going to defend our border .
i just came back from a wonderful meeting with the president of mexico , where i expressed my deep respect for the people of his country , and for the tremendous contributions of mexican - americans in our country .
and they have made tremendous contributions .
many are in our armed service ; you know how good they are .
i want to again thank him for his gracious hospitality and express my belief that we can work together to accomplish great things for both countries .
that 's mexico and the united states .
we agreed in the meeting on the need to stop the illegal flow of guns , drugs , cash and people across the border and to take out the cartels .
have to get rid of those cartels and we have to do it quickly .
our country is being poisoned .
our country is being poisoned .
we 're also talking about and talked about the importance of working to keep jobs and wealth in our hemisphere .
a more prosperous mexico means fewer illegal border crossings and a better market for products made in the united states .
when i 'm president , i 'm going to look at every trade deal we have across the world , and see what steps must be taken to protect american jobs and create new opportunities for the american worker .
the american worker has been forgotten and we 're not going to let that happen .
we will fight for every last american jobs .
and we will have friendships with other countries , but they will not take advantage of us any longer .
that i can tell you .
we 're going to show ourselves and the world again what a strong and growing american economy can look like .
we 're going to give major tax relief to every worker and small business in this country , bring thousands of new companies and millions of new jobs back to our shores , and unleash an american energy revolution , which we have to do .
we will also be appointing justices of the united states supreme court , who -- you will be very proud -- you will be extremely proud when we name them .
you 've already seen some of the people and the kind of people that we want .
justice scalia -- passed away recently -- serves as an absolute perfect focal point .
he is the kind of person we want on the united states supreme court .
i will nominate men and women to the court who meet the high standard of justice scalia , and judges who have the wisdom and integrity to follow the law and just not make it up any way they want to make it up .
above all , these next four years , i will be uncompromising in the defense of the united states and our friends and our good allies .
we are going to end the era of nation - building and create a new foreign policy , joined by our partners in the middle east , that is focused on destroying isis and radical islamic terrorism .
we will extend the hand of friendship to any nation that will work with us in good faith on this vital mission .
and we want this mission to be accomplished quickly .
at the same time , we will change our immigration screening procedures to help keep terrorists and extremists out of our country .
we have enough problems .
our country has enough problems , we do n't need that one .
and that includes stopping the influx of syrian refugees .
incredibly , my opponent , hillary clinton , wants a 550 percent increase in refugees from that region .
hard to believe .
i , on the other hand , want to build a safe zone overseas and use the money saved to invest in america .
we do not want to let anyone in our country who does n't support our values and who is not capable of loving our people .
it 's time to create a new american future for you , your children and all american children yet to come .
in this future , we will have an honest government that includes an honest state department , not pay for play .
she probably did n't mention that to you yesterday .
government access and favors will no longer be for sale , and important e - mail records will no longer be deleted and digitally altered , which is something they just found out two days ago .
bleached .
bleached .
expensive process .
why ?
why ?
33,000 e - mails bleached , through a very expensive process .
you ask yourself , " what 's going on ? "
we will also have an efficient and responsible federal budget .
no more waste .
no more throwing away taxpayer dollars .
once more we will have a government of , by and for the people .
it will be ...   it will be an inclusive society , one that offers hope and opportunity to every part of this country , including our inner cities .
we will ensure that every child in this land , including african- american and hispanic children , are put on the american ladder of success , meaning a great education and a great job , which they 're not getting now .
we will follow the noble example of our military men and women working selflessly across all different races and incomes and backgrounds to achieve unity and accomplish amazing things .
you are amazing people .
just in case you did n't know that , ok ?
amazing people .
ladies and gentlemen of the american legion , i ask today for the honor of your vote .
working in unison , we can deliver the real american change our country so desperately needs .
we will make -- we will make , america strong again .
we will make america proud again .
we will make america safe again .
we will make america great again .
thank you very much and god bless you .
thank you .
thank you .
thank you very much .
thank you .
thank you , everybody .
thank you very much .
first of all , we 've made a great choice in picking governor mike pence , did n't we ?
did n't we ?
thank you .
thank you , karen .
what a group , mike .
this is big by any standard .
do you agree ?
this is -- look at it .
and here is the good news , there are thousands of people outside trying to get in .
do you believe what 's going on ?
so it all began for me in new hampshire .
it 's the first state we won .
remember the promise i made ?
we will stop those drugs from pouring in , poisoning your children , poisoning everyone else , and that we 'll work very hard to get people off that addiction , it 's going to happen .
we 're going to do it .
i said i was going to do it , and we 're going to do it .
so i want to thank everybody in new hampshire .
thank you .
also , my family was here .
i said , come on .
my children were here , and i just -- tiffany , jared , ivanka .
now , we know the pence family , very , very famous .
and by the way , i just looked at the numbers , indiana is doing very well .
you have done a great job .
a great job .
thank you .
thank you , karen .
don jr. , vanessa , eric and lara ...   ... they 've been such a big part .
and you know , i 've been reading about all these surrogates going all over for hillary clinton , but i had my family .
i had the best surrogates of all , they were all over .
they were all over , so -- so i just want to thank you .
ivanka , maybe on behalf of the family say a couple of words ?
go ahead .
i. 
  well , i was not planning on speaking tonight , but i did want to be here on this last night prior to election day to support my father .
i am so incredibly proud of him , what he 's accomplished today , and i know tomorrow will be another great day .
and then he will get to the real work of making this country great , of working for you -- the american people .
and he will never , ever let you down .
thank you .
we 're grateful and god bless .
d. 
  thank you very much .
so again , go and enjoy it .
let 's go have a good time .
and by the way , we are going -- right after this -- to michigan because michigan is in play .
and i may get there a little bit late , but they 're waiting .
we have thousands and thousands of people .
the polls just came out , we 're leading in michigan .
we 're leading in new hampshire .
we 're leading in ohio .
we 're leading in iowa .
we 're leading in north carolina .
i think we 're doing really , really well in pennsylvania .
and i do believe we are leading in florida ...   ... so it 's going to be amazing .
it 's going to be amazing .
so , i want to thank everybody .
and , folks , go ahead .
and , mike , i 'll see you in a little while .
i think mike is going to come with me to michigan , right ?
thank you .
thank you every much .
thank you .
thank you .
thank you .
thank you , everybody .
thank you very much .
well , you know , we said we want to finish you off in new hampshire because of the incredible relationship i have , but who would have expected this , right ?
who would have expected this ?
this is some group .
so , a couple of things , two people i have a lot of respect for , really like as people , incredible people .
and because they 're so important to the area , i thought i would give you this information .
they 've told me i can do it , so i will do it .
tom brady ...   ... great guy , great guy .
great guy , great friend of mine , great , great champion , unbelievable winner .
he called today and he said , donald , i support you , you 're my friend , and i voted for you .
and i want to tell you , this guy is a champ , and he 's a winner , and he is a great person .
so i said , so , tom , you voted for me , you support me , am i allowed to say it tonight to this massive crowd in new hampshire ?
he said , if you want to say it , you can say it , ok ?
tom , that 's what a champion is all about .
and another person -- very close to tom actually for a lot of reasons , you 'll understand in a second , i have unbelievable respect for him , champion in every way .
and i was in the plane and they handed me a letter , and it was from coach belichick .
and he wrote me the most beautiful letter and it was only two hours ago .
so we called back , we said , do you think that mr. trump could read that letter to the people of new hampshire ?
and he said , absolutely if you 'd like .
he said , but do me a favor , do n't read that letter .
let me send one that 's a little bit different .
so i think that he was going to take all the good things out , right , like most gutless people do -- gutless -- but he 's the opposite , he 's a champ .
so he sent me the new letter and it was much better .
it was stronger .
see , most people do n't do that , most people do the opposite .
i do n't want to get involved .
this guy is a true champ , so he writes , coach belichick , congratulations on a tremendous campaign .
you have dealt with an unbelievable slanted and negative media , and have come out beautifully -- beautifully .
you proved to be the ultimate competitor and fighter .
your leadership is amazing .
i have always had tremendous respect for you , but the toughness and perseverance you have displayed over the past year is remarkable .
hopefully , tomorrow 's election results will give the opportunity to make america great again . "
best wishes for great results tomorrow .
bill belichick .
so i just want to ...   ... i just want to -- it is funny though when he said i really want to redo the letter , i really did expect to get a little bit --- because i understand how most people work , but most people are n't the coach .
so tom brady and bill belichick , i want to thank you both .
and go win a good super bowl or whatever you want to do .
boy , what a combination .
never been a better combination .
but when you know them personally , like i do , they 're even better .
tomorrow we are going to win the great state of new hampshire ...   ... and we are going to take back the white house .
we are going to deliver historic once in a lifetime change .
when the people of this country from florida to minnesota , from new mexico to right here in new hampshire , step onto the voting booth , tomorrow , there is one fundamental question for you to consider -- do you want america to be ruled by the corrupt political class or do you want america to be ruled again by the people ?
i am asking for the votes of all americans , democrats , republicans , independent , first - time voters -- and there are a lot of those first - time voters , folks .
who are so desperately in need of change .
can you imagine having hillary clinton for four years ?
can you imagine ?
hillary clinton 's only allegiance , is to herself , her donors and her special interests .
my only special interest is to you , believe me , is to you .
that 's why i 'm doing this -- that 's why i 'm doing this .
the corrupt special interest have stolen your jobs and shipped your wealth to other countries .
they betrayed the working class of this country .
tomorrow , the american working class will strike back .
it 's about time .
real change begins with immediately repealing and replacing obamacare .
it 's just been announced that americans nationwide are going to experience a massive double - digit and triple - digit premium hike .
over 90 percent of the counties in new hampshire are losing obamacare insurers next year , lots of luck in your negotiation .
honestly folks , not going to matter , we 're going to have it terminated .
we 're going to have great health care at a fraction of the cost , so it 's not going to matter .
i want you to leave here happy tonight .
premiums are surging , companies are leaving , insurers are fleeing , doctors are quitting and deductibles are going through the roof .
yet , hillary clinton wants to double - down on obamacare , making it even more expensive .
i 'm asking for your vote so we can repeal and replace obamacare and save health care for every family in new hampshire and in our country .
real change also means restoring honesty to government .
let 's start by getting rid of clinton .
that 's the best .
by the way , did you ever see anything like happening right now ?
have we ever seen anything like this ?
four - star general james cartwright , two weeks ago , for a tiny , tiny infraction by comparison , can go to jail for up to five years and might very well .
general petraeus ' life was destroyed , reputation totally destroyed for something that was a fraction of what hillary clinton did .
what a shame , what a shame , so sad .
hillary clinton is the most corrupt person ever to seek the office of the presidency of the united states .
she threatened national security , she sold her office to the highest bidder , and then to cover he tracks , she deleted 33,000 e- mails after receiving a congressional subpoena .
that in itself disqualifies her from running from president .
she should n't be allowed to run .
she 's being protected by a totally rigged system .
i 've been saying it for a long time .
drain the swamp .
hillary has shown contempt for the working people of this country .
her campaign in wikileaks has spoken horribly about catholics and evangelicals and so many others .
they got it all down folks , wikileaks -- wikileaks .
and what podesta said about her , bad instincts .
he said she 's got bad instincts , and bernie said to her -- said bad judgment , right ?
so do we want a president with bad instincts and bad judgment ?
i do n't think so .
we 're going to stand up for the catholics and we 're going to stand up for the evangelicals .
wikileaks just released another debate question -- hillary got another one just one hour ago .
i said i have to mention it .
you know , if you go to west point or annapolis or the air force academy , and if you get the questions to a test and if you do n't report yourself , they throw you out .
sad , sad .
to me it 's one of the bad things .
a lot of my people they say , let 's not talk about that , i should talk about it .
donna brazile got the questions .
donna brazile took those questions and gave them to crooked hillary , right ?
and crooked hillary did n't do anything .
she took the question .
and i 'll tell you what , if i were bernie sanders , i would n't be too happy , and she probably did it with me , too , but did we win those debates or what ?
would n't matter -- would n't matter .
so she got those questions .
she never turned them in , folks .
remember , you 're dealing with a very dishonest person .
my contract with the american voter begins with a plan to end government corruption and to take our country back from the special interest .
i want the entire corrupt washington establish to hear these words from all of us .
when we win tomorrow , we are going to drain the swamp .
that is something -- that is something .
at the core of my contract is my plan to bring our jobs back .
new hampshire has lost one in four of its manufacturing jobs since nafta , a disaster , a deal signed by bill clinton and supported by his lovely wife , hillary .
amazingly , america has lost -- listen to this -- 70,000 factories since china entered the world trade organization , another bill and hillary - backed disaster .
we are living through the single greatest jobs theft in the history of the world -- there 's never been anything like this .
a trump administration will stop the jobs from leaving america and we will stop the jobs from leaving new hampshire , believe me .
we will stop those jobs .
if a company wants to fire their workers , leave new hampshire and move to another country and then ship their products back into the united states through what will soon be a very , very strong and powerful border .
we will make them pay a 35 percent tax on those products .
and you know what 's going to happen , you know what 's going to happen ?
they 're never leaving , they 're staying -- they 're staying .
we will renegotiate nafta , stand up to china and stop the job - killing trans - pacific partnership .
as part of our plan to bring back jobs , we are going to lower taxes on american business from 35 percent to 15 percent .
we will massively cut taxes for the middle class .
hillary clinton is raising taxes very substantially .
we will cancel billions in global warning payments to the united nations , billions and billions and billions of dollars and nobody knows where it goes and nobody knows what it 's used for .
i know where it goes , it goes into a lot of people 's pockets .
that 's where it goes .
and we will use that money to invest in environmental infrastructure in the united states of america if you do n't mind , right ?
and we will rebuild our inner cities , and the african - american community and the hispanic community ...   ... will love what 's going to happen because the inner cities , in so many cases , are like living in hell .
crime is rampant , horrible .
you ca n't walk to a store without getting shot .
schools are terrible , as bad as it gets , and there are no jobs .
we 're going to bring back the jobs .
we 're going to fix the schools and make them terrific .
and we 're going to make the inner city safe .
we 're going to make them safe .
and as you know , the democrats , for longer than 100 years in many cases , unbroken chain have been in - charge of the inner cities .
and you know what they want , they want your vote , then they say , see you in four years , folks .
they do nothing .
i will fix the inner cities .
and i ask you though what do you have to lose ?
believe me , we will do such a great job , what do you have to lose ?
and we 've been doing very well .
if you look down in florida , look at those long lines .
we have been doing very well with the african - american community and with the hispanic community ...   ... and all of the dishonest press , they 're saying , what 's going on here ?
what 's going on ?
among the world 's most dishonest people -- look at all of them , look at all those cameras .
look at all of them , look at all of those cameras .
why do n't you twirl the cameras , folks ?
go ahead , twirl them .
show the crowd .
show the crowd .
they do n't do it .
and outside you have another 10,000 who was just reported -- 10,000 .
these are the world 's bad people , they 're dishonest people .
they 're very , very dishonest -- not all of them .
but i would say most of them , you know .
you heard -- you heard the coach , he mentioned it , too .
i guess , he 's got his difficulties with them also .
now they 're very dishonest .
i will be a champion for all americans against this unfair and corrupt system .
we will become a rich nation again .
but to be a rich nation , we must also be a safe nation .
hillary clinton wants a 550 percent increase in syrian refugees coming into the united states .
ca n't do it , folks -- ca n't do it .
her plan will import generations of terrorism , extremism and radicalism into your schools and throughout your communities .
when i 'm elected president , we will suspend the syrian refugee program ...   ... and we will keep radical islamic terrorist the hell out of our country , believe me .
a trump administration will also secure and defend the borders of the united states and , yes , we will build a great , great wall .
and do n't forget , new hampshire , i promised you -- i promised you , when i won new hampshire in the primary , i promised you , i said , we are going to stop the drugs from flowing in -- we 're going to stop them from flowing in .
we 're going to stop the drugs from poisoning your children and plenty of others .
we 're going to build a wall .
i was endorsed by so many people having to do with the borders , the border patrol agents , ice all endorsed donald trump , such an honor for me because these are great people that want to do their job .
but i promised you , that if i got this far , you were the first ones and you were the first ones that really taught me how bad the drug epidemic is .
i met with your police -- who are incredible people , by the way -- and they explained ...   and i guess , it made a big impact on me because i love new hampshire , i love the beauty of new hampshire -- the trees , the winding roads , the lakes , the rivers , the whole thing , the little streams .
so i meet with people and i say , what 's your biggest problem , and they 'd say , heroin .
i 'd say , heroin ?
it made such an impact because it just does n't seem to work with the beauty of your area .
but i said we would stop it , we will stop it 100 percent and then we are going to work on helping the people who are so seriously addicted , ok ?
we are going to do it .
hillary clinton totally supports open borders , there goes your country .
which means unlimited drugs pouring into your states , pouring in to our country .
hillary also strongly supports sanctuary cities like san francisco ...   ... where kate steinle was murdered by an illegal immigrant and deported probably more than five times .
we will cancel all federal funding to sanctuary cities , believe me   all of it .
we will stop illegal immigration , stop the drugs from pouring into our country and dismantle every last criminal gang and cartel threatening our citizens .
we will also repeal the obama - clinton defense sequester and re- build our badly depleted military we needed so badly now .
this will be national effort .
and a major part of this re- building will be the portsmouth naval shipyard .
it 's going to be a big part of it , folks , a big part .
we have now the smallest navy , by the way -- does anyone know this ?
the smallest navy that we 've had since world war i.   we 're going to build it back up .
i 'm honored to have the endorsement of more than 200 top admirals and generals and 22 medal of honor recipients , and the list goes on and on , and up and up every day .
hillary and her failed establishment have dragged us into foreign wars that have made us less safe and that we never win -- we never win .
we fight and fight and fight .
like mosul , we give them four months notice , we 're going into mosul .
what about the element of surprise ?
remember the old element of surprise .
we are going to be attacking mosul in four months .
we will hit them from the rear , we will hit them from the front , we will paratroop in , we will do all sorts of things .
then three months , they say again , then two months , then one month , and a couple of weeks ago i 'm hearing , we expect to be attacking mosul next week .
these are smart people .
one of the reasons we 're attacked is we want to get the leaders of isis who we feel are staying in mosul .
they left after the first mention that we 're going to attack .
do n't these people understand it ?
what a bunch of people we have .
what a bunch of people .
i mean , we got a president , all he wants to do is campaign for crooked hillary .
that 's all he wants to do .
you know , he takes that big -- that big 747 air force one , those big old engines that spew the stuff , right ?
and he flies it all over the place , campaigning for hillary .
and then he talks about let 's not affect the ozone layer .
what a joke -- what a joke .
and he should n't be campaigning , he should be out trying to get our jobs back , trying to secure our borders , building up our military , stopping our drug problem .
amazing , amazing .
and hillary ca n't fill a room .
look at this is called , filling a stadium , and i have no guitar and no piano , right ?
i mean , she gets jay - z and beyonce the other night .
the language , right , the language was so bad .
people were insulted ; they started walking out .
hillary then walks under the stage , hugs them , hugs them , hugs them , and then she says , donald trump uses such foul language .
give me a break .
did you hear what he was saying ?
and tonight she has bruce springsteen .
what they do n't say is this , so they perform actually in the case of jay - z , they were leaving because some of these people never heard language like that , they started to leave .
so what happens , they come in , listen to the musician , which i think is demeaning to the -- it 's actually demeaning to the political process .
they listen -- because she ca n't fill a room .
if she 'd come her she 'd have -- i 'm telling you -- she 'd have 100 people sitting on the first place .
we 're going to have -- we have 28,000 people including the people outside ...   ... more than beyonce , more than jay - z , more than anybody .
and we do n't have a guitar .
what we do have is we all have together a great plan to make america great again .
that 's what we have .
and also in all fairness , is there any place better than a trump rally to be ?
i mean , really ?
there 's no place better .
so these politicians have shipped our jobs and our wealth all over the world and left our borders wide open at home .
that will change immediately upon our victory , believe me , immediately .
got to get out and vote .
tomorrow is the day .
got to get out -- we got to get out and vote .
one thing i 'll say about new hampshire , i 'd never disappointed new hampshire , but new hampshire has never disappointed me .
remember in the primaries they said , donald trump , you know the phony polls , these people .
they said , donald trump may not win new hampshire .
i said , that 's surprising , i think i 'm going to win -- i think i 'm going to win .
and then we won by 18 points ...   ... with a lot of people .
you know , we have 17 people .
you know what else ?
right next door in massachusetts where they 're represented ...   now i know why you like belichick so much and tom -- tom brady .
by the way , is there a better reference than tom brady and bill belichick who are ...   i do n't know -- i do n't think so .
you know , in massachusetts we had -- what 14 people left .
they go like this , boom , boom , boom .
i think we had 14 people left .
we got 49 and - a - half percent of the vote , and these dishonest pundits said , donald trump has not broken 50 .
how do you break 50 when you have 14 people ?
but we won -- we won massachusetts , we got over 49 percent .
and massachusetts is represented by pocahontas , right ?
pocahontas .
represented by pocahontas .
oh , she 's terrible .
she is so -- she is just a terrible person , terrible .
you know , clinton thinks she is doing herself a favor to use this woman as a surrogate .
everybody that watches her , they say , she is a terrible human being , she is terrible .
so , i do n't know who 's going to challenge her , but whoever does , you know , i hear a very great baseball pitcher is going to challenge her .
he 's a great -- and you know what , he 's a great guy .
i do n't know if he 's going to do it , but he 's a great guy .
but elizabeth warren is terrible -- and you know what , she 's a terrible -- let me tell you , she 's a terrible senator .
take a look at what she 's passed , nothing , nothing .
and in the senate , everybody hates her .
they do n't want to even deal with her .
so i 'll make you a deal .
you can have pocahontas , i 'll take tom brady and bill belichick , ok ?
and from now on , it 's going to be america first .
to all americans i say it 's time for change and time for leadership .
just think about what we can accomplish in the first 100 days of a trump administration .
we 're going to have the biggest tax cuts since ronald reagan , even bigger , and hillary is going to raise your taxes substantially .
we 're going to eliminate every unnecessary job - killing regulation .
we will cancel every illegal obama executive order just ...   he goes out and plays golf so much that he does n't have time to convince congress to go -- let 's do it the way it 's supposed to be done , right ?
right ?
i mean , he 's played more golf than most people in the pga tour .
this guy like is it over 300 rounds .
hey , look , it 's good .
golf is fine , but always play with leaders of countries and people that can help us , do n't play with your friends all the time .
we are going to protect religious liberty ...   ... re - build our military , and we are going to finally take care of our veterans properly , our veterans properly .
our veterans have been very mistreated , and i want to thank them for the tremendous support -- and the military -- the tremendous support i get .
they do polls and it 's like , forget it .
it 's like i 'm not running against anybody .
and our law enforcement has been so great .
they 've been great .
we 're going to provide school choice and put an end to common core .
we 're bringing our education locally .
and we will support the men and women of law enforcement , great people .
... and save our second amendment , which is under siege ...   ... and appoint justices to the united states supreme court who will uphold and defend the constitution of the united states .
think of this , i started on june 16th , long time ago from way back .
can you imagine this ?
and now i can say you have one day , but it 's no longer one day , it 's like just like tomorrow morning .
who is going to vote tomorrow morning , please ?
i promise you this , i will never ever let you down , i promise you that .
i did n't need to do this .
you know , i built a great company , one of the great companies , great , great -- some of the great real estate assets in the world .
i enjoyed my life , and i was on the other side , you know , i 'm criticizing the other side because i understand the other side as well as anybody .
but our country was in trouble and i love our country , and i looked at what was happening .
and i 'm really happy i did this -- i 'm really happy i did this .
it 's been an amazing experience , and we are indeed going to make our country great again .
you have one day to make every dream , your every dream for your country and your family come true .
you have one magnificent chance to beat this corrupt system and deliver justice for every forgotten man , for every forgotten woman , and for every forgotten child in this nation .
do not let this opportunity slip away , folks .
it 's never going to happen again , never going to happen .
in four years from now , never going to happen again .
and people are voting that they never saw before , these are great people , but they never saw anybody they wanted .
they 're voting in numbers like they 've never seen in texas , in florida .
no matter where you look , they 're voting in number like they 've never seen before .
we are fighting for every citizen who believes that government should serve the people , not the donors and not the special interests .
and we are fighting to bring us all together as americans , just imagine what our country could accomplish if we started working together as one people under one god , saluting one american flag .
thank you .
thank you .
thank you , everybody .
such a great honor , incredible people .
you 're incredible people .
i 'm asking you to dream big , because with your vote , we are just one day away from the change you 've been waiting for your entire life .
to all of the people in all of our cities and towns , i say these words to you tonight , i am with you , i will fight for you , and i will win for you .
i will win for you .
together we will make america wealthy again .
we will make america strong again .
we will make america safe again .
and we will make america great again .
thank you very much , everybody .
god bless you .
god bless you .
get out and vote .
thank you , everybody .
thank you , mike .
thank you , everybody .
who ?
thank you , everybody .
this is a great honor , great state .
i have a lot of property   people in virginia .
pay a lot of checks -- bing -- every night , every day ; a lot of great success i 've had in virginia over the years .
and we have just phenomenal stuff in loudoun county , as you know , and we have down in charlottesville and some other stuff .
tremendous , tremendous , beautiful property .
charlottesville is right next to thomas jefferson .
he was an architect .
you know , he had great taste .
he had great taste .
he understood that 's some of the most beautiful land i 've ever seen .
so i love virginia .
and we are going to win virginia .
we 're going to win virginia .
i 'm going to go over some of the statistics when tim kaine was governor .
they 're not pretty .
they 're not pretty .
but before i do , i just want to say that debbie wasserman schultz ...   i always knew she was highly overrated .
i always knew .
not good .
but she just got fired .
they said , " debbie , you 're fired ; get out , debbie -- out , boom . "
boy , they were .
how about that for disloyalty , though , in terms of hillary clinton ?
in all fairness , because debbie wasserman schultz has been so much for hillary clinton and   politicians , folks , other than mike pence , of course .
he 's great .
but these politicians -- hey , look , look , look .
so , there 's no loyalty there .
right ?
there 's no loyalty .
none whatsoever .
it gets a little heat and they fire her -- " get outta here , get outta here . "
she knew what was going on .
hillary clinton knew what was going on .
she knew everything that was going on .
she knew it 's a rigged system that bernie sanders never had a chance .
ok ?
he never had a chance .
and if you look at it , look what 's going on , they 're having a lot of people marching now , and a lot of those people are going to vote for us .
i 'll tell you right now .
a lot of them .
and not even because they like me or they do n't like me .
although i have to say , have you seen the polls that just came out ?
right ?
we had , like , the biggest bounce that anyone can remember .
they said , " well , if he gets out of the convention with no bounce , that will be a success . "
did we have nine points or something ?
ten points ?
we 're leading .
we 're actually leading in the polls .
and the cnn poll was so good , i may have to start liking them again .
and i do n't .
no , they treat me unfairly .
but you know what 's more important ?
the poll .
but you know , the big poll , the big poll , that 's november 8th .
that 's the poll we care about , right ?
but look how disloyal crooked hillary clinton was to somebody that put her life on the line .
i mean , she -- what she did in order to take advantage of bernie sanders and all of his supporters .
debbie wasserman schultz , what she did in order to make sure that the system , the rigged system stays intact and hillary gets it , and then you see the e - mails .
can you imagine , they talk about religion .
they talk about religion .
can you imagine if that was my e - mail ?
i 'd right now be on the front page of every newspaper .
it would be horrible .
and they 're trying to play it down .
well that was n't so bad .
that was n't so bad .
but could you imagine , seriously .
there 's such a different standard .
so here 's the story .
here 's the story .
so debbie was totally loyal to hillary .
and hillary threw her under a bus and it did n't take her more than five minutes to make that decision .
man , i do n't want her covering my back , i 'll tell you right now .
it 's true .
it 's true .
now the other thing i 'm surprised at , you know it 's nice when you 're not reading speeches .
is n't it ?
really ?
because i can talk about current events .
this stuff happened 10 minutes ago .
you know if you 're reading speeches , i see these guys .
i dealt with a lot of them .
i 've actually been a very political person all my life .
i 've always been on the other side .
but now for 14 months i 've been doing this .
and i like this side in a certain way better because we can do things better .
they used to love me when i was just a contributor .
i 'd give millions of dollars .
i was a contributor .
i know , i like this better .
i like being non - establishment better .
but with bernie , when you look at what happened , the thing that surprises me most is how he folded .
he folded .
i thought he was really hanging out tough , tough , tough .
then they find these horrible e - mails talking about his religion and is he jewish and is he an atheist and what and that 's not going to play well .
man that 's rough .
and that 's not as bad as some of the other ones .
and i said there 's no way that bernie sanders shows up to make a speech .
there 's no way that he can ever endorse crooked hillary clinton anymore right ?
there 's no way .
and today i see him trying to make the case .
and his own people are out there booing .
ok ?
they 're out there booing .
so it 's pretty bad .
then i 'll tell you , hillary clinton , i 've been saying this for a long time , and i got it from bernie sanders .
he said she suffers from bad judgment .
right ?
bad judgment .
she suffers from very bad judgment .
her instincts are bad , they 're no good .
her instincts are defective .
her instincts are defective .
but she 's got , she 's low energy .
she actually is low energy .
she 'll go home , she 'll take a nap for 4 or 5 hours , then she 'll come back .
no naps for trump !
no naps .
i do n't take naps .
we do n't have time .
we do n't have time .
you ever see hillary where she comes out and she 'll read a teleprompter for a little while and then she 'll go home ; you do n't see her for 3 , 4 days .
and then she comes back .
and then they used to , i remember in iowa they put like 3 or 4 people , really nice people in there sitting around a little table .
and everyone 's saying well i 'd like to ask her a question , no , no , no , you 're too tough .
this is what we have .
how do you think isis is going to react ?
i do n't think so right ?
i do n't think so .
not going to be good .
no .
we have tough enemies out there .
we have tough , mean , vicious , horrible , horrible people .
these are horrible , horrible human beings .
we need toughness folks .
it 's about time .
we need strength .
we need toughness .
we need smarts .
we need warmth .
we need compassion .
we need everything .
we need everything .
but we do n't need somebody that goes home and takes naps .
we do n't need naps .
but what did surprise me was that bernie was so soft on this .
i really -- i was amazed , because i watched his speech , you know -- " we must vote for hillary clinton . "
i mean , the hatred he 's got , why would he do that ?
he looks better if he did n't do it , to me .
hey , what do i have to do with it ?
i do n't care .
whatever he wants to do .
but could you imagine if what 's taking place now with the democrats took place in cleveland ?
and by the way , i have to tell you , cleveland did an amazing job .
thank you , ohio .
thank you , cleveland .
what a job .
i spoke to the police chief calvin -- did a phenomenal job up there , but what we had -- and the secret service , working with the secret service .
what a job they did .
but cleveland 's a beautiful place .
i mean , really i was so happy .
we had no problems .
they were trying to show -- i know they showed this one square .
it was this big square and they had a few people .
they bring the cameras in close , you know , really close , because they do n't want to show all the beautiful grass , you know , with no people on it .
and you know why ?
i 'll tell you why , because people like our message .
people like our message .
they really like it .
and if you look at philadelphia -- i went to school in philadelphia .
i love philadelphia .
if you look at philadelphia , what they 're going through right now , it looks like a lot of people .
it 's 100 degrees there .
and speaking of that , by the way , i do n't know if you saw it .
did you know i went to the other room ?
so you have a second room , and then outside you have over 1,000 people .
and it 's 104 degrees out .
no , think of it .
and the first time i ever did it .
i said , " let 's go -- let 's go to the second room first . "
right ?
that 's the ante - room .
but let 's go because it 's the overflow room .
i said -- so i went in there .
we surprised them .
we were nice .
but you know , we love these people .
but you know what i also like ?
i do n't have to do it later .
and outside , we have a lot of people .
and i wish they 'd let them in .
the fire department wo n't let them in because of a fire regulation , which is very sad because they 're outside .
it 's -- we have speakers out there .
i think the speakers are burning up , folks .
it is hot .
i wish the fire marshal -- where 's the fire marshal ?
is he around here ?
come on , fire marshal .
if they could get in , fire marshal -- you know , you have doors that go right out to the outside .
i promise there 's nothing , like you do n't have a problem .
i feel badly .
we have those people -- we have people standing outside .
you could get a few more people inside .
if they could , let them in .
so , that 's the way a builder would talk .
ok ?
that 's the way a builder ...   so you had the firing of the head of the dnc , and that was a vicious firing .
a lot of things happened .
you had her firing .
hillary clinton 's total disloyalty was at play .
it really was .
people do n't say that .
they wo n't say that in the media .
oh , if i did something with reince , can you imagine if i fired reince ?
i would n't do that because reince has done such a great job -- reince priebus .
what a job he has done .
and i always used to say , for months now i 've been saying , " i 'll take reince over debbie . "
and everyone said , " oh , but debbie 's a super star . "
i said , " so is reince , " and then it turned out that debbie flamed out and she 's gone .
but the disloyalty was incredible .
and i really mean that .
because honestly , whether you like her or not , she worked very hard to rig the system so that hillary got in .
it 's true , right ?
it 's true .
no , it 's true .
she worked very , very hard to rig the system .
little did she know that china , russia , one of our many , many friends came in and hacked the hell out of us .
can you imagine ?
can you imagine what they 're hacking ?
i guarantee we 'll find the 33,000 e - mails .
why did hillary get rid of her middle name ?
hillary ?
no , but why did she get rid of it ?
hillary rotten clinton .
rotten clinton .
hillary rotten clinton , right ?
maybe that 's why .
it 's too close .
no , no .
it 's too close .
it 's too close .
you think mike pence would say this ?
i do n't think so .
by the way , did i do a good job with mike pence ?
ok .
him and his family .
what a high - quality person .
you know , you have to vet people , right ?
and we vetted mike and they came back , and these are killers .
and they came back with many pages on certain people , ok ?
many pages .
i -- i 'd like to write a book .
many , many pages .
with mike , they came back with like nothing .
he 's like the most perfect human being , this guy .
i said , " mike , did you ever do anything wrong in your whole life ? " "
no , i do n't think so . "
he is -- where is he ?
he 's the best guy .
that guy is great .
i love this guy .
i love him .
i love him .
but you know what i really like about mike ?
so listen to this .
to me , a very important thing is her bad judgment .
now , whether you like her choice , tim kaine -- nobody even knows who he is .
no .
he 's done a terrible job for virginia .
i assumed -- they said he picked a -- you know , he got picked because of virginia , because virginia is very important and i 'm doing very well here .
hey .
hey , i 'm employing a lot of people here and they do n't employ anybody .
i spent a lot of money in potomac falls , sterling , that area .
i mean , i spent a lot of money .
we have great , great things happening .
next year , we have the senior pga championship coming .
thousands and thousands of people will come into virginia and spend a lot of money .
thank you .
i love you too , darling .
but ...   but just think of it .
so hillary clinton has -- almost 50 percent of the people want a progressive .
ok .
we do n't have to like that , but that 's ok .
that 's where they are .
they want to give everything away and raise your taxes .
that 's what happens .
no , no .
she will have a tax raise .
by the way , i have the largest tax cut of anybody running for office , republican or democrat .
ok ?
but hillary clinton -- hillary clinton will have a tax cut that is not there .
it 's going to be a tax cut times 20 in reverse , like a rocket ship .
we have the biggest tax cut proposed , i guess , in the last four years .
and it 's -- we 're going to get it through .
at least we 're going to get most of it through .
i 'll tell you what , i 'm going to try and get all of it through .
but we have -- and it 's policy , it 's , you know , put out there .
that does n't mean there 's not a little negotiation , because we 're going to have to negotiate .
but we 're going to have it go .
hillary clinton 's going to have one of the biggest tax increased in the history of our country because what she 's proposing , you 're going to have to pay for .
it 's very simple .
very simply .
you know , maybe she 'll -- you know , after she gets rid of bernie , get rid of all this stuff .
that does n't help you , by the way .
but what she 's proposing , she needs to have a massive , massive tax increase .
nobody every talks about that .
do you notice she never talks about who 's going to pay for it and how they 're going to pay ?
but just statistically , she 's going to need a very major tax cut .
but here 's something to me that 's very interesting .
fifty percent of that party is bernie sanders , almost , and they 're very passionate .
and that 's a much more passionate side .
her people , they fall asleep .
ok ?
they fall asleep .
they 're watching her .
with bernie 's people , they 're really out there .
they -- say what you want about bernie sanders , he got it on free trade .
he got it .
freed trade .
now i 'm -- i 'm totally -- i 'm a free trader .
i believe in free trade .
you know , they get it all wrong because they just do n't say it properly .
but i want smart trade .
i want -- i want to trade with other countries .
but i do n't want to lose $ 500 billion a year   with china .
thank you china , we love you very much .
but we 're not going to lose $ 500 billion .
and i do n't want to have a trade imbalance with japan where they send us millions of cars and we send them some beef .
and then they send it back .
and then we send some wheat , wheat .
they send cars we send wheat .
sounds like we 've got to send a lot of wheat right ?
the trade imbalance is massive .
and with mexico we have an unbelievably big trade imbalance .
so they kill us at the border .
they kill us .
they 're killing us at the border .
and we have one of the biggest trade imbalances .
and what happens ?
what happens ?
i 'm not even including the drugs right ?
the drugs are pouring across .
you know i won the state of new hampshire .
and i got very , very friendly with the people in new hampshire .
i 'll never forget them .
because that 's an amazing group of people .
and i said , what 's your biggest problem ?
they said heroin pouring across the southern border .
i said heroin ?
new hampshire ?
because you look at new hampshire it 's so beautiful , with the lakes and the little beautiful roads and the trees and the forests .
and i said you do n't have heroin , i said you have , he said mr. trump you have no idea .
it 's one of the worst areas for that .
it comes pouring across the southern border .
i said , you know what ?
if i win i 'm going to sit , i 'm going to fix that problem .
i am going to fix that problem .
i 'm going to fix that problem .
and one of the ways , i appreciate that .
you know i always like to say if i win because honestly life is a very strange thing and i do n't want to be accused by them of being arrogant .
so i 'll say if .
but it better be when or i 'm going to be very angry at you folks from virginia .
from virginia .
but the folks in new hampshire and you 're having the same problems .
but they 're having it for whatever reason disproportionately badly .
heroin is pouring across the border .
and it 's going , a lot of it , it 's going all over the country by the way .
everybody 's got the problem .
you buy it for less than a candy bar .
and our youth is being poisoned and plenty of other people .
but our youth is being poisoned by this stuff .
heroin , heroin .
and what we 're going to do , thank you .
what we 're going to do is first of all the border patrol agents endorsed me , 16,500 .
they 've never done that before .
and their job is easier now without trump .
their job is easier without trump .
because you know , right now they just stand and people go by .
these are great people .
i got to know them very well .
the border patrol agents want to do their job .
it 's a much tougher job , probably a much more dangerous jobs when you stop people and say sorry folks , boom go back .
but that 's more dangerous than saying , we ca n't do anything .
it 's called stand back , stand back and leave them alone .
let them walk right in .
how stupid are we ?
how stupid are we ?
ok ?
so i spoke to them when they endorsed me .
so i said , let me ask you : a wall , how important ?
they said mr. trump , it 's very , very important .
very , very important .
and they know .
they know .
see i just saved a million dollars .
somebody else would go out and hire a consultant who knows nothing .
they 'd come in from harvard they 'd spend about a year at the border .
they 'd learn nothing .
they 'd then write this 2,000 page report that nobody will read .
they 'll charge you $ 1 million for the report .
and you have no idea what just happened .
as opposed to saying , like i did with the border patrol , is a wall good ?
they said very good .
they actually used an interesting expression ; they said it 's a vital tool to turn things around .
it was a very interesting expression .
they did n't say great , bad .
they just said , " it 's a vital tool , mr. trump , to turn things around . "
especially the drug traffic , because it 's very tough .
and we can build that wall so easily .
and by the way , mexico is going to pay for that wall ...   ... just because .
they 're going to pay for the wall .
and i 've got great -- we got great marks on the -- on the speech the other night .
and everyone did , everybody did so great .
we had such -- by the way , i have to say , the republican national convention was such a tremendous success .
it was so great .
i mean , we had a couple of people that i think probably destroyed their careers , but who knows .
but honestly -- no .
but honestly , that was such an incredible success .
and look at what 's going on in philadelphia .
that was such a beautiful deal .
the city of cleveland was great , the law enforcement was unbelievable .
we had no riots , we had no nothing , it was unbelievable .
i 'll never forget it as long as i live .
it was unbelievable .
and i made a speech -- and i have to tell you , because i figured this would n't happen because if i made a speech -- if i gave the gettysburg address as given as good as anybody could possible give -- i figured , you know , you always get -- you always .
i got great reviews on this speech .
i got great reviews .
we got standing ovations .
some people said , well the speech was a little long .
that 's because we had 26 or 27 minutes of like standing ovation , we had applause .
and i had a great time doing it because i 'm talking about something that i love , we 're in a movement folks , this is a movement .
this is n't just -- i love what we 're doing together , right ?
i love -- i love what we 're doing together .
i love it .
and what really -- what i have to say is this .
so , hillary clinton has bad judgment .
she should n't have picked this guy , big mistake , because he is the exact opposite what all of the bernie people .
now , if he got 2 percent of the vote or 5 percent of the vote or 20 percent of the vote , it 's -- but you know what ?
he almost beat her .
if the system was n't gamed , if the system was n't gamed , he would 've beat her .
he would 've beaten her .
now think of this .
so instead of picking somebody , and you do n't have to go with pocahontas , you do n't have to go that far -- who by the way , who has n't done anything .
she 's the worst -- she is the worst senator in the u.s. senate .
you know , she 's got a fresh mouth , other than that , she 's got nothing going .
she 's has got -- she has done nothing in the u.s. senate , but you do n't have to pick her .
but you could have picked a liberal person and we understand it , we could live with it .
and you know , she could have had party unity .
instead , they have thousands and thousands of people going crazy because she did n't pick somebody representative , she did n't pick somebody representative of what 's going on .
let 's get -- look , again .
she 's got bad judgment .
whether it 's libya , whether it 's benghazi , whether it 's at night with the calls , with the calls , everybody 's calling .
the only call she answers is her friend calls , she picks that one up , but she does n't pick up the calls for help .
she 's got bad judgment .
bernie sanders said , she 's got bad judgment .
she 's got bad judgment when it came to picking a vice presidential candidate for that side of the party .
i actually just asked mike pence -- i said mike , do you think she 's going to be forced to change because honestly .
now , i would n't pick him , i would n't pick him for a different reason , though .
you know why i would n't pick him ?
so , mike pence of indiana has done an unbelievable job .
a triple - aaa bond rating , so many different things , job creation , top in virtually every category , right towards the top , at the top .
listen to this .
during tim kaine 's tenure as governor of virginia , plus he 's not very popular .
i thought that i would see polls saying he 's at 85 percent and trump is going to lose virginia .
i 'm going to -- people do n't even like the guy .
and   weird little dude there .
i do n't know what 's going on with him .
during tim kaine 's tenure as governor of virginia from 2006 to 2010 , the unemployment rate of the state more than doubled .
so i immediately went back to my statistician .
i said , " listen , do me a favor ?
will you please check it . "
he came back .
he said , " hey , maybe he 's wrong , but more than doubled . "
this is your great governor , right ?
now , governor mike pence cut the unemployment rate from 8.4 percent to less than five percent , quickly .
since 2013 , indiana 's gone from 31st in the nation for veterans unemployment , to second , and it 's going to go first .
ok ?
veterans unemployment .
during tim kaine , that 's the guy that bad judgment , crooked , hillary clinton , bad judgment , such bad judgment .
we ca n't have another president with bad judgment .
we ca n't do it .
during tim kaine 's tenure as governor , the state of virginia lost 60,000 manufacturing jobs .
now , indiana gained 30,000 .
now , it 's a different time and different everything .
he was , you know , so i 'm not comparing -- they 're not -- because they 'll say , well , one was here and one was there .
but i 'll tell you , if mike pence or me was running virginia , we 'd do great .
this guy did a lousy job .
you know why ?
he 's a political hack .
that 's why .
he 's a political hack .
look what he 's done .
look what he 's done .
he 's always been in politics .
he likes politics .
he wants to be in politics always .
ok .
during tim kaine 's tenure as governor of virginia , it averaged almost no gdp growth .
and indiana , as you know , is doing great .
i mean , think of it .
here 's a beauty .
ok .
nobody is going to vote for tim kaine when you hear this one .
ok ?
tim kaine .
i never even heard of this guy , but that 's ok .
less than a week after tim kaine became governor of virginia -- one week -- he proposed a nearly $ 4 billion tax increase -- $ 4 billion .
including a tax increase on people earning as little at $ 17,000 a year .
he tried to pass transportation reform .
he failed , whereas mike pence had tremendous .
i mean , the whole thing is ridiculous .
so a $ 4 billion tax increase his first week .
do we want this as a president ?
now , you know , look , hopefully we do n't have to worry about it .
i will say this , virginia has lost one in three manufacturing jobs since bill clinton -- these are my statisticians ; they 're great -- signed the agreement to put china into the world trade organization .
do n't forget he did that .
but bill clinton signed something that was the worst trade bill ever in the history of this country -- ok ? --
in the history of this country : nafta .
that was bill clinton .
people do n't realize .
i 'll tell you a little joke .
see how hot it is , everyone ?
everyone 's sweating and soaking wet , right ?
here 's the difference .
i would n't pay the hotel bill .
i 'd say we 're in a hotel , we 're in a ballroom , and you know what ?
these are grown companies .
we 're in a ballroom .
and if we 're in a ballroom , it 's not supposed to be so hot that everybody in the audience is using as a fan .
so what they do is they turn the air conditioning down because they save money .
so then , i would not pay them .
and you know what i do ?
i pay my bills so fast with somebody good .
with somebody average , i pay them ok .
with somebody great , a lot of times , i give them bonuses .
but here we are in a ballroom and i 'm like -- i feel like i 'm in a sauna , ok ?
right ?
right ?
so i do n't know what hotel this is , but you ought to try turning on the air conditioning or we 're not going to get you paid .
these people .
is -- am i right ?
it 's hot .
just so you know , i 'm really good at this business .
you make a lot more money if you own a hotel and you let people suffer and do n't turn on air conditioning .
you make a lot more money .
you would be surprised at how much it costs , but this is ridiculous .
and -- so then , there 'll an article . "
donald trump refuses to pay the bill . "
of course .
and you know what ?
the smart people say trump is smart .
the other people would say , " is n't that terrible . "
ok ?
i think the ballroom and the people that own this hotel should be ashamed of themselves .
all right .
so look .
look .
so virginia lost one in three manufacturing jobs since the bill clinton bill .
hillary supported china 's entry into wto .
roanoke , which is a beautiful place , by the way , has lost one -- and i 've been here many times -- has lost one in three manufacturing jobs , ok , since the clinton disasters .
last year , the u.s. trade deficit with tpp countries -- i mean , i could go into this -- i could read this stuff to you .
it gets a little boring after a while , but it 's all the same thing .
we have -- hillary clinton wanted to approve tpp , that 's trans - pacific partnership .
and then i announced that i 'm against it .
and then she heard me make in a speech .
this is what i 've heard .
a friend of mine told me .
and i basically said the various reasons , including monetary manipulation , currency manipulation , et cetera , why it 's no good , why it will be another nafta but maybe even worse .
ca n't be worse , but it 'll be as bad , ok ?
different countries , but it 'll be as bad .
and she heard me .
and she said , " he 'll kill me in the debate . "
so what happened is she all of a sudden came out against tpp .
but as sure as you 're sitting there , she 's going to approve tpp .
if she won , she will approve it .
she 'll make a change .
she 'll make a comma .
she 'll say , " move that comma .
now , i can do it . "
ok .
folks .
six - thousand pages of material that most people have n't read .
it is a disaster .
trans - pacific partnership is a disaster .
you ca n't let it happen .
we will never let it happen .
i will never ever let it happen .
and i do n't want to make deals with many countries ; i want to do one - on - one deals , one - on - one .
you 've got to see this deal .
it 's like a fancy jigsaw puzzle .
lines   going here , here , there .
so if one of the country misbehaves , you ca n't do anything because you 're so locked up into this very complex agreement .
and believe me , it 's just like obamacare .
thousands of pages and nobody in congress read it , and now it 's a disaster .
and we will repeal it and replace it with something fabulous .
ok ?
all right ?
but -- but we 're going to have something that 's going to be very special .
and i have to tell you , i appreciate you all being here and i really wish -- i appreciate it , thank you .
thank you .
thank you .
thank you .
and i appreciate the folks in the room next door , which is almost as big as this and it 's packed also .
and even more than you folks , i appreciate the people standing outside in 104 .
they 're dying .
they 're dying .
although i venture say that they 're more comfortable than i am right now .
it 's probably -- i think it 's actually cooler outside than it is in this damned ballroom .
ridiculous .
ridiculous .
but you know what ?
i 'll tell you .
you know what i love ?
look at this room .
it 's packed .
you know what i love ?
and the other room is packed .
what i love ?
nobody left .
not one person .
i always watch the doors .
if i see doors starting to open , people pouring out , i usually stop .
but that never happens with me .
never , ever .
but i stop .
nobody leaves .
because you know what ?
we 're in this together .
we 're in this together .
this is a movement .
so time magazine just did an another cover .
i talked about it .
you saw the one from the back of my head .
right ?
it 's pretty full back there .
you know , could be better .
could be better , but not bad .
but a picture from the back of my head .
the guy was standing right over me with a camera like this .
i studied that picture very closely .
i did n't read the story , but i did study the picture .
you know , i think that 's number five or six that we 've had .
so i think i 've had two in my lifetime , and five or six in the last few months where , you know , we had this incredible thing going on .
and they called it a movement .
and bill o'reilly calls is a movement .
he 's never seen anything like it .
he said in his professional career , in his whole lifetime he actually said , this is the single greatest political phenomena that he 's ever witnessed .
and brit hume said it , and a lot of people have said it .
and i really mean this .
it 's not about me .
it 's about you .
there 's -- i 'm a messenger .
there 's a group of people in this country that 's massive .
you know , they used to call it a silent majority .
i do n't use the term .
it 's a noisy majority , because we 've had it .
we 've had it with the iran deal .
we 've had it with our depleted military .
we 've had it with no borders .
we 've had it with education where we 're ranked right near the bottom .
we 're doing horribly .
we 've had it where they want to essentially abolish your second amendment .
you have no protection for yourself .
all right ?
we 've had it .
and by the way , the nra endorsed me and they 're great people , 100 percent .
and the evangelicals -- how many evangelicals to we have in here ?
you better get out and vote because you did n't vote for romney , and you better get out and vote for me .
you know , we have the johnson amendment , where lyndon johnson , who was very powerful , put in an amendment where basically our pastors , our ministers , and all religions , they do n't have the right to speak up .
and i had -- i had a meeting -- i was telling franklin graham , who 's a great guy , i was telling jerry falwell jr. , who is a great guy , great guy .
i mean , so many .
we had a meeting where we had 50 to 60 pastors , ministers .
and they were saying , " we love you . "
and they were praying .
and it was like this incredible scene .
and i said , " ok , well , folks , can you endorse me ? " "
well , we ca n't do that . " "
why ? " "
because we 'll lose our tax exempt status . "
i said , " why ? "
now , nobody brought this up to me .
they were living with it .
nobody was going to go fight it .
i said , " why do you lose your tax exempt status ? " "
well , we 're not allowed to speak . "
and i said , " wait , " and i looked into it .
i said , " whoa . "
and that was passed by the ultimate politician , lyndon johnson .
i mean , it 's not like we 're dealing with the pope .
this was lyndon johnson -- smart , tough guy , but we 're smarter and tougher .
but look , that was passed by a politician because he had problems with some of the churches in texas where they were going after him for good reason .
and i said , " wait a minute , folks . "
now , we put in our platform that we 're going to work like hell to get rid of the johnson amendment because ...   ... because your representatives , ministers , pastors , rabbis , they have totally lost their voice .
and do n't kid yourself , that 's what 's happening to religion in this country because you see the same numbers that i see .
so i think this -- if you 're evangelical , if you 're christian , if you 're jewish , if you have religion , you better go out and vote for trump because this is going to be the last chance you 're ever going to get to get this thing going .
ok ?
thank you .
thank you .
so i said in my -- i will say this , i said in my speech in the other night and i meant it , i thank the evangelicals because i want to get these tremendous voices .
they said , " trump ca n't win south carolina , right ? "
and i said , why ?
i have a tremendous piece of ground .
i won with the evangelicals .
i won all over with the evangelicals because they get it , they 're smart and they understand .
they know i 'm not perfect .
i 'm not perfect , but they know i love them and they know i 'm going to fight for them better than somebody that is perfect .
i 'm going to fight for them .
i 'm going to fight for other religions .
i 'm going to fight .
i 'm going to fight for people to be able to speak .
and actually when they said this to me , i was in an office building very high up and i 'm looking down .
i said to these powerful pastors , these power men and women , they 're just powerful people , just tremendous strength and energy and conviction .
they were in a whirlwind , it was beautiful , their voices .
i said , " but that means that you are less powerful than those people walking down the street . "
i pointed to the street , " they have a right to talk and you do n't .
you do n't have your right to talk . "
that 's our religion .
that 's our religion .
in my case , i 'm presbyterian , i 'm a protestant , but that 's our religion .
and my minister , who i like a lot , does n't have the right to speak .
we 're going to end that folks .
with one chance , we 're going to have it .
so you better go back to your churches and you better get everybody to vote because four years ago , they did n't get up .
they did n't vote for romney , and to this day , a lot of people understand it .
though , some people do understand it .. frankly , you better get up and you better vote .
it you vote - if you think about it , if you take christians , jewish , some of the catholic , take the religions , it 's bigger than men and it 's bigger than women .
it 's bigger than men .
you know , men are 50 percent , women are 50 percent , the religion is like what 80 percent .
if you get up and vote , we 're going to get rid of that .
and we 're going to free up great people to go and speak what they want to speak about , and they should be able to speak .
so just a couple of things .
i would like to bring mike up .
just a couple things , we are going to strengthen our military .
our military is really depleted , it 's not good .
i did n't want to go into iraq .
we got there .
i said , " keep the oil . "
they did n't keep the oil .
these people do n't know what they 're doing .
you know , in the old days , you 're in a war , to the victor belong the spoils , right ?
today , we get nothing .
trillions of dollars in costs .
thousands and thousands of lives lost , we get nothing .
iraq is a disaster .
the middle east is worse now than it was 15 years ago by a factor of 20 .
if we would have done nothing , we would have been much better off .
we have to build up our military .
we never needed it so much .
we never needed our military so much .
so we 're going to take care of our country .
we 're going to take care of our vets .
we 're going to take care of our people .
we 're going to make america great again .
and i have to tell you , one of the really good decisions , because i laugh when they say , " do you think mr. trump likes governor mike pence ? "
i love this guy .
he 's great .
he 's great .
and everybody does .
i 'm getting such great marks and such great reviews .
unlike hillary .
did i ask you before ?
do you think she 'll change ?
he looked at me and said no way , because it 's hard to do , right ?
she may be forced -- she may be forced to change .
he actually -- i 'll tell you -- tim kaine stands for the exact opposite of all of the bernie sanders people .
i mean , it 's ridiculous what she did .
again , bad judgment .
so i 'm going to have mike say just a few of the final words , and i 'm going to sit down and watch him .
he is some great person .
he 's got some wonderful family .
and we are having such fun going all over the place .
and so mike can finish off , and i want to thank you , folks .
thank you .
if you guys want to ask a couple of questions , fine .
you go ahead , mike .
go ahead .
we 're going to work .
one thing we have to do for the youth , and it 's a question i get asked , mike , more than any other question .
we have young , fantastic people going to college and they 're choking on their debt .
ok ?
they 're choking on debt .
they have n't started life yet , and some of them have given up before they start it because they see no way .
we 're going to work on a plan and we 're working on it now so that we can help young people get through college , and not die .
i mean , some of these kids , what they 're doing is incredible -- the massive depression that 's going on because they see no way of ever being able to pay it back .
now , part of that 's going to be jobs .
but we 're working on a plan now to take care of youth with respect to college debt .
we 're going to work on a very good plan .
we have to .
we have to .
do you own the hotel ?
i bet .
one - hundred percent .
we have to stand by israel , 100 percent .
yes ?
yes ?
hello .
these are usually the toughest questions .
he knows .
he knows .
jacob , that wall will go up so fast and be so big and powerful and as good - looking as we can make it that your head will spin .
ok ?
believe me .
it 's going to go up fast .
thank you .
go ahead .
how about over here ?
go ahead .
sure .
congratulations .
cut your taxes and no more crazy regulations .
ok ?
big , right ?
all right ?
the regulations are out of control .
you know , mike -- so i 've been all over the country and i would 've always said taxes would be like the biggest thing .
if i had my guess , i would say that people are more angry about regulations than the fact that we pay among the highest taxes in the world .
so we 'll cut the regulations .
ok ?
ok .
how about one more -- one more question ?
one more .
who 's got a good one ?
who 's got a good one ?
go ahead .
give him -- i like that question , actually , right ?
give him a mic because that 's such a great question .
go ahead .
wow .
are you a minister or a pastor ?
he is .
thank you very much .
now , i feel better , he is .
so ladies and gentleman , i just want to thank you .
that 's a great way to end actually .
i just want to thank you for being here .
it 's so important that on november 8 , you have to get out and vote .
if for no other reason , remember this , remember this , strong defense , strong borders , but remember , supreme court justices .
we 're going to be appoint , and mike will be absolutely right there with me .
we 'll be picking the best right off that list .
we are going to be appointing anywhere from two to five , it could even be .
and if you put the wrong people on , you 're back to venezuela .
this is venezuela .
so let me just tell you , if you can , get your friends , get everything you have to do on november 8 .
please get out to vote .
it 's going to be tough .
it 's going to be tough because it 's a stacked decked .
it 's a rigged system against all of us .
the reason i won is because we had such an outpouring of love .
i mean , the numbers were so big , they could n't do anything about it .
let me tell you , you have to get out on november 8 , and you have to vote .
you have to get your friends , and your family , and everybody out to vote .
ok , thank you all very much .
we love you .
we will be back .
thank you .
thank you .
thank you , everybody .
thank you .
thank you , everybody .
thank you .
thank you .
it is great to be back in north carolina , believe me .
we had a fantastic victory in the primaries , and i love the people .
and i have property here .
i employ a lot of people in north carolina .
and i pay them a lot of money , i want to tell you that right now .
so thank you , everybody .
it 's a really great honor .
you know , two people are here tonight .
eric trump , do we ever hear of eric trump , right ?
his wife , lara , who was born in north carolina , and she 's running and working so hard to win north carolina november 8th , november 8th .
and i 'm sure most of you have never heard of her , but ivanka trump , ok ?
i. 
  hi , everyone .
wow , this is amazing .
no lack of spirit in this room .
thank you , north carolina .
we are so appreciative for all of you , for the energy , for the enthusiasm .
my father is an amazing man .
he is a great man .
and he will be an unbelievable president .
i promise !
my father likes to over - deliver , and he will over - deliver for all of you .
so thank you , god bless .
thanks , dad .
l. 
  hey , y' all !
now , you know i could n't come home and not say hey to all you nice people here .
it 's such an honor to represent a family that i can tell you is one of the best families i have ever met in my life .
now , you know i was raised with good southern values .
and i could not be part of and speak on behalf of a family and a man that was anything less than incredible .
and that is what our next president , donald trump , is .
i love , y' all !
thank you , north carolina !
d. 
  thank you .
oh , boy .
it 's great .
it 's great .
we are going to make america so , so , so great again .
and in 62 days , we 're going to win this state and we 're going to win back the white house .
but to do that , you must get out and vote .
and that means early voting which begins in north carolina on october 20th .
in other words , start voting , start voting .
this is our chance to end years of injustice , corruption and betrayal , and we 're going to bring back our jobs , by the way .
this is our chance to solve all of the problems that have gone unsolved for so , so , so many years .
boy , i 'll tell you , many , many years of gross incompetence .
and that includes bringing back our jobs that have been taken away from us like we 're a bunch of babies and moved to other countries that were smarter and sharper than our leaders .
that 's not going to happy anymore , folks .
not going to happen anymore .
for how long have people been saying washington is broken and controlled by special interests ?
you know that .
this is the year we can fix it .
that 's because change has come from the outside of our broken system , and it 's a very corrupt system at that .
we will never fix our rigged system by relying on the people who rigged it in the first place .
and that 's what you 're doing .
we need change .
we need change .
we will never solve our problems by relying on the politicians who created our problems .
so to every american who has been waiting for real change , your wait is over , your moment of liberation is at hand .
and by the way , we have another room like this outside that 's loaded up with people .
and outside they have thousands of people also , so that 's what 's happening .
and we 're going to go visit the other room right after this .
is that ok with you people ?
i mean , you already have the better location .
we have to go and visit them , right ?
but a vote for trump is a vote to restore democracy , to heal our economy and to bring millions of jobs back into every forgotten stretch of this country .
and boy , that does mean north carolina !
the change will begin my first day in office .
number one , we 're going to eliminate every unconstitutional executive order and restore the rule of law to our land .
then we 're going to begin implementing plans for construction of a wall along our southern border .
in other words , we will build the wall .
who 's going to pay for the wall ?
who ?
exactly right .
they will .
they will .
they will .
and you know , they 're doing very well .
mexico , honestly , they 're doing very well .
it 's like the eighth wonder of the world , what 's going on , massive factories , massive plants are being built .
unfortunately , the bad news is they 're being filled up right here , they 're being filled up by people from mexico , not by people from the united states .
we 've got to change it around folks , i 'm sorry , we 've got to change it around .
and it will change .
this will keep out the violent cartels and gangs as well as their drugs that are poisoning our youth and many others , many , many others .
but that 's just the beginning .
i 'm going to ask congress to send me a bill to repeal and replace , finally , " obamacare . "
it 's a disaster .
under senate rules , that bill can be passed with 51 votes ; 51 , not a big deal , especially if we hold the senate , and i think we will .
remember , they were saying , well , if trump wins , well , most of those people are up .
but i 'm higher than some of them , so it 's very interesting .
i think we 're doing very well , i have to tell you .
i think we 're doing very well .
the pundits are extremely upset ...   ... meaning a republican congress and a republican president can save americans from this disaster in a single ...   d. 
  very simple .
and remember the judges , remember the supreme court , justices of the supreme court , do n't ever forget it , do n't ever forget it .
and do n't ever forget the second amendment , which is under siege .
and you do n't vote for donald trump , you 're going to see what 's going to happen , you 're going to see what 's going to happen to your second amendment .
it 's not going to be pretty .
the national rifle association , nra , endorsed me , the earliest endorsement they 've ever given , i believe .
and you 've got to get out .
if you believe in the second amendment , you 've got to get out and you 've got to vote .
so it 's going to be a very busy first day .
i 'm going to instruct the department of state to immediately suspend the syrian refugee resettlement program ...   ... and develop plans for the construction of a safe zone in the region .
and the safe zone will not be paid for by us , it will be paid for by gulf states that have plenty of money , that do n't spend it , because we 're going to be , think of it , at $ 20 trillion , double the amount of debt that we had when president obama first came to office .
so we 're not going to build it , but we all have hearts , we want to take care of people , we 're going to build beautiful safe zones in syria .
and other people are going to pay for it .
it 's called the opm theory of money .
i love that theory .
it 's called other people 's money .
and remember the power we have , because some of those countries , many of those countries , would n't be there for a long period of time , believe me , if we did n't protect them .
so we have a lot of power , just remember .
we do n't use that power , we do n't even talk about that power .
my opponent wants a 550 percent increase in syrian refugees over the large number ...   ... over the large number that are already coming into the country , thousands and thousands , through president obama .
she is running to be america 's angela merkel .
and you see what happened to angela merkel of germany .
they had a massive defeat recently in the elections , because germany has had problems like it 's rarely seen before .
and look at france and look at other countries .
it 's catastrophic , folks .
it 's catastrophic .
i have friends that go to france every year , they love it .
i say , how did you like it this year ?
they say we do n't go to france anymore , france is n't france .
pretty tough .
we 'll go to north carolina instead , ok ?
i think so .
even our great mayor , rudy giuliani , is smiling at that one .
but it 's true .
it happens to be true , rudy , right ?
i 'm also going to notify all countries that refuse to take back dangerous , illegal immigrants who have committed crimes in this country that they will lose access to our visa programs and many , many more little goodies if they continue to refuse to take back the criminals that have been placed in our country .
right now they refuse to take them back , gang members , drug lords .
we bring them back , they say we do n't want them , so we fly the plane right back and they go right back into our country .
it 's unbelievable actually .
this is the measure that is called for under current law , and i will totally enforce it .
they will take those people back , believe me .
the secretary of state is required to take this action .
but hillary clinton refused to do so , just refused , resulting in thousands of criminal aliens being released into united states communities .
and by the way , lots of crime and even death .
furthermore , i will direct every agency in government to begin identifying all wasteful , job - killing regulations .
and they are going to be removed .
this will include lifting the restrictions on american energy .
we 're going to get your electric bills down .
i will also notify our nafta partners of my intention to renegotiate the deal , totally renegotiate the deal .
it 's got to be a two - way highway , remember that .
right now it 's one way .
our jobs leave our country and go someplace else , mostly to mexico .
and we will withdraw from the tpp before it can be ratified .
that 's going to be another nafta , believe me .
we 're going to bring these jobs back to north carolina .
and we 're not going to allow our companies to leave north carolina .
there will be consequences if they do so .
they 're not going to move to a country , make their product , sell it without any tax , without any tariff , right into our country , so we end up with a tremendous loss of taxes and tremendous unemployment .
we get nothing .
we get nothing .
and you know what ?
if they knew there was retribution , if they knew there was consequence , they would n't leave , they would n't even be talking about it .
they would n't even be talking about it .
hillary clinton supported nafta .
she supported china 's entry into the world trade organization .
and she supported tpp .
remember , she said it was the gold standard .
by the way , i do n't think anything can be as bad as nafta , but tpp is going to be pretty close .
it 's going to be a disaster and a disaster for this area .
she just does whatever her donors and special interests want her to do .
that 's why she 's raising all this money .
but we 're raising a lot of money .
we 're putting out a statement tomorrow .
we 've raised a lot , and a lot of it , unfortunately , came from me .
what am i going to do ?
but a lot of it came from small donors .
i think we 're average $ 61 a shot .
and we raised millions .
we 're going to be reporting a very big number tomorrow , so stay tuned .
in a trump administration , we will negotiate trade deals on behalf of american workers , ok ?
not for some other country or some company owned by the special interests and donors that give her money .
for the american workers .
it 's going to be now america first , remember that , and our worker comes first .
we will work to ensure that farmers in north carolina have the tools they need to thrive at home and compete on a level playing field in foreign markets .
and that means negotiating fair trade deals that do indeed put america first .
crucially , i am also going to convene my top generals .
we have a great one here .
actually , we have a great two generals here tonight .
one of them graduated number one in his class from west point , just like general douglas macarthur , general douglas macarthur .
where is that general ?
where is he , tough guy ?
he is -- come here , general .
come here .
number one in his class .
i 'm impressed by that , general .
number one in his class at west point , two - star general , incredible guy .
by the way , did you see ?
i think it was 88 generals and admirals endorsed donald trump today .
and these are the fighters , these are the fighters .
these are the warriors .
these are the ones , not the political hacks that endorsed hillary clinton two or three weeks ago .
did you see them all ?
they run .
you know why ?
because we have no place for them .
these are the people that have been telling her and obama and others what to do over the last number of years .
how has that worked out , folks ?
how has that worked out ?
so we 're going to convene my top generals and give them a simple instruction .
they will have 30 days to submit to the oval office a plan for soundly and quickly defeating isis .
we have no choice .
any nation who shares in this goal will be our friend in this mission .
for years , we have been caught up in endless wars and conflicts under the leadership of failed politicians and a failed , totally failed , foreign policy .
and this is a policy that could only happen with incompetent people running our country , believe me .
the same people who made every wrong decision in iraq , afghanistan , libya , syria , egypt , china and russia are the same people who are now advising who ?
hillary clinton .
who ?
you said it .
the same people are advising hillary clinton .
so i 'm proud instead to have the support of our warfighting generals , active duty military officers and top military experts who know how to win .
these are the tough wins , these are the smart ones , and know how to keep us out of this endless war , the war that 's been going on forever and draining our country , draining our country .
our infrastructure is a disaster .
it is draining our country , our roads , our tunnels , our bridges , our schools , our hospitals , everything .
our infrastructure is a disaster .
this is draining us .
hillary clinton favors what has been called military adventurism , ok ?
military adventurism , rushing to invade countries , displacing millions of families and then inviting the refugees into our country , creating power vacuums filled by terrorist groups , like isis .
and believe me , there are plenty of people that are very closely associated with isis , coming into our country .
we 've got it from within , folks .
this could be the great trojan horse of all time .
and in 200 years and 400 years , i do n't want people to be reading about it .
ok ?
i do n't want people to be talking about it .
i believe in a foreign policy based on our national interests that focus on american security and regional stability , instead of using our military to create democracies in countries with no democratic history and could n't care less about democracy .
we 're trying to force democracy down their throat .
we 're spending trillions of dollars and they do n't even want it .
we will work to form partnerships overseas based on a long - term strategy of defeating radical islamic terrorism .
we will first have to reverse the damage inflicted by hillary clinton and obama .
her legacy of failure and his total legacy of failure in the middle east , russia , asia , everywhere , has made americans far less safe probably than ever before .
and they talk russia , they keep talking russia .
would n't it be nice if we actually could get along with russia ?
would n't that be nice ?
would n't that be a good thing ?
and with russia helping us , because they do n't like isis any better than we do , with russia helping us to knock out isis , would n't that be a good thing instead of a bad thing ?
these people .
as part of our plan to avoid and prevent foreign conflicts , we 're going to rebuild our very depleted military .
and you saw this .
there was a documentary recently on our jet fighters .
they 're so old we ca n't get parts .
we get the parts from airplane graveyards and from airplane museums .
we take the parts off planes that are in museums and graveyards and we put them on our jet fighters .
this is not the united states of america , folks .
this is not the united states .
this is our ultimate deterrent , however .
we will be guided by three very famous words : peace through strength .
i will ask congress to eliminate the sequester and immediately reinvest in our military .
we have no choice , not like we can say , oh , let 's not do it .
we have no choice .
we have no choice .
we have a great country .
we want to keep our country strong .
we want to keep our country , so we have no choice .
somebody said , is n't there something else you could do ?
this is n't like , oh , gee , let 's pick a , b , c. we have no choice .
we have to have , maybe more than ever before , a strong and powerful military .
and hopefully , we 'll never have to be able to use it .
hopefully , we 'll never have to use it .
right now , we have , amazingly , the smallest air force since 1947 , the smallest army since 1939 , and one of the smallest navies , listen to this , since 1917 .
like the cold war , we also need to fight this battle by collecting intelligence and then protecting -- protecting -- our classified secrets .
hillary clinton has taught us all how much of a problem we have by cybersecurity .
big thing , cybersecurity .
we ca n't have someone in the oval office who does n't understand the meaning of the word " confidential " or " classified . "
now , i think she probably understands the meaning .
such a serious situation .
and by the way , today , much to the consternation of many , the new cnn poll was just released and trump is winning .
trump is winning , meaning -- meaning -- you 're winning , i 'm not winning , you 're winning .
you 're winning .
you 're winning .
the movement is winning , because this is indeed a movement , folks .
when you look at this room and you look at another room in this building and you look at thousands of people outside and you learned about it two days ago , this is not just a normal situation .
this is a movement .
it 's a movement .
we 're tired of incompetent people running our country into the ground .
the new revelations about hillary clinton from the just - released fbi documents make more clear than ever that she fails to meet the minimum standard for running for public office .
if she applied for a low - level job at the state department today , just a low - level job , she could n't even get a security clearance based on what she 's done .
her conduct is disqualifying .
let 's run through what we discovered in those fbi documents , which , by the way , were released late on friday just prior to labor day weekend , and the interview took place over the july 4th weekend .
it 's important .
and we 're hoping matt lauer will ask about it on wednesday night to her when he does the town hall , because she is being protected by the media , by the press like nobody ever has been protected in the history of this country .
me , on the other hand , it 's a total pile - on .
actually , a couple of the media people have said , also in the history of our country there has been nobody hit so hard , so viciously , so violently , and i will tell you so ridiculously unfairly , as donald trump .
i 'm proud to do it for you , folks .
i 'm proud to do it .
you know the expression , whatever ?
it 's clear from the fbi report that hillary clinton lied about her handling of confidential information .
she repeatedly told the country that she understood the classified system , then she told the fbi she did n't understand that the letter c meant confidential or even classified in the documents she e - mailed .
on 39 separate occasions , 39 , she said she could n't recall details about her mishandling of classified information and she could n't even name one step she took to make sure foreign hackers could n't get into her totally illegal server .
keep in mind that her insecure e - mails included e - mails about the drone program .
it 's also clear from the fbi report that hillary clinton and her top aides knowingly destroyed evidence and covered up their actions .
after her private server was revealed last march , her staff deleted all the e - mails and wiped it clean using a software designed to prevent any recovery .
she bleached her e - mails .
nobody even heard about it before , and nobody does it because it 's a very expensive process .
why would anybody that 's getting rid of e - mails that had to do with the wedding ?
and also , was n't it -- remember , right -- yoga ?
yoga .
yoga and the wedding .
why are you , when you delete 33,000 -- i figure five for the wedding and two for the yoga , right ?
so that 's seven .
but why do you acid wash or bleach the e - mails ?
nobody even heard of it before , very expensive .
just ask yourself .
then they used hammers to destroy phones so they could n't be turned over .
and by the way , who uses 13 different iphones in four years ?
who ?
the only people who use that many phones are usually involved in very , very , and i mean very shady activity .
and now she 's running for president .
and by the way , did you ever notice , she never talks about policy , she never talks about illegal immigration , she never talks about anything .
all she does is a total hit job on donald trump .
she makes up terms , right ?
she makes up terms .
temperament -- you know what they did ?
they got madison avenue , that 's the big advertising people , and they probably drew , like , 20 terms and they go , oh , let 's see , temperament , oh , temperament , yeah , let 's use that one .
so i have to tell you this , i have to say it , i think my single- greatest asset of any assets i have is my temperament and i know how to win .
but it 's my temperament , it 's my single - greatest asset .
and every time you hear it , just remember this is a phony group of lying people .
and tell her we want to hear about your policy on jobs , on illegal immigration .
i want to hear what she 's going to do to stop the jobs from leaving north carolina and going to mexico and other places .
ok ?
let her tell us .
because you know what , folks ?
she does n't have a clue , not even a clue .
people who have nothing to hide do n't smash phones with hammers .
they do n't .
people who have nothing to hide do n't bleach -- nobody 's ever heard of it -- do n't bleach their e - mails or destroy evidence to keep it from being publicly archived as required under federal law .
and she got rid of these e - mails after congress , not before , after congress requested them .
think of that .
can you imagine if i or somebody else did that ?
can you imagine if rudy giuliani did that ?
oh , rudy , you 'd be in such trouble .
poor , rudy , right ?
it 's unbelievable .
folks , i 'm telling you , in history -- in history -- there has never been a situation like is going on with justice and hillary clinton .
there has never been a situation like is going on with the media protecting hillary clinton .
let 's do better than that .
let 's win on november 8th , ok .
let 's win .
hillary clinton failed to turn over thousands of documents , then tried to shield her criminal conduct by having her chief of staff declare herself to be hillary clinton 's private attorney .
hillary and her top aides told the fbi and others related in the lawsuit that they could n't recall or remember , ca n't remember anything .
by the way , if she really ca n't remember , she ca n't be president .
she does n't remember anything !
she does n't even remember whether or not she was instructed on how to use e - mails .
were you instructed on how to use it ?
i ca n't remember .
but that 's in addition to the guy who set up the server .
remember him ?
and he pleaded the fifth amendment .
what are we going to do with this guy ?
what happened ?
he pleaded the fifth , right ?
he pleaded the fifth .
where is he ?
where is he ?
is he living ?
where is he ?
he pleaded the fifth and that was the end , we never heard about him again .
boy , i 'll tell you , this is like a third - world country , folks .
it 's terrible .
this is really , if we bring it up , this is like watergate , only it 's worse , because here our foreign enemies were in a position to hack our most sensitive national security secrets .
no one takes all the risks hillary clinton took unless they 're trying to cover up massive , massive crimes .
hillary clinton using , and you know this , she was using state department to dole out special favors and access to her friends and to her donors , totally special favors .
it 's called pay for play .
one example of pay for play is what the clintons did in haiti .
so let me stop here for a second and say how much we appreciate the haitian - american community in florida and across our country .
and we 've had a great relationship with that community .
we send our prayers to the many still suffering in haiti from the earthquake .
but while haiti has suffered , the clintons and their pals have totally cashed in .
bill and hillary 's brothers have signed housing deals in haiti and one wound up on the board of a gold mining company .
clinton foundation donors have seen the clintons pave the way for their investments .
in one deal , hillary clinton set aside environmental and labor rules to help a south korean company , with a record of violating workers ' rights , set up what amounts to a sweatshop in haiti .
the facility has produced only a fraction of the jobs it promised and faces reports of wage theft all over the place .
people are asking , where did all the money go ?
this november , it 's up to the american people to stop the clintons from raiding america the way they 've raided so many other people and places over the years .
one of the groups in america that have been harmed the most by hillary clinton 's policies are african americans .
she sees them only as votes , not as people worthy of a better future .
it 's called vote for me now , i 'll do lots of things , and then you get the vote , i 'll see you in four years , folks .
liar .
many african americans have succeeded greatly in this country .
we honor and protect , we really do , we protect these total achievements .
so many have really , they 've just succeeded and i have such respect and admiration for that success .
but that includes , and i have to say , lowering taxes , because we 're going to do things for them , for everyone , lowering taxes on small - business owners to 15 percent .
we 're going to lower taxes on our businesses to keep our jobs .
we 're going to lower taxes on all businesses so that jobs do n't leave our country .
but millions of african americans in our inner cities remain trapped in poverty , joblessness and failing schools .
and these are the worst schools you 'll ever see .
the democratic party has run inner cities for 50 , 60 , 70 and even a hundred years .
forty percent of african - american children live in poverty , including 45 percent of those under the age of 6 .
fifty - eight percent of african american youth are not working , they ca n't get a job .
approximately 2,900 people have been shot in chicago since the beginning of the year , and nearly 4,000 people have been killed in chicago since president obama took office .
and that 's his home community .
nationwide , think of this , nationwide , african americans are nearly 60 percent of the murder victims under the age of 22 .
this is a national crisis .
and anybody who fails to understand that is not fit to seek the presidency of the united states .
to those african americans and hispanics suffering in crime and poverty , i say very simply give donald trump a chance .
what do you have to lose ?
we 're going to bring back your jobs , rebuild your cities , give parents and students school choice .
we 're going to make your communities safe so you do n't get shot when you walk down the street with your child .
what do you have to lose ?
nothing !
i will not let you down .
we 're going to push a new civil rights agenda .
we believe every american has the right to a safe community , a great education and government that protects their jobs , not gives their jobs away to foreign countries .
this weekend , i had the honor to join a church service in detroit at the great faith ministries international .
it was an amazing experience .
you probably saw it .
it was a really incredible experience .
i will fight for detroit .
i will fight for chicago .
i will fight for baltimore and d.c. and , by the way , will i be fighting for north carolina , that i can tell you ...   ... and for every part of this nation .
and i will fight to bring us all together as one american people .
i did n't need to do this .
i did n't need to do this .
it 's not easy .
it 's nasty .
it 's nasty .
i talk about the fact that people in the audience 18 years ago are making more money 18 years ago than they 're making today in real wages .
a lot of people , do n't raise your hands , but a lot of people , i hear that .
eighteen years ago , they made more money than they make today .
and today , they 're working two jobs in many cases , also partly because of " obamacare , " but they 're working two jobs and they 're working harder .
now , as you get older , maybe it would be nice not to work quite as hard .
but i can only say this .
i 've also gotten older and i 'm working a hell of a lot harder than i 've ever worked before , that i can tell you .
true .
true .
i will fight to bring back our jobs , and that means all those jobs lost right here in north carolina and every other state in our great union .
let me quote the same passage from the bible , i read on saturday , from 1 john 4 : no one has ever seen god , but if we love one another , god lives in us and his love is made complete in us , all of us .
made complete in us .
imagine what our country could accomplish if we started working toward one people , under one god , saluting one flag .
it 's time to break with the bitter failures of the past and to embrace the new american future .
in this future , we will , and we have to , we have no choice , it 's just like our military , we have no choice , we have to build it strong again .
we have no choice .
in our military , we have the greatest people , men and women , on earth .
but we have to give them what it takes .
we have to back them .
and we have to back our police , by the way .
we have to back our police .
we have to be a country of law and order .
and in this future , we will respect the dignity of all americans , and that means great jobs , great schools and great , safe neighborhoods .
we will keep our children safe , which requires secure borders , a strong military and supporting law enforcement .
jobs will return , that 's right , and the wall will happen .
prosperity will rise , and new factories and plants will come rushing back to our shores .
government corruption will end .
and the state department will answer to the voters , not hillary clinton 's donors and special interests .
so few people remember , but republicans are the party of abraham lincoln .
and come november 8th , we will once again have a government of , by and for the people .
you must get out and vote .
you must bring all of your friends .
you must bring everybody .
get out and vote and be vigilant , watch what 's happening , watch what 's happening , because we 're going to win north carolina , we 're going to win a lot of different places .
watch what happens .
because we 're going to take back the white house and we 're going to make america proud again .
we will make america strong again .
we are going to make america safe again .
and we will make america great again !
thank you !
god bless you !
thank you !
thank you , everybody .
thank you .
thank you .
thank you .
and we love big ben .
big ben 's a friend .
we play golf together .
he once hit a shot that went head   right into a tree .
it was a massive tree like this .
the ball hit the tree so hard , i swear i said , ben , within two years , that 's tree 's going to be dead .
and you know what ?
two years later , he 's shooting the same .
it 's because we have   here .
but two years later , that tree was dead .
he is a strong guy , and he 's good guy too .
big ben .
so i 'm thrilled to be back in pennsylvania .
great place .
i went to school in pennsylvania .
november 8th , we 're going to win this state and we 're going to win back the white house .
we 're going to take on the special interests , the corrupt media -- and it is corrupt -- and the career politicians that have stolen your jobs , your wealth and stolen our middle class .
they 've stolen our middle class .
we 're going to make pennsylvania rich again by bringing back our jobs .
we 'll bring back our jobs .
and hillary clinton does n't have a clue about how to bring back jobs , that i can tell you .
she does n't have a clue .
if she wanted to , she could n't do it .
you know , in new york state , she ran for the senate .
and you know what , the state new york is a disaster for jobs .
and she said , " i 'm going to bring back 200,000 jobs . "
guess what ?
right down the tubes , worse today than ever before .
how many have watched the debate last night ?
good .
we had a lot of fun .
and i would say that hillary is highly overrated .
it was fun watching .
i mean , most of us   unanimous decisions .
but some of these people , they were so pain -- it was like a painful experience .
but we 're fighting for you , so what 's good for me is good for you .
and i mean that totally 100 percent .
and we 're going to talk about a lot of things today , but i always want you to remember this above all else .
we 're going to bring back the jobs to pennsylvania .
we 're going to bring back steel .
your steel has been stolen from you in this area .
natural gas , the epa is killing you and killing your companies and you 're losing your jobs .
let me tell you , that 's going to turned around on day one if i win .
on day one .
your jobs are coming back to pennsylvania , and they 're coming back to this area .
and that means we 're going to take care of our steel workers and we 're going to take care of our miners , believe me .
i 'm going to take care of you .
we laid out a goal , uplifting vision for america .
lower taxes , better trade deals -- i 'll give you a purse .
and millions and millions of new jobs .
but all crooked hillary can do was talk about small , petty things last night .
during the course of 90 minutes , she was exposed and her values were exposed .
she had no defense .
all she could do was lie .
she lied so much last night .
they do n't like to catch her on the lies .
i explained how hillary clinton oversaw the disasters in libya , including the drawing of the infamous red line .
remember she said , oh , i had nothing -- well , it turned out she was there , by the way .
remember , she said she was n't there ?
the red line was actually drawn in august of 2012 .
no , she was there .
she lied about it .
she said she was n't involved in that catastrophe .
but that was just one of many .
of course , the moderators did n't call her out and they did n't call out this lie that she told .
hillary clinton said she did n't delete her e - mails after a congressional subpoena .
but she did .
that was another lie .
that was a hard one to believe .
how did she say no to that one ?
the subpoena -- well , the subpoena was sent on march 4 , 2015 .
crooked hillary 's e - mails were bleached and destroyed .
now , nobody bleaches them .
you know what ?
bleaching is so expensive .
it 's really a very expensive process .
but when you bleach them , it pretty much means they 're gone .
although i 've always heard you ca n't get rid of e - mails .
i 've been told you ca n't .
i wonder if the nsa has her e - mails , do you think ?
do you think ?
i do n't think they looked too hard for her e - mails .
what do you think , folks ?
do you think -- i do n't know .
i 'll tell you , i bet -- i do n't know this for a fact , but i 'll bet within the fbi -- you know , you have some of the greatest americans in the world that are so proud of the fbi -- and i 'll bet you they are sick to their stomachs at what 's happening .
sick to their stomachs .
anyway , her e - mails were destroyed somewhere between march 25th and march 31st after the congressional subpoena was received .
you know , if you are suing somebody privately and they delete and get rid of all your stuff that you subpoena , you got a very big consequence .
you know what the consequence is , right ?
here 's -- here 's the united states congress -- united states congress subpoenaing to see e - mails and other things and they 're gone .
and now , by the way , did you read yesterday ?
two boxes of e - mails and materials are now missing .
very , very sad .
special prosecutor , here we come , right ?
if i win , we 're going to appoint a special prosecutor because we can not allow this to happen to our country .
we ca n't .
we 're like a third world nation .
hillary had no defense for her contract   and did n't even try to defend the ridiculous   that these were 30,000 e - mails about yoga and wedding planning .
let 's see .
you have 30,000 -- 33,000 e - mails deleted , right ?
i would bet she had three for yoga and maybe five for the wedding , right ?
what about the rest ?
she had no defense when i brought up her failures in iraq , syria and libya .
she had no defense when i brought up her failures as a senator from new york promising to create the 200,000 jobs for upstate new york .
but instead , the jobs were shipped to mexico and other countries .
she had no defense for calling on millions of americans and then saying that they were deplorable -- that 's you , deplorable .
that 's me , it 's all of us .
and you know what 's worse ?
irredeemable .
i do n't know , which is worse ?
would you rather be deplorable ?
irredeemable means you have no chance , right ?
we 're deplorable and irredeemable .
i do n't think so .
i think we have the greatest people on earth .
the smartest people .
we have the smartest .
we have the most loyal people .
that 's one thing every poll points out that , boy , trump 's people , it 's like the most loyal ever .
and one thing i know , we 're going to get out and vote and we 're going to be voting .
and you remember the primaries .
donald trump is behind , voting begins tomorrow , should be very interesting , but it looks like mr. trump will not be able to win this state , but he 's put up a good fight .
next day , donald trump wins by 22 points .
everyone ...   crazy deal .
mr. brexit , mr. brexit .
remember i said brexit 's going to happen because i have a lot of property over there .
brexit 's going to happen .
they all laughed .
they said donald trump said that brexit 's going to happen .
is n't he ridiculous ?
anyway , three days later , they vote , brexit happens .
they never say anything .
they never said anything .
but that 's all right .
this is like brexit , folks .
you watch .
we want our independence back .
we want our borders strong .
we do n't want people coming in from syria that we have no idea who the hell they are .
as i said last night -- and i mean this -- she 's got hatred in her heart .
she wants to divide america .
i want to bring us together as one people .
and by the way , we have thousands and thousands of people outside .
you know , that , right ?
do you know how lucky you are ?
do you know how lucky you are ?
and i guess they 're not allowing them in .
i do n't know why because there 's thousands of people .
where is the fire marshal ?
let some more people come in , i see some seats over there .
let some people -- fire marshal , we need your help .
where 's our fire marshal ?
let them come in .
we 've got 3,000 or 4,000 people standing out there .
see , i guess they figure you folks are taking the seats in the very back .
we ought to let some more people come in .
i always get a kick -- i mean , i know a lot about fire and fire marshals , but you have a room with four walls and a roof and nothing to burn .
let the people in .
hillary also had no defense for obamacare , which is a total disaster .
i 'm going to repeal and replace your disastrous obamacare .
much cheaper , much better .
hillary had no defense for her secret speeches to wall street and international banks that she hid from the public and which were exposed by wikileaks .
and by the way , just as i 'm walking on the stage , mayor giuliani said you 're not going to believe this , look at this , we have all of these new charges .
you see it just came down today .
wikileaks , some new stuff , some brutal stuff .
i mean , i 'd read it to you , but to hell with it , just trust me .
it 's real bad stuff .
the speech transcripts contain scandalous revelations about hillary clinton that disqualify her from seeking public office .
and she is .
she 's disqualified just on the fact that she did that with her e - mails .
think of it ; deleting 33,000 -- think of it .
how can you do it ?
these transcripts also shine a spotlight on how this corrupt establishment works , where politicians meet in secret with the big banks , collect massive sums of money , then betray the american worker , which is you and me and sort of all of us , we 're all workers .
we 're all working , we just work differently .
you know , i tell this to people .
we have people in this room right now that made more money 18 years ago than they 're making now .
they work a lot harder right now than they did 18 years ago .
their job was better 18 years ago and they 're older .
and the only thing i say is i 'm older also , and i 've never worked this hard either , folks , i will tell you .
that 's for sure .
my campaign is powered by my money and also small donations from millions of visitors to our website who just want their country back .
they want america back .
last night , i asked hillary clinton why she does n't take some of the hundreds of millions of dollars that she made   -- so i 'll over $ 100 million into the campaign of my money .
is that smart or is that stupid ?
take some of the money she made selling favors to special interest and invest them in her campaign , instead of having to rely on even more corporate donations .
she looked like , oh my god , why did he bring this up ?
she had no answer .
she was flabbergasted , i can tell you .
in the secret speeches released by wikileaks , this is yesterday and the day before , hillary -- not as good as today , buy the way -- hillary clinton -- but i say that because the press will try not to pick them up because they try and protect her .
i 'll tell you what , the only thing she 's got going in the media .
without the media , she would not have a chance .
hillary clinton told her wall street donors that you need to have a public position and a private position .
in other words , you need to be dishonest to run for office .
in other words , have one for the public and one for the people that are giving you the money .
right ?
and that is very much right in that whole thing .
i mean , it 's crazy .
how did hillary clinton try to defend this shocking admission ?
she did not deny -- she said this awful thing .
instead she blamed honest abe incon .
honest abe !
so hillary clinton for lying , blamed abe lincoln , commonly known as honest abe .
he 's spinning in his grave .
the speeches also show that crooked hillary supports cutting medicare and social security benefits , one more example of how hillary clinton 's public position is a lie .
she wants to knock the hell out of your social security , she wants to knock the hell out of your medicare / medicaid .
and i 'm going to save them , ok ?
this is a little reversal for the democrat / republican , but i am going to save them   because we 're going to make -- we 're going to make our country rich again .
we 're going to bring back our jobs .
we 're going to make good trade deals .
we 're going to have countries that we are defending all over the world pay a little bit more money , if that is ok .
which , in all fairness , until i came along , you never even heard about that .
right ?
and then when i say that they say , oh , trump does not want to defend japan .
no , i 'd love to defend , but let them pay a little more money , right , is n't that good ?
we 're dying , we 're going to have $ 20 trillion in debt , $ 20 trillion .
so some of these countries that we do such a good job for , where we defend them -- and we love doing it , but they got to help us out a little bit .
right ?
most shockingly , these speeches show hillary clinton saying , quote , my dream is a hemispheric common market with open trade -- you know what that does to your community ?
that 's the end .
and open borders !
in other words , she wants the united states to surrender to global governance   with no controls over trade or immigration .
great .
can you imagine ?
seriously .
can you imagine ?
she 's saying she 's for nafta , which she was .
you know , her husband signed nafta .
but she 's also for trans - pacific partnership by the way , nafta is the worst trade deal ever made in the history -- not of this country , but of the world .
what it 's done to pennsylvania and ohio and update new york and new england .
poor new england , what it 's done to new england .
so she 's for radical , unlimited immigration .
in other words , people are going to pour in , but that 's what she 's for .
i 'm building a wall and she 's for , like , come on across .
slight difference .
a slight difference .
we 're going to build a wall .
who is going to pay for the wall ?
by the way , they may not know it yet , but i think they 're getting the idea .
but when you think of it , she wants to have people pour across .
now , the border patrol agents , 16,500 , endorsed me recently .
and last week ...   never endorsed a presidential candidate before in long history .
and last week , ice endorsed .
ice is -- these are great people .
these are people that want to do their jobs , but they 're told to stand back , do n't do your job .
these are great people .
you know , it 'd be a lot easier for them if they did n't endorse me because they could just take it nice and easy .
but they want -- so , we got ice , we have the border patrol agents , we have sheriff joe from arizona .
we love sheriff ...   and hillary clinton 's got nothing .
so she wants people to pour across the borders .
she wants thousands and thousands of people to come in from syria .
i mean , 550 percent more than our president obama .
a trump administration will completely renegotiate nafta or we will walk away and make a brand - new deal that 's far better where actually businesses start coming to pennsylvania and to ohio .
unbelievable .
and we will stop the disastrous trans - pacific partnership , which would be almost as bad as nafta .
nothing could be as bad .
but we 'll stop it .
and we 'll make deals .
but this is a complex deal with many countries .
you have to see the arrows all over the place .
once you sign it , it 's 5,000 pages , more than that long .
once you sign it , it 's a mess .
i like free trade .
we make one deal , two deals , three -- we make it with individual countries , and if they do n't behave , we terminate them .
we send them what 's called a notification of termination .
but that will never happen because during that 30-day period , we 'll renegotiate a better deal for our country , ok ?
and you the other way , you ca n't terminate .
there 's too many -- it 's -- people go crazy .
you have to be like a grand chessmaster , and we do n't have any of them .
hillary clinton 's radical call for open borders , meaning anyone in the world can enter the united states without any limit at all , would end the united states as we know it today .
no one who supports open borders should be able to run for president because we wo n't have a country .
and by the way , weeks ago , i called out hillary clinton for supporting open borders and the media said i was wrong .
now , i 've been proven right .
where is the media rushing to correct these false stories ?
because in the wikileaks , it was all about open borders , free trade for everybody .
see , i like free trade , but we want smart trade .
it 's got to be -- it should n't even be called free trade , it should be called smart trade .
i do n't like the term free trade .
because free trade , to have it really work , you need really , really smart people negotiating your details .
and all these other countries have smart people .
for them , it 's important .
for us , we have people , they do n't know what they 're doing .
no less than bernie sanders declared that open borders would be the end of america .
bernie sanders said open borders means there would be no united states , doing away with the concept of nation - state .
sanders also explained how open borders would make everybody in america poorer by radically reducing wages .
maybe that 's ok with him .
not ok with me .
by the way , how many ways can hillary clinton betray bernie sanders ?
she really has betrayed him .
i mean , look , even if we do n't agree with him , i mean -- you know , bernie sanders would have been a legend .
he would have gone down as a legendary figure in history if he did n't make the deal with the devil .
but he made the deal with her and now he 's just another guy .
she attacked his supporters as basement dwellers , she admitted in secret she 's in favor of entitlement cuts and she 's for open borders and open trade .
your state has lost one in three manufacturing jobs .
since bill and hillary clinton 's nafta and china deals happened .
i 'm going to stop foreign cheating , the product dumping , which by the way , is killing your steel industry , and in this case has already killed much of your steel industry .
how many people agree with me that china -- because this is such a big steel area , or was -- we 're gon na bring it back , do n't worry about it .
but how many people agree with me that china had so much to do and stupid politicians with the killing of the steel industry in the state of pennsylvania ?
between that and currency manipulation , which they do like grand masters and we do like we 're playing bad games of checkers , we 're going to start making things in america again .
and we 're going to start making things in pennsylvania again .
do n't let them tell you you 're doing well because you 're doing lousy .
pennsylvania steel will build our future and pennsylvania energy -- our miners , we 're bringing our miners back -- will power our future .
congressman , get up there , will you ?
do we know our congressman ?
look at this guy .
i tell you , they say he was a hell of a   football player .
they say he was -- i do n't know if he 'd be so good today .
would you be good today ?
i do n't know .
but he has been such an incredible supporter , and so great , and he 's standing next to my daughter tiffany who came today .
thank you , congressman .
thank you .
we have such great support in these areas .
that includes , though , clean coal , shale oil and natural gas we have to protect .
pennsylvania workers will be hired to do the job .
hillary clinton would rather give your jobs to people that pour into the country illegally .
i explained how she favors a 550 percent increase in syrian refugees coming into our land .
we have nothing -- we know nothing about them .
and by the way , we all have hearts .
we know what 's going on .
it 's horrible .
when you look at syria , when you look at the migration .
we 'll build safe zones and we 'll get others to pay , like the gulf states .
they have nothing but money and they 're not putting up their fair share .
they have nothing but money .
they 'll pay .
and we 'll lead it , but they 'll pay .
i also exposed how hillary clinton is personally responsible for the release of thousands of dangerous criminal aliens into the united states .
as secretary of state , hillary clinton refused to make foreign countries take back their own criminal aliens by canceling visas , a duty vested in her by the law .
and i must tell you , she refused to use forceful diplomatic action .
so we 'll have a killer , and he 'll be from another country , let 's say someplace in south america , and we 'll catch him because our ice people are great and our border patrol people are amazing , so we 'll catch him .
and what happens is we 'll want to bring him back to whatever country that person comes from .
this could be a killer , a drug dealer , somebody else , a gang member , the head of a gang .
hillary clinton would say , " we ca n't force him back into that country . "
the hell we ca n't .
i guarantee you that under my administration , there will not be one bad guy that is not forced back into his country .
not one .
there wo n't be any .
you wo n't be reading about it .
we will put such pressure on those countries to take these people back .
but hillary clinton did say -- i 'm sorry madam secretary , if you can believe this .
this was prior to her naps .
i 'm sorry , madam secretary .
but they wo n't take this killer back . "
oh , that 's ok .
well , bring him back and let him out on our streets . "
and you know what happens , right ?
the remembrance project .
you know what that is , right ?
the remembrance -- these are the most incredible mothers and fathers and sisters and brothers who have lost their loved ones to killers , to killers , illegal immigrants that killed their loved ones .
and it 's a sad thing to see , that i can tell you .
her refusal to take such diplomatic action has caused the release of thousands of criminals into our community .
one foreign national and convicted killer who should have been sent back to his home country in 2012 was instead set free by clinton 's watch .
six months after his release , he killed again , murdering a 25-year old beautiful casey chadwick .
you probably heard about it .
in just one single year of hillary clinton 's tenure , 2010 , nearly 4,000 convicted criminal aliens were released into american communities because their home countries just said , " no , we 're not taking them back .
we 're not taking them back .
yes , we 're supposed to legally .
we 're not doing it . "
so we took them .
another revelation from those secret speeches is that hillary clinton knew that the state department and their devices were under threat of hacking , and yet she traveled overseas with her totally insecure telephone .
remember the ones that she banged the hell out of when she wanted to get get rid of ...   " no i was n't trying to . "
who banged their phones .
when you throw your cell phones , does anybody bang them with a hammer ?
this is still more evidence that she lied to the fbi , just like she lied to congress .
and she lied to us .
one more very important issue where i exposed the hypocrisy of hillary clinton , and the media , was on hillary clinton 's treatment of women .
i was getting beaten up for 72 hours on all the networks for inappropriate words 12 years ago .
locker room talk , whatever you want to call it .
but i said to myself , wait a minute .
and i just saw a very inappropriate words , but bill clinton sexually assaulted innocent women and hillary clinton attacked those women viciously .
one of them said more viciously than he attacked them .
if they want to release more tapes saying inappropriate things , we 'll continue to talk about bill and hillary clinton doing inappropriate things .
there are so many of them , folks .
you probably saw yesterday we brought four wonderful women to st. louis .
and honestly , it was both very beautiful and very sad .
they really -- they 've been trying to get their feelings out for so long and the media would n't take it .
one thing with me , the media takes it .
whatever .
so they were able to get what they wanted to get out .
to quote juanita broaddrick , " hillary clinton threatened me after bill clinton raped me . "
she 's been struggling to get the media to pay attention to her for many , many years .
so last night , i decided we would expose the hypocrisy of the clintons and the media and our politicians to the entire world .
as i outlined last night , bill clinton was the worst abuser of women ever to sit in the oval office .
he was a predator .
hillary clinton systematically attacked and discredited the victims of bill clinton 's sexual harassment and assault .
these things are n't written by the media , but they 're true .
written by many books .
these victims include names like kathleen willey , juanita broaddrick , paula jones , connie hamzy , eileen wellstone , sandra allen james and cristy zercher .
and there are many , many more .
for decades , hillary clinton has been deeply familiar with her husband 's predatory behavior , and instead of trying to stop it , she made it possible for him to take advantage of even more women .
she put even more women in harm 's way and then she goes out and says , " i love women .
i 'm going to help women .
i 'm gon na help women . "
she 's a total hypocrite .
the hypocrisy of the media and our politicians is hard to believe .
they condemn my words , but they ignore and defend the -- and this is the way it is -- the reprehensible actions of hillary and bill clinton that have destroyed and hurt so many lives .
but perhaps the greatest window into the character of hillary clinton can be found in what she did as a lawyer when she was defending a man who raped a 12-year - old little girl .
desperate to win her case , hillary clinton blamed the 12-year - old victim .
her name was kathleen shelton .
she was with us yesterday .
she was right sitting front row at the debate .
as the lawyer for the rapist , hillary clinton said the little girl was emotionally unstable and had a quote , " tendency to seek out older men and engage in fantasizing . "
this is -- hillary ruined that little girl 's life , destroyed her life , then years later she was recorded laughing about it on videotape .
she was laughing at the girl .
there 's nothing hillary clinton wo n't do or say to obtain power , and it 's about time people started to understand that .
but the hypocrites in the media do n't want to talk about what hillary clinton has done to these victims .
they do n't want to talk about what their other political heroes have done to other innocent girls and women .
people like kennedy , chappaquiddick .
we remember that .
driving his car into a pond instead of calling the police , possibly saving her life .
in fact , almost definitely being able to save her life .
he went home and went to sleep .
did not report the incident to the police for 10 hours , yet he was hailed as a hero .
the last 72 hours has framed what this election is all about .
it 's about the american people fighting back against corrupt politicians who do n't care about anything except staying in power and keeping their donors happy .
what i want to say to every american right now is that i accept the mantle of this responsibility for all of us , for all of us .
we have an absolute incredible situation taking place , folks .
and i will never stop fighting for you against the washington establishment that has betrayed each and every one of you , betrayed the country .
our government has lost its virtue .
right now , it 's just about protecting the powerful , and you know what i mean .
and i know it better than anybody else .
and i 'm doing this because i just think it 's so damn unfair .
and it 's ultimately going to lead to the destruction of our country .
and we 're doing it .
the clintons have corrupted our government at the very highest levels .
rank and file -- incredible people by the way , incredible people -- rank and file fbi agents are shocked at the corruption that they 're witnessing at levels of the fbi that nobody would have thought it was possible .
the department of justice , where bill clinton gets into the back of an airplane for 39 minutes just prior to a determination being made .
of course , you and i know the determination was made a long time ago .
but gets on with the attorney general because he happened to be in arizona playing gold .
it was 110 degrees out , right ?
nobody saw him on the golf course .
just happened to be there .
oh , there 's the attorney general .
let me get back on the plane .
so they spend 39 minutes in the back of the plane .
they talked about two things ; golf and grandchildren .
thirty - nine minutes .
so i give the grandchildren five minutes , i give the golf three minutes , right ?
what else do you think might have been talked about ?
they ca n't believe , these fbi people , these people for life in the fbi -- these are people that are unbelievable people .
they love this country so much .
and they 're seeing things that they 've never seen before where guilty , guilty , guilty , guilty , no charge , no problem .
they see all of this stuff going on and these people much be sick to their stomachs .
what have we seen in the e - mail scandal ?
what have we seen in third - world - level corruption ?
this is really what it is .
it 's third - world -- we 're like in a third - world country right now .
and this november is our one chance , november 8th , our one chance to save our country .
it 's the last chance we 're going to have , folks .
i 've traveled around this country talking about change .
but my travels , the places i 've been , the people i 've met , they 've also changed me .
i 'm not proud of everything that i 've done in life .
i mean , who among us is ?
is anybody totally proud of every single element ?
some we are .
but let me tell you what i 'm very proud of .
i 'm proud that i 've always treated the blue collar worker -- and i consider myself in a certain way to be a blue collar worker -- that make this country run with tremendous respect .
the waiters and waitresses , the cops and firefighters , the receptionist and the custodians , we treat them with dignity and respect .
these are great people .
these are great people .
and our police and law enforcement officials , we have to be thankful for them because they have done an amazing job .
i 'm proud of the tens of thousands of jobs that i 've created and i 'm proud that i provide equal play and equal pay for equal work .
and i have to do that , i have to do that .
i 've promoted women to the highest positions in my companies over the years and they have done an incredible job .
i 'm proud of our unbelievable movement , because that 's what we have is a movement .
men and women who only want a better future for their children .
that 's what they want , that 's what we want .
i know that if my father and my mother were alive today , they would be very , very proud of me and they 'd be proud of everybody in this room and all of the other stadiums and all of the other rooms that we 're in .
we have the greatest people in the world .
the greatest people .
and we are going to make america great again .
and it 's going to happen fast too , i can tell you .
my parents knew what was in my heart .
they would know the love that i have for all the hardworking people in this country and the love that i have for my country itself .
i 'm glad that i have the chance today to open my heart to all of you and tell you how much i want to make our country so much better , so much stronger , so much safer , so much wealthier .
we have to do all of those things .
a woman came up to me and said , mr. trump , please , sir , leave out wealthy ; it does n't sound good .
i said , can i use rich instead ?
rich .
no , no , that does n't sound good .
i said , here 's the problem , countries all over the world are ripping off the united states .
they 're taking our wealth , they 're taking our jobs , they 're taking our future .
we have no choice .
we want to save our social security and our medicare and our medicaid .
we want to save our wealth .
we want to keep our taxes as low as possible .
right now , they 're far too high .
our taxes are going to be cut massively by me , if i get in .
and hillary 's going to raise taxes .
our regulations , which are killing our companies , are going to be cut massively by me .
and i 'll tell you what .
you look at your energy companies , your natural gas , your coal companies , your steel companies , they ca n't do business , they ca n't compete with the rest of the world because the regulations are so horrible and so massive .
so we 're going to cut taxes .
hillary 's going to raise taxes .
we 're going to cut taxes big league for the middle class , big league for business .
we 're going to grow again .
companies are n't going to be leaving our shores .
they 're not going to be leaving us for mexico and other places .
we 're going to have companies coming back and new companies being formed .
it 's going to happen very quickly .
my whole life i 've been a fighter , and now i 'm going to fight for you .
we 're going to fight .
we 're going to bring back our military .
you know , our military needs enhancement .
it 's so depleted .
we 're going to fight for our veterans who are being horribly mistreated , not taken care of properly .
in many cases , illegal immigrants are being taken care of much better than our veterans .
we 're going to fight for our second amendment , which is under siege .
we 're going to take care of that one easily .
we 're going to fight to have supreme court justices that believe in our constitution appointed to the supreme court .
we 're going to fight for all of our businesses , but we 're going to fight for the steel businesses that have been taken away from us .
we 're going to fight from those -- for those miners whose jobs have been .
you know , when i was in west virginia , i met incredible people and a lot of miners .
and i said to them , did you ever think of maybe moving to another area and going into another profession ?
they said , mr. trump -- just like she goes , hell no .
but just like -- it 's just like that .
they say , mr. trump , we love being miners , we love mining .
our grandparents did it , our great parents -- grandparents did it , our fathers .
we love mining .
and i realized the love that they had for mining .
and as you remember , weeks before hillary clinton made a statement someplace else before going to west virginia and trying to get their vote , if you can believe this , she said we are going to close the mines and we 're going to put the miners out of work .
then she went to west virginia and she tried to convince them , well , she did n't mean it .
let me tell you , folks , we 're going to take care of our mines , we 're going to take care of our miners .
we 're going to have clean coal , clean coal , we 're going to have them .
but we 're going to bring back our .
and we 're going to protect a great new resource , something that really over the last fairly short period of time , from an energy standpoint , has become so important , and something so important to this area ; natural gas .
so we are going to keep our people working and we 're going to have a lot more people working .
we are going to get rid of obamacare .
we are going to get rid of common core .
we 're going to bring our education local .
we are going to make great and lasting trade deals , not the horrible trade deals .
this year on trade , we will have almost an $ 800 billion trade deficit .
think of it .
who negotiates these deals ?
who 's negotiating ?
in other words , countrywide .
with china , we 're going to lose almost $ 500 billion .
but think of this , countrywide we do all this work .
we 're going to have a trade deficit of $ 800 almost billion .
it 's not going to happen anymore , folks .
it 's not going to happen anymore .
we 're going to trade -- we 're going to trade , but i say we 're going to now have a two - lane .
you now , we have a one -- we have a one - lane superhighway going into mexico , right ?
you know that .
hello .
we have a one - lane highway going into mexico .
we 're going to make it maybe for a little while , to get some of it back , a one - lane highway coming back .
but ultimately , it 's going to be like this .
we want to be fair .
we 're going to bring pennsylvania steel and manufacturing back .
we 're going to unleash trillions in new energy , and we 're going to put our miners back to work .
we 're going to protect our hunters and save our second amendment .
hillary clinton wants to do big , big damage , big , big damage to the second amendment .
we 're going to fix your schools and your inner cities and reduce crime and poverty and joblessness .
and we 're going to liberate millions of african - americans and hispanic americans from poverty .
what they 're going through is unbelievable .
we 're going to make pennsylvania and ohio , and so many other places within our country , the manufacturing hub of the world once again .
we 're going to be able to do it .
it 's going to be not even hard to do .
but to do these things , we must push aside the politicians and the special interests who have betrayed us .
they 've betrayed us .
so this year , we have an election coming up on november 8th .
so important that you get out and vote .
so important that you watch other communities , because we do n't want this election stolen from us .
we do n't want this election stolen from us .
we do not want this election stolen .
we have a movement like they 've never seen before .
bill o'reilly and others have said this is the single greatest phenomena they 've ever seen .
we have a movement like no other .
we 're going to make that movement incredible .
and what we 're going to end up with is this : a country that 's not divided , a country that loves itself and loves its people .
we 're going to make a country where people are proud to come in , people are proud to come through the borders , people want to come through because they respect us and they respect our values .
we are going to make a country that 's wealthy again .
we 're going to make a country that 's safe again .
we 're going to make a country that know what it 's doing and -- and functions on common sense again -- functions on common sense .
our future is in our hands .
on november 8th , you 're going to look back and you 're going to say i believe , years from now , that was the most important day and the most important vote that you have ever cast because we 're going to turn our country around , we 're going to take back our country , we 're going to take back the white house .
we are going to work so hard and we are going to make america great again .
thank you .
thank you very much .
thank you , everybody .
what a group .
what a great state .
well , you know , i just landed and i was watching on the way in and i heard fox saying that they have a couple of thousand people , well , this is not a couple of thousand people , folks .
and over there , there 's thousands of people trying to get in .
i wish the fire department would let them in , in all fairness .
we 're outside , we do n't need a fire marshal , we 're outside .
so fire marshal , will you let the people in please ?
i assume the fire marshal is a democrat , i assume .
unbelievable , it never stops .
but i 'll tell you , we 've had a - an amazing time .
we just left , as you know , i know the   florida , which is a great , great section , especially if you like horses , and we had a crowd that you would not , over 15,000 people .
and they could n't get them all in either , they never can , because there 's movement going on that 's amazing , and in 27 days , we are going to win florida , and we are going to win back ...   we 're going to bring back our jobs , we 're going to renegotiate our disastrous trade deals .
we 're going to reduce surging crime , which is going down and bad , bad numbers .
we 're going to cut taxes , big league , and she is going to raise your taxes big league .
we 're going to get rid of many of our unnecessary regulations , lift the restrictions on american energy , and we 're going to end common core .
we 're going to reduce to cost of college , which is going up in record setting pace , make child care affordable , so important .
and we are going to repeal and replace the disaster known as obamacare .
we 're going to put america first and we 're going to be united in our love for our country .
we are a divided country right now , divided almost like never before .
we are going to be a united country again .
this election is a simple choice .
it 's a choice between putting our faith in a corrupt establishment or putting our faith in you , the american people .
you know , i just said , in front of this big , big crowd .
we just literally left , ca n't believe we 're going to end up doing -- the last two weeks i said we 're going to do four or five of these a day , can you believe that ?
now , let me ask you .
first of all , hillary has very small crowds , nobody cares , but ...   how many of these do you think hillary could do a day ?
maybe a half .
i was at this massive -- it was just like a really hot building .
it was a steep toe , it was over 100 degrees , we went for an hour and 10 minutes , the people were unbelievable , and i said jokingly , i said if the people of florida do n't vote for me , i 'm going to be very angry .
and one of the news commentators said , donald trump admonished   the people of florida .
and you know who i 'm talking about .
these guys are so crooked , their worse than hillary clinton .
i think they might be more crooked than hillary and that 's saying a lot .
i could n't believe it , i 'm watching it -- i said , i 'm going to be so angry at the people of florida , joking , everybody 's joking , everybody 's laughing , and he said , he admonished   the people of florida .
they make us sound like such jerks , it 's unbelievable .
i tell you what , these are the most dishonest people you 'll ever see .
these are horrible , horrible people .
now i know i 'm   and you know who i 'm talking about back there , you should be ashamed of yourself .
it 's a choice between the pessimism of the hillary clinton and the optimism of a move empowered by millions of people all over the country .
she 's been there for 30 years and has n't do n't anything but fail , take a look at what she 's done .
and during the last debate , which you know look , i want to partial and all , which i won big league , i mean that was not even close .
how about this ?
i 'm standing at the podium , my podium , i 'm standing by my chair , right ?
i 'm standing and she walks across , i said hi hillary , how are you doing ?
she walks across , and she stands in front of me and then the next i wake up by saying , oh we got all good reviews .
but wait , of all of the online polls , we won 10 out of 10 by big margins but forget it .
forget it , forget it .
so i 'm standing at my podium by my chair .
she walks across the room , she 's standing in front of me , right next to me , and the next day i say , what did the papers say ?
they say , he invaded her space .
i invaded her space .
believe me , the last space that i want to invade is her space , believe me .
i do n't want to invade her space .
we 're still trying to let these poor people come in .
come on fire marshal , do your job .
so - so we love those people .
you know they stand here for hours ?
they stand here for hours .
and i 'll tell you what , see that woman ?
she went down , she 'll be back .
they all come back .
we had one yesterday in a tremendous heat wave .
a tremendous - i mean   the place was hot .
and then , you know , i always like to say it 's 100 degrees because it is .
because some times if it 's really hot and if i 'm doing a little sweat - not too much , i 'm not too bad .
we 've all seen worse in the campaign trail , have n't we ?
but if i 'm doing a little , they 'll say , " donald trump was sweating . "
it 's 109 degrees at   these .
but you know these people , when they go down they do go down .
and they all come back .
i do n't even know if that 's a good thing or a bad thing .
but our friends have courage , it 's unbelievable .
sorry about   that .
but make sure she 's great .
so the department of justice fed information to the clinton campaign about the e - mail investigation so that the campaign could be prepared when they came into the interview .
did you ever hear a thing ?
we have mayor giuliani one of the great mayors - one of the great prosecutors .
where is he ?
where is our mayor ?
where is our mayor ?
as you know , he was one of the great prosecutors .
he said , " as long as i 've done this , i 've never heard of anything . "
and what 's happened with the fbi is so sad .
and you have great , great people in the fbi and i would n't know - although it looks like we 're reading stories about it , they are so disgusted at what 's gone on at the top .
they can not even believe what 's going on with the great institution of the fbi .
they can not believe what is going at the fbi .
these are unbelievable americans , these are unbelievable people .
they could not believe .
and for the attorney general to meet in the back of an airport   with bill clinton just prior to making this totally phony decision -- this totally disgusting , phony decision -- to meet in the back of an airplane because he just happened to be there - he just happened .
he just happened to be - he was in arizona - a place that i love and a place that we 're going to win big , by the way .
you watch .
because they like having borders .
they are getting inundated with drugs .
but it was in arizona -- now do you know how hot it was that day ?
it was so hot .
so he was there to play golf , he said , right ?
but you happen to see    oh , it 's the attorney general , gee that 's -- what a coincidence .
let me go in through the back of the plane .
see that plane , and other planes that i 've had over the years -- i 've never had anyone like , oh , i see someone on the runway .
oh , let them in for a little while , let 's chat .
never anybody in years and years .
so she let him in , oh , come on in .
hi .
how you doing ?
how 's everything ?
they talked about grandchildren , and -- what else ? --
they talked about golf .
now , 39 minutes is a long time .
let 's figure you talk about the grandchildren for 3 , and the golf for 3 1/2 .
he probably gets up and shows his swing or something , right ?
you do n't have any room in the plane , that 's the problem .
not on that plane .
no , i 'm only kidding .
but tell me -- then he left and nobody saw him on the golf course .
by the way , is n't it shocking ?
he did n't get to play , i guess .
folks , what 's happening to our country is a disgrace .
it 's never happened before .
and in fact , she lied in front of congress to such an extent -- and i 'll tell you what , i 'm very disappointed in congress , both republican and democrat , that they do n't find a way to do something .
because they give the information to the department of justice , they give the information that she lied to the fbi , and she could do whatever she wants to do and they 're not going to prosecute her , because it 's a total fix and it 's a disgrace .
this corruption is just one more reason why i will ask my attorney general to appoint a special prosecutor .
and furthermore -- furthermore , we are going to investigate this phony investigation .
it 's a phony investigation .
hillary clinton -- please .
you know how expensive   it is ?
nobody ever heard of it .
i have people very sophisticated in the world of e - mails and all of these things , they never even heard of the bleaching .
the reason they did it , it 's an unbelievably expensive process .
hillary clinton bleached and deleted 33,000 e - mails after a congressional subpoena .
so she gets a subpoena -- she gets a subpoena , and after -- not before , that would n't   be bad .
but after getting a subpoena to give over your e - mails and lots of other things , she deleted the e- mails .
she has to go to jail .
and her law firm , which is a very big and powerful law firm , which is the one that said , oh , they 'll determine what they 're giving   -- those representatives within that law firm that did that have to go to jail .
she then had 13 telephones -- and many of them were hammered dead .
now , how many people have gotten rid of a cell phone and hammered the hell of it ?
how ?
i need hands up , please , hands up .
did anybody hammer -- uh oh , he did .
what 's your business ?
oh .
is he in the mob ?
what 's your business ?
these are illegal acts .
you know , if you do this privately , it 's a criminal act .
and look at what happened -- look at what happened to other people like general petraeus for doing a tiny fraction .
their lives have been destroyed .
she 's running for president and she 's being protected .
and these people , the most dishonest people other than hillary that you have , these people are protecting her because without the press , she is nothing .
she is nothing .
and this has been her whole life .
from   making one of the great returns   ever because it was done dishonestly .
to whitewater , everything has been the lies .
but more importantly , take a look at her deals ; libya , syria , isis .
look at what happened -- she wanted to get rid of isis .
when she was in , isis did n't exist essentially .
she created the vacuum for isis .
the e - mails also show how the clintons ripped off the wonderful people of   doing favors for their friends and special interest -- look at   coming back .
that woman was out cold and now she 's coming back .
see ?
we do n't go by these new and very much softer nfl rules -- concussion , a little ding on the head , no , you ca n't play for the rest of the season .
our people are tough .
so americans , honestly , i 've had it with the years and decades of clinton corruption -- this corruption .
this will finally be the year the american people can say enough is enough .
enough is enough .
the clintons are a very dishonest and very bad pairing .
i mean , bill clinton was impeached for lying , he totally lied .
he lost his law license .
remember this , you know , some people thought hillary was smart .
i do n't think she 's smart .
look how badly she performed in the last debate .
look , i thought she was terrible .
now , look , look , look at how badly she performed .
she went to washington , d.c. , she took her bar exam and she failed , right ?
oh , she 's a genius .
she failed the bar exam -- they 'll go and check it , but trust me folks , she failed her bar exam .
she could n't pass it , so she went someplace else and got her license to hurt people .
the clintons in   the past .
we , as a group , as a movement   we are leaders here .
we 're going to be the future .
if we had a little -- if we had a little help   from our very weak leadership , from the   republican leadership , we would be sailing   like we 've never sailed   before .
these are weak people .
the new   e - mails also show members of the clinton team viciously attacking catholics and evangelicals .
no , the press does n't want to report that one .
that could be a .
it 's just the latest evidence of the hatred that the clinton campaign has for every day faithful americans .
if you 're a person of faith , i think you 're going to vote for donald trump .
and i have such .
hillary clinton ... 

  so do you believe the last 10 days , five to six of these a day ?
i may be limping over the finish line , but we 're going to get to that side .
now , the press will report -- the press , this dishonest group of .
here 's what the press will report . "
he said that he was going to limp over the line . "
come on , paul .
you can do better , carl .
you can do better .
campaign carl .
hillary clinton thinks you 're deplorable and irredeemable .
i call you hard - working american patriots and together we are going to save our country .
these e - mails also reveal that crooked hillary clinton believes in global governance , unlimited immigration -- there goes your country .
and world - wide corporations .
speaking in a select group -- to a foreign bank , hillary clinton said , " my dream is a hemispheric common market . "
there goes your -- there go the rest of your jobs .
with open trade and totally open borders .
ok .
that 's good .
ok .
no more country .
you know what ?
i want to have free trade too , but i want to have smart trade .
we have trade where we benefit for a change because we have lost our jobs , we have lost our money , we owe $ 20 trillion ... 

  we do n't make our product anymore .
we will build the wall .
and mexico will pay for the wall 100 percent , 100 percent .
one hundred percent .
great people .
i met with the president of mexico , month and a half ago .
i thought this was set up by the presidential commission on debates .
so why do n't you -- why do n't you -- those guys are .
talk about a mic that did n't work in the first debate .
you know what they said ?
the head guy came over and i said , " my mic was n't working .
why did n't you fix it ? "
he said , " we knew it did n't work , but we wanted to find out .
so as soon as the debate was over , we wanted to find out what the problem " -- oh thanks a lot .
i appreciate it .
we do n't care if we stand in the rain , do we ?
i 'll take my hat off .
i 'll get my hair nice and wet .
that 's the end of this suit .
that 's ok .
behind closed doors when she thought no one was listening , she pledged to dissolve the borders of the united states of america .
hillary wants to end forever the american independence that our soldiers fought for and died for to keep and protect us .
we will never surrender the freedom and sovereignty of the united states of america .
a trump administration will secure and defend our borders .
without borders , we do n't have a country .
under the obama - clinton policies , illegal immigrants simply show up at the border and they 're released into the united states .
and that 's why the border patrol agents in ice are so upset .
and it could be so easy for them .
but these are great americans .
they want to do it right .
and they know that what we 're doing and who we 're allowing into our country is wrong and bad for our country .
i 've met the family of sarah root , an unbelievable young girl killed the day after graduating from college with a 4.0 grade average - the top of her class .
her killer was released by obama , meaning the obama representatives at the border .
she should have been held .
the killer should have been held , released against the will of agents by a policy that 's sick and weak , and disgusting .
released , went on to kill .
and kill again , and kill again .
and hillary wants to go even further .
the ice officers who endorsed me , their first endorsement ever , said that hillary 's plan is the most radical immigration proposal in united states history .
hillary also wants to increase syrian refugees by 550 percent over obama .
think of it .
obama 's letting 'em in by the thousands .
by the way , this guy only does is campaign , he is the worst .
this - even though she admitted in private according to wikileaks - i -- do n't you wish the press would pick up wikileaks and report it ?
what - what they said about the justice department , what they said about catholics , what they said about evangelicals , they must be dying watching this .
but you know what ?
they know it 's ok 'cause they know it 's not gon na be properly reported .
but she knows the terrorists are trying to infiltrate through the refugee program .
she said that .
she knows that 's gon na happen .
and yet the refugees , she wants to pour in .
the terrorists have already infiltrated our country .
there are now 1,000 open isis investigations in all 50 states .
attack after attack , including the recent terrorist strikes in new jersey and new york , minnesota that were made possible by our extremely open and extremely weak immigration system .
the orlando terrorist was the son of a taliban supporter who sat right behind hillary during a speech , from afghanistan .
the examples go on and on .
the shooter in san bernardino , the killer who slaughtered four marines in chattanooga , tennessee , the recent mall shooter in washington state were all admitted by authorities into the united states .
they should never have been allowed to come in to our country .
so let me state this clearly .
i am going to keep radical islamic terrorists the hell out of our country .
at the same time we 're going to completely rebuild our very dilapidated - look .
our military .
it 's in such - these are the greatest people on earth .
our military is completely - we 're gon na rebuild our military .
that includes building a state of the art missile defense system .
we are going to be protected .
we are going to be strong .
we are going to be strong .
we are going to take care of our great veterans .
our veterans have been horribly treated .
when it comes to keeping america safe i believe in three very important words .
peace through strength .
but a strong country - we have to be a rich country .
sad .
a woman came up , she said , " mr. trump that does n't sound nice . "
sorry folks .
we want to protect your social security .
we want to protect your medicare .
she wo n't be able to do it .
hillary does n't have a clue .
take a look at what she did to new york state .
she said she was going to bring 200,000 jobs to upstate new york .
it was a total disaster .
people poured out of new york .
they poured out of upstate new york .
i am going to make america rich again .
the paris climate deal - and i believe so much in the environment .
believe it or not , people are shocked - i 've won many environmental awards .
many .
but the paris deal , supported by hillary , will cost our country another $ 5.3 trillion over a period of time and skyrocket electricity prices in a very great state that 's my second home .
what 's that state ?
we will cancel this deal so that our companies can compete .
and again , we want clean beautiful air .
and we want crystal clear water .
that 's what we want .
and we want to be able to do business throughout the world , not so that we ca n't compete because of these crazy deals that our president is making .
we are going to unlock the $ 50 trillion in energy reserves right here under your feet in america .
this means many new jobs in florida and all across america .
that also means cheaper energy for our farmers , cheaper energy for everybody .
we 're going to take care of florida farmers , and florida agriculture .
and we 're going to take care of our steelworkers who are under siege from china , and we 're going to take care of our miners who are practically being put out of business .
the obama - clinton crew spent $ 50 billion on climate programs when they should have used that money to help florida farmers fight diseases that threaten your crops .
and that 's happening all over .
and by the way , when clinton was secretary of state , missing , missing , or gone , nobody can figure it out - maybe someday they will , and maybe they 'll never find it - missing .
six billion dollars - oh but she 'll be a wonderful president .
she 's going to be -- she 'll be a wonderful president .
remember , isis -- here was isis when she started .
now , isis is in 32 different countries , and now she stands up , " i will fight isis very hard . "
you 're funny . "
we 're going to fight isis very , very hard . "
there was no isis .
she created the vacuum , along with our incompetent president .
she created the vacuum and isis formed .
this money should have been invested in infrastructure , like the hoover dam .
a trump administration will invest in projects like dams and railroads and fast trains and grids .
our electrical grid is obsolete and dangerous .
we will return the epa to its core mission .
that same clean air and clean water that i just mentioned , and that means the water for lakeland , and we have to remember that , right ?
unless you do n't want this .
everybody likes clean water , maybe .
maybe .
and we could save a couple of bucks .
let it be dirty just for lakeland , no ?
no .
ok .
well , i promise it will be crystal clear , crystal clear .
ok ?
just -- i 'm just testing you .
i 'm just testing .
i thought maybe you would n't mind .
we could save a couple of bucks for the country .
ok ?
at the center of our -- and that 's very true , yes .
at the center of our economic revival , we 'll be fixing our terrible trade deals .
when i announced i was running , who knew this was going to happen ?
remember ?
all of these guys , they ca n't believe what 's going on .
i 'll tell you .
these crooked people back there , they can not believe it .
remember ?
remember this guy charles krauthammer , where he goes , " well , donald trump has not done this , he has no chance .
oh , really ? .
i have a lot of friends who made a lot of money betting because when they had me down to three percent .
i had a friend -- he 's one of the smartest guys in business .
he said , " you know what , donald ?
in all fairness , i 'll bet on you at three percent any time . "
that made a lot of money .
but one by one , we knocked them off , right ?
i knocked them off for you .
the movement knocked them off -- one by one by one by one ; governors .
there was a time when i was three or four months into it , where it said , " trump has four months of experience , and all of the people he 's running against have 233 years . "
so it 's four months versus 233 years , and here we are , folks .
you see , because as i 've always said , experience is very important , but competence is much more important .
i 've always said that .
i know .
forty - seven million americans are in poverty .
and 45 million americans are on food stamps .
this is the legacy of obama - clinton .
my economic agenda will take in the opposite direction , and it can be summed up in three such beautiful , beautiful words , jobs , jobs , jobs .
the great state of florida , my state , your state , has lost one in four manufacturing jobs since nafta , signed by bill clinton -- the single worst trade deal ever signed , ever negotiated in the history of the world .
ok ?
not here -- in the history of the world .
you look at new england , you look at florida , you look at pennsylvania , ohio , michigan -- poor michigan .
i 've been fighting for michigan , and they do n't listen , but now they 're going to listen , because i 'm going to bring the auto industry back to michigan .
i 've been talking about it for a long time .
so , her husband signs nafta .
nafta 's a disaster .
hillary clinton 's south korea deal was supposed to be wonderful for the united states .
great .
it was great for south korea .
for the united states , we lost at least 100,000 jobs .
since china entered the world trade organization , another bill and hillary backed disaster , 70,000 factories have shut down or left the united states .
so when i saw that number , i said , wait a minute , go back , it 's a mistake .
ca n't be seven -- maybe 7,000 , maybe 700 .
ca n't be 70,000 .
ready , 70,000 factories -- now that wo n't fact check , oh , it was 69.99 -- these people are the worst .
seventy thousand , i really thought they 'd made a mistake .
that 's 15 factories closing a day on average .
we have real geniuses in washington .
do n't we ?
we 're living through the greatest jobs theft in the history of the world .
this is the greatest jobs theft in the history of our world . .
and boy , is it going to change fast , folks .
boy is it going ...   you know , we have people here today who made more money 18 years ago than they 're making now .
they had one job instead of two and they were a lot younger .
so they 're older , they make less and they have two and three jobs .
supposed to be the other way .
but i always say , you 're working harder now than you ever did before and you 're older .
well i 'm working harder now than i ever did before and i 'm older , too , so i do n't feel sorry for you .
companies like carrier , general electric , motorola , mattel , fiat and chrysler , and so many other are moving their jobs to mexico and other places and now florida has just announced it 's moving all of its small car production to mexico .
if and when i win , we are going to renegotiate the disaster known as nafta .
we 're going to renegotiate .
and if we do n't get the deal we want , we will terminate nafta , we will get out of nafta , we 'll start all over again and believe me , we 're going to make some great deals and i do believe -- i believe totally in free trade , but it 's got to be fair trade .
it 's got to be trade when like some - let 's - let 's let some of the crumbs come our way .
you know what we get ?
we get the drugs and the unemployment .
mexico gets the jobs , the factories , the money , the income .
we get the drugs , they get the cash .
oh , is n't that wonderful .
our youth is being poisoned .
our people are being poisoned with the drugs that are pouring across that border .
we 're going to end that very fast .
we will also stop the trans - pacific partnership , the deal that hillary clinton in the debate swore that -- she said , i never said that there was a gold standard .
the crazy fact checkers said , i was right .
i ca n't believe it .
she did say -- and you know what , if she ever got into that deal , nothing 's as bad as nafta , but that deal will be -- trust that will take a lot of your jobs out of florida .
that will take a lot of your jobs out of everywhere , but it will take a lot of your florida jobs .
the backers of that deal have donated heavily to hillary clinton and they want her to get that deal approved .
it 's a very bad deal for our country .
it 's going to take more jobs , it 's a very , very bad deal .
tpp , hopefully i 'm there , i will end it so fast and we 'll make deals with individual countries , not this big web of complicated stuff over 5,000 pages that nobody from our country even reads .
do n't forget obamacare .
thousands and thousands of pages and in congress i think they said almost nobody even read it .
and that 's why -- look , it was a disaster anyway , whether they read it or not .
but tpp is great for other countries , but bad for us .
we 'll do it nice and simple .
we like a country ... more 
  -- whether they read it or not .
but tpp is great for other countries but bad for us .
we 'll do it nice and simple .
we like a country ?
boom , we do a trading deal .
another one , we do a trading deal .
another one .
and if they do n't behave , and if they do n't live up to the deal , we send them what 's called a notice of termination , 30 days .
it 's a 30 day notice of termination , and believe me , they will come back so fast , sir , mr. president , is there a way i can make this deal better for our country ?
i 'll say , yes , we 'll do it , but we 're going to make it even better now , ok .
but we have a nice , simple pad .
not this crazy web -- did you ever see this tpp ?
they 've got arrows all over the place going to different countries .
we will be free traders , but we will free trade with our friends .
we will be smart .
we will be smart .
and we 'll bring back jobs , and we 'll begin making product again .
we 'll begin making things .
my dream as president , one of many , will be to have apple and companies like apple start to make their iphones and other products in the united states , not in china and vietnam and all of the other countries they 're making them in .
hillary clinton is an insider .
she fights for herself .
i 'm an outsider -- used to be an insider , to be honest with you , ok .
i know the inside and i know the outside .
and that 's why i 'm the only one that can fix this mess , folks .
believe me .
i know the inside very well .
and you know what ?
it 's a lot easier from my position , being on the inside .
but i felt i had to do this .
this country has been great to me .
it 's been great to my family , and i felt i had to do this .
and the fact that i know -- who is more of an insider than me ?
in all fairness , nobody , practically , nobody .
so i know it from the inside and i know it from the outside , and the outside is a lot tougher , but i owe it to my country and i know i really owe it .
we have such great people in this country .
we 're going to fix this country .
we 're going to get rid of these corrupt politicians .
and we 're going to do it right .
by the time i finish , i 'll have over $ 100 million into my campaign .
think of that .
that 's a lot of money .
financed the primaries , financed this -- we have a lot of money coming in from the small donors .
it never happened to a republican before where they have this kind of money .
small donors average $ 61 .
but you know what ?
it 's so important .
and one of these characters said , it does n't matter if you win or lose , because what you 've done has never been done in the history of this country , meaning this great movement -- look at the people where they are .
they did let some of those people in .
that 's fantastic .
thank you .
look at that .
look where that guy is .
but you know what ?
we are going to do things , and it 's so important .
and i said , it does matter whether we win or lose .
and let me tell you , if i do n't win on november 8th , he said , you 'll go down in history .
now bernie wo n't go down in history .
you know why ?
because he made a deal with the devil .
had bernie not made that deal , he would have gone down as a major footnote in political history .
bernie sold out to the devil .
he sold out to the devil .
i mean , his ideas are different than our ideas , other than he knew we were being ripped off on trade , which he 's right about , but we can fix it , he could n't .
but bernie sanders sold out to the devil and he 's gone .
and now when he goes and speaks , nobody shows up anymore .
sad .
we ca n't let that happen to us .
but i said to this pundit , i said , no , you 're wrong .
if i lose , i will consider it the biggest waste of time , energy , and money that i 've ever done in my entire life .
true .
so i 'm not controlled by the special interests .
you 're my only special interest , folks , i 'm telling you .
it 's the people 's voice be heard , and on november 8th the whole world is going to hear your voice , and the whole world is going to see what 's going to happen in the united states of america .
they 're going to hear you say that it 's time to put america first once more .
we 're going to start making things again in our country , and part of our plan to bring back our jobs , we 're going to lower your business tax from 35 percent to 15 percent .
new companies , forget   it for them .
people are going to get jobs .
you saw the last jobs report was a disaster .
i said that " ca n't be the last one before the election " , they said " no , there 's another one , " then they came back and said " no , sir we made a mistake . "
that 's the last jobs , take a look at the jobs report that came out last week , it is a disaster .
take a look at gdp , we 're at one percent .
if china was at one percent , it would be a national disaster .
they go to seven , and eight , and nine percent , and they consider it horrible .
we go to one percent , and we just keep going along folks .
that means we 're literally going in the wrong direction .
we 're also going to fix our inner cities , it 's so important to me .
and we 're going to help our african american great people .
and our hispanic american great people .
forty - five percent of african american youth live in poverty .
african americans have a really horrible loan rate of home ownership , far lower than the rest of the population ; not good , 41 percent .
fifty - eight percent of african american youth do n't have jobs .
more than 3,000 people have been shot in chicago since the beginning of the year .
you do n't hear these people back here , they do n't want you to hear , because they want crooked hillary to get in .
we have - wait - we have the highest murder rate in this country in 45 years .
more people are being murdered now than being murdered in 45 years .
so , you look at our inners cities - you look at our inner cities , the education is no good , the schools are horrible , they education 's a disaster .
people are being shot walking to the grocery store , their kids are being killed .
it 's a disaster .
there 's no jobs , and there 's no hope , and then for years , the democrats have wrought the inner cities , without abate .
seventy - five years - 75 years , so here 's what i said , we ought to fix the inner cities .
i 've look at african americans and i say " what the hell do you have to lose , we 're going to fix it , " we 're going to fix it , i promise .
that 's so cool , i did n't tell them , that 's cool .
but listen , what do we have to lose , what do you have to lose ?
is it going to get worse ?
look at the crime rate , look at the - the education , look at the jobs ; the jobs are nonexistent .
same thing for hispanic americans , you take a look at what they 're going through , and it 's so unfair .
and i see all these " women for trump " signs , i love this , i do n't --   " women for trump , " i do n't get these polls .
every place i go i see hundreds of women for trump and then i see a poll .
he 's not doing well with women .
i do n't know , i do n't know .
you know , my daughter ivanka , she wants child care and she can care all of them but you know women want safety for our country , they want a strong military , they do n't want crime in our cities , they want to be protected by law and order .
they want law and order .
the women in this country want what i 'm saying and we are really - i think we 're saying it very strong .
so , to the african americans i say i will fix it .
to the hispanic americans i say i will fix it .
i will fight for you harder than anybody has ever fought for you .
that 's all of you .
that 's all of you .
that 's everybody .
we are going to make america strong again .
we are going to make america safe again .
we are going to make america rich again and we are going to make america great again .
thank you , god bless you everybody .
god bless you .
god bless you .
thank you very much .
thank you .
special place , special people .
thank you .
so we really were n't supposed to be here .
we were n't going to come back to iowa .
they said , mr. trump , you do n't have to , you 're leading by so much you do n't have to .
i said , what do you mean i do n't have to ?
i want to go to iowa which is true .
i want to go to iowa .
and the incredible leadership that you have in this state unbelievable .
so i just want to begin by thanking iowa leaders here today , lieutenant governor kim reynolds .
where is kim ?
come on up kim , come on , come on kim ; a man that i 've gotten to know very well over the years and somebody that 's respected outside of iowa like you would n't believe , inside of iowa so much that he 's the longest serving governor in the history of the united states , terry branstad .
by the way , terry came to my office and he was talking to me about trade .
i think there 's nobody that knows more about trade than him .
he 's one of the ones in dealing with china where you would be our prime candidate to take care of china .
he has done so well , so well , for the people of iowa nobody knows it better .
congressman steve king great guy , great guy .
i even like him when he was endorsing ted .
he was endorsing ted and i still liked him .
so steve ; he came around ; it took him a little while but he came around .
thank you very much , steve .
and a woman who i got to know because as you know she was on a very short list and she loves the people of iowa and she felt she needed a little it was n't me ; it was n't me she felt she needed a little more seasoning maybe and i said is n't that refreshing when you hear that from somebody and she is now seasoned because there 's nobody that does a better job representing their people than joni ernst and a great person joni come on up .
thank you very much incredible people .
whenever they run just keep voting .
you have to always vote for them .
if it 's in two years or four years or 20 years , you 're never going to do better than them .
in two days , can you believe this , we are going to win the great state of iowa and we are going to win back the white house and i want to thank the people of iowa .
you have opened up your hearts to me so much , incredible it 's been just incredible ; our evening here the other night with the fireworks .
everything is always beautiful in iowa .
real change begins with immediately repealing and replacing obamacare , a disaster , right .
they 're all saying , yes please .
it 's just been announced that the residents of iowa are going to have and experience a massive double digit premium hike .
like i know the number ; i will not tell you i never do this with any of the groups ; i do n't say the number because it 's so depressing .
right now , everyone is happy ; we 're having a good time even though the subject matter is difficult but we 're going to make it great .
but i will say this : the obamacare is out of control .
in the great state of arizona , premiums are going up more than 116 % .
i just left arizona and they are very unhappy with what 's going on .
over half of the counties in iowa are losing obamacare insurers next year , tough to negotiate .
it 's honestly not going to matter because we 're going to have it terminated by then so we win .
we 'll have it terminated so we wo n't have any problems , governor , ok .
we 'll terminate it ; it 'll be gone ; it 'll be just a bad memory .
premiums are surging .
companies are leaving .
insurers are fleeing .
doctors are quitting and deductibles are going through the roof .
you have deductibles at 15 , 16 , $ 17,000 can you believe it ?
yet hillary clinton wants to double down on obamacare making it even more expensive , far more expensive .
i 'm asking for your vote so we can repeal and replace obamacare and save health care for every family in iowa and for every family in our great country so important .
just remember , obamacare , got to get rid of it .
real change means restoring honesty to our government .
there is little doubt that fbi director comey and the great special agents within the fbi will be able to collect more than enough evidence to garner indictments against hillary clinton and her inner circle despite her effort to disparage and discredit the fbi .
if she were to win it would create an unprecedented constitutional crisis .
in that situation we could very well have a sitting president under felony indictment and ultimately a criminal trial .
just today we learned hillary clinton was sending highly classified information through her maid did you see ; it just came out a little while ago who therefore had total access to this information completely jeopardizing the national security of the united states .
this just came out wiki leaks .
we need a government that can go to work on day one for the american people .
that will be impossible with hillary clinton , the prime suspect in a far - reaching criminal investigation .
her current scandals and controversies will continue throughout her presidency and will make it virtually impossible for her to govern .
let 's hope we do n't have to think about it .
if she ever got into the oval office , hillary and her special interests would rob our country blind that 's what she has been doing .
at the heart of this election is a simple question : will our country be governed by the people or will it be governed by the corrupt political class ?
we 're going to find out very soon .
if we win the corrupt politicians and their special interests lose .
if we win the american people and you understand that if we win , what 's going to happen to the american people ?
if we win you 're going to be so happy because if we win our country is going to start winning again .
we do n't win anymore .
our country is going to start winning again ; it 's just that simple .
speaking in a secret wall street meeting , hillary clinton admitted that she wants to cut medicare and social security .
hillary clinton is going to destroy your social security and medicare .
she even wants to give your benefits to illegal immigrants and you 've seen that all over .
i am going to protect and save your social security and your medicare .
you made a deal a long time ago , a long time ago .
and i will protect american workers .
the political and media elite have no idea what it 's like to be living on a paycheck , paycheck - to - paycheck basis , not knowing whether or not the owners and leaders of their company are negotiating to move their plant or factory to mexico or some other country and fire them sometimes with virtually no notice .
it 's happening all over the country .
it 's not going to happen with us folks , not going to happen with us .
politicians do n't understand what that 's like .
the media and the political elite do n't know the pain and the suffering these people are living under .
but i figured it out a long time ago and that 's why i 'm here , i 'm with you , rather than where i was .
i was on the other side .
i was on the other side .
i understand it well .
i understand the other side well .
i was enjoying my life for many years on the other side but i also love our country and i will tell you , our country was going bad ; our country was going not only in the wrong direction ; our country was going bad .
and on june 16th of last year , i went from being a true insider to perhaps the ultimate outside ever , ever .
i do n't know ; i think so , right .
what do you think , kim ?
i think so , pretty much , huh ?
these people that i 've known all my life ; they 're saying , donald , what happened ?
we are going to make america great again - that 's what happened .
you are the people that built our country and we are going to give you the respect that you deserve .
hillary is an insider fighting only for herself and her special interests .
i 'm an outsider .
i 've become an outsider fighting for you .
i 'm not a politician .
you , the american people , are my only special interest .
that 's what i 'm doing it for ; that 's what i 'm doing it for .
and it 's a lot of work , folks , i will tell you .
it 's a lot more work than i ever thought but it is a movement in this country the likes of which our country has ever seen , even the extremely dishonest media back there ; they will say there is no there has never been anything like this .
this is far bigger than bernie sanders .
that was a smar ... and by the way many of his people believe it or not are coming to our side because they agree with me on trade .
they realize how we 're being ripped apart on trade .
and he should 've never made a deal .
he told his soul to the devil when he made that deal .
he ruined his legacy .
but many of the bernie people are coming over to us because of trade .
and our stance on trade is tougher and smarter and better than his but they understand that and they 're coming over .
the media , wall street and the politicians are trying to stop us because they know we will fix the rigged system that has enriched them for so many years but very much at your expense very , very much .
i 've spent a life in business creating tens of thousands of jobs .
i built a great , great company , but i 've spent a whole life i 've employed tens of thousands of americans but when i saw what was happening to our country , i just felt i had to act ; i had to act and i acted i acted .
so that 's when i made my move and that 's the way the move is .
that 's when we made our move .
thank you very much .
june 16th famous day , right ?
do you remember coming down the escalators , oh boy , but i do n't mind being an insider , i do n't mind .
this is our last chance folks .
i think the governor would agree with me so much .
we have one chance ; it 's our last chance ; it 's on tuesday ; it 's the 8th it 's our last chance .
now some of you have voted .
how many of you have voted ?
it 's not so ... actually i like it because our numbers are looking very good but i know we 're going to get a lot more people .
tuesday is going to be a very good day .
but this ... this is our last chance because , and i 'm talking as a country , because it 's never going to happen again .
and i was sort of saying it last time , but his time i say it and we have so many things to do and we can do them some of them easily ; some of it is common sense .
there 's no common sense .
the iran deal $ 150 billion going back to iran and then we 're going to give them $ 400 million in cash , right ?
but the $ 400 million turned out to be $ 1.7 billion .
terry is looking at me saying , that 's not possible , $ 1.7 billion ?
$ 1.7 billion we could use that and we could do a hell of a job in iowa with $ 1.7 .
that 's in ... terry , that 's in green that 's cash .
that would go up to the ceiling , $ 1.7 billion in cash .
and obama lied ; he said it was n't for hostages but they would n't let the hostages go until the money came in so many lied ; lied on obamacare .
you can have your doctor ; you can have your plan 28 different times ; you can have your doctor ; you can have your plan .
many democrats who did n't want to approve it approved it based on that lie because it just made it unfortunately , it just made it .
but going out and voting , it 's your last chance ; it 's your last chance to make our country truly , truly , truly great again we have such potential .
my contract with the american voter begins with a plan to end government corruption and to take back our country from the special interests .
i want the entire corrupt washington establishment , other than our great congressman over here ; he 's not corrupt ; where 's our congressman i 'm not talking about you congressman and i 'm not talking about everybody but boy there are a lot of them .
to hear words we are all about to say when we win on november 8th we are going to drain the swamp .
that was an expression i tell people .
i thought it was hokey ; i thought that was so hokey , i said no way i 'm ever saying that .
and then i went before a big group like this and by the way this room is packed and there are thousands of people outside that ca n't get in which is amazing .
but i gave that expression at a speech and i go like , very timidly , drain the swamp .
the place like really liked it .
then i said it with more energy the next time and they really liked it .
and then a third time they really , really ... and then now people are going crazy and they 're screaming at me when i 'm speaking drain the swamp , drain it .
between that and build the wall , these are two expressions , right .
and we will build a wall .
so you never know about things , right ?
i tell the story of frank sinatra .
frank sinatra did n't like " my way " , the song " my way " ; great song .
he did n't like it and then he sang it , the audience loved it ; he sang it again ; the audience really loved it .
then it went out and became the number one song .
all of the sudden he loved it , right he loved it .
it became his favorite song just about .
at the core of my contract is my plan to bring jobs back to our country and to iowa .
we 're going to bring our jobs back .
our economy 's growth is anemic the worst since the great depression , you do n't hear that .
my jobs plan begins with a proposal to lower taxes on american business from 35 % to 15 % and that 's a massive tax cut for the family farms and the folks in iowa that work so hard and end up with very little left after taxes .
and we 're going to further protect our family farmers .
we 're going to protect them like they have never been protected before , i mean honestly , or i would have one big enemy in terry , that i can tell you .
and we 're going to protect corn - based ethanol .
hillary clinton 's plan will shut down family farms all over the nation just like closed up the mines well let me tell you , the miners are going back to work and the steel workers are going back to work .
we 're going to have clean coal but miners are going back to work .
she will do this not only through radical epa regulation but also by raising taxes to rates as high as almost 50 % .
hillary also wants to substantially increase the death tax on family farms .
you know you have a farm ; it would be nice to leave it to your children , right .
it 's tough , tough we 're going to get rid of that .
on top of that , her anti - energy agenda will radically up drive up the costs of energy , another attack on agriculture big , big attack on agriculture .
we will reverse the obama / clinton epa intrusion and eliminate job - killing regulations that hurt the people of iowa and really hurt the farms .
you know the one thing and i was telling the governor , your governor the last time we 're giving massive ... we're the highest - taxed nation in the world and we 're giving massive tax cuts but we 're also cutting very substantially the regulations .
and we want clean air ; we want clean water and we want safety .
but beyond that , but i was just saying we are ... you know you look at all of the different things ; the thing that they most want , people , are the cut in regulations , even more important to them , more important than the massive tax cuts are the cuts in regulations .
because they have killed our businesses ; they 're killing our businesses , especially our small businesses and i would 've been surprised and i was surprised . [
audio cuts out ] [ joined in progress] ... syrian refugees pouring into our country and that 's over the thousands and thousands that obama has allowed .
you know he should go to the oval office and he should work on jobs ; he should work on knocking the hell out of isis , rich nation once again .
but to be a rich nation , hillary clinton wants a 550 % [ audio cuts out ] ... to keep radical islamic terrorists the hell out of our country .
we have no choice ; we have enough problems .
and we all have heart and we 're going to build safe zones in syria and we 're going to have the gulf states we owe $ 20 trillion in case you 're not sure about it ; we have lots of problems but we will have the gulf states who have tremendous money , tremendous , and they have n't been carrying their weight ; they have n't done much ; have n't accepted any we 're going to have the gulf states , they 'll be happy to do it ; they 're going to pay for it , but we 're going to build safe zones , but we ca n't have them come into our country too much uncertainty .
we just ... we have enough problems .
would n't you say we have enough problems ?
so we 'll take care of it .
a trump administration will also secure and defend the borders of the united states .
and yes , we will build a great wall .
we 're going to keep the drugs out .
we 're going to keep the poison out of our country that 's destroying our youth and plenty of other people .
as secretary of state , hillary clinton allowed thousands and thousands of the most dangerous and violent criminal aliens to go free because their home countries would not under any circumstances take them back .
can you imagine that ?
they catch murderers , drug dealers , the worst people they bring them back and their country says we 're not taking them .
they go through the secretary of state .
she said , bring them back and the crime that 's been committed by these people is unbelievable .
i promise you this : there wo n't be one instance , not one , where when we bring somebody back to their country where they belong , where that plane comes back with that person sitting on that plane ; there wo n't be one instance ; there wo n't be one instance ; it 'll never happen .
it 's truly called a lack of respect for our country .
hillary supports totally opened borders there goes your country and strongly supports sanctuary cities like san francisco where kate steinle was murdered by an illegal immigrant who was deported at least five times .
thousands of americans would be alive today if not for the open border policies of obama and clinton .
this includes incredible americans like 21-year - old sarah root who you know about , who you 've ready it , who was right from iowa , right from here , incredible person .
i 've spent time with her incredible family , beautiful family devastated .
the illegal immigrant who killed sarah arrived at the border , entered federal custody and then was released into the community despite the pleas of people that knew him please do n't do this , do n't do this right under the policies of the white house .
he was released again and again but then he killed sarah in a savage , savage way .
sarah graduated from college with a 4.0 grade index , number one in her class the day before she was killed .
there are so many instances like this ; so many instances like this .
and people knew trouble but the administration said we do n't get involved .
a trump administration will end this nightmare of violence that 's going on all over our country .
we will stop illegal immigration , deport all criminal aliens and dismantle every last criminal gang and cartel threatening our citizens .
and we 're going to build that wall .
it 's going to be a great wall and let me just tell you , mexico is going to pay for the wall ; they do n't know it yet ; they do n't know it yet they 're starting to have a very good idea but that 's ok .
you know mexico , they 're great i met with the president of mexico three months ago , great , but it 's got to be a two lane highway .
you know we lose so much we lose our plants , we lose our jobs , we lose our wealth and we get drugs and unemployment it 's got to be a two way and it will be because the trade deficit with china and so many of these countries , but the trade deficit with mexico is massive far greater than what we 're talking about for the wall .
so a lot of politicians said you ca n't get mexico to pay for the wall .
i said , it 's going to be so easy ; it 's going to be so easy .
but here 's what you have to understand ; we 're going to have big , beautiful doors on that wall and people are going to come into our country and they 're going to come into our country people , lots of people , are going to come into our country but they 're coming into our country legally they come in legally .
ok thank you very much everybody , we will .
we 're going to straighten things out .
we 're going to end up with very strong borders , believe me very , very strong borders .
we will also repeal obama / clinton defense sequester and rebuild our badly - depleted military , badly - depleted .
i 'm honored to have the endorsement of more than 200 top admirals and generals and 22 medal of honor recipients .
hillary and our failed establishment have spent $ 6 trillion on wars in the middle east that we never win and now it 's worse shape than ever before .
the middle east is in far worse shape than it 's ever been even from our standpoint .
they 've dragged us into foreign wars that have made us less safe .
they 've shipped our jobs and our wealth to other countries and left our borders wide open at home .
we send our troops to foreign countries to defend their borders but our politicians refuse , they refuse to defend our borders .
is n't it amazing we fight to get the money , the blood , the great people , the great people , the loss and we fight to defend a border but we wo n't defend our own borders .
that will change on november 8th , believe me .
a trump administration will never , ever put the interests of a foreign country before the interests of our country .
from now on it 's going to be america first .
to all americans , i say this : it is time for real leadership and it is time for change .
we 're going to change .
hillary clinton is not change .
hillary clinton is four more years of obama which is isis , which is all of these other things high taxes .
just think about what we can accomplish in the first 100 days of the trump administration .
we 're going to have the big tax cut since ronald reagan and hillary is going to raise taxes .
we will save your social security as is without cuts and your medicare .
she is going to chop , chop , chop away .
she is going to chop it away .
we are going to eliminate every unnecessary job - killing regulation , cancel illegal obama executive orders .
we will protect religious liberty , rebuild our military and take care of our great veterans , our greatest people .
we 're going to finally , once and for all , take care of our veterans .
our veterans have been horribly treated .
we 're going to provide school choice and put an end to common core we 're bringing our education local .
we will support the men and women these are great people of law enforcement .
we 'll save our second amend which is constantly under siege and deploy appoint justices to the united states supreme court who will uphold and defend the constitution of the united states .
it 's time to cut our ties with the failed politicians of the past .
hillary clinton is the candidate of yesterday .
we , we , because this is the great movement there 's never been anything like this in this country ; i say it all the time bill o'reilly said it recently , numerous times .
he said , in his lifetime this is the single greatest political phenomena that he has ever seen .
it 's you ; i 'm the messenger ; i 'm the messenger ; it 's you it really is ; it is you .
i 'm a good messenger , you have to say , right ?
i 've been a good messenger but it is you , the greatest they 've seen .
we 're fighting for every parent who lost their child to drugs and crime and gang violence .
we 're fighting for every community whose jobs and dreams have been ripped out and shipped to other countries , one of the primary reasons i got involved in this i could n't watch it anymore as our companies ... i live in new york .
new york state ... new york state ... what happened to new york state with the jobs going to mexico and other places and when hillary clinton was senator she said , she ran on the basis that she would create new jobs .
i 'll tell you what , just another lie it 's worse than ever , ever , ever before .
she did nothing ; she did nothing .
we 're fighting for every american who believes government should serve the people , not the donors and not the special interests .
i 'm asking you to dream big because with your vote can you believe this ; in just two days ; we 're two days away we will get the change you 've been waiting for for your entire life .
and i hope , i hope , that you will consider it the greatest and most important vote that you will ever cast because we will start winning again .
we 'll win on trade .
we 'll knock the hell out of isis .
we will start winning again .
together we will make america wealthy again .
we will make america strong again .
we will america safe again and we will make america great again .
thank you very much everybody .
god bless you , god bless you .
thank you .
get out there and vote .
thank you .
thank you .
we 're going to win ohio , no doubt about that .
you know , i want to start by thanking somebody that 's been so great .
he 's the owner of this building and he really does work hard .
he 's become a very , very successful guy , robbie roberts .
he 's here someplace .
where 's robbie roberts ?
right there .
come on , robert .
fantastic .
way to go .
man .
thank you .
appreciate it .
i appreciate it .
matt borges , where 's matt ?
republican party .
he has done such a good job .
i think we 're going to win ohio .
big league folks .
big league .
big league .
so -- and i just want to thank everybody .
i mean , to come out here in these numbers , these -- man , i 'll tell you , that 's a lot of people .
this is a lot of -- we 've been having a lot of people .
we have a movement going on .
we have a movement going on , just remember .
it 's going to be something special .
and come november we are going to win this state , i have very little doubt .
we 're going to win the white house .
and we 're going to bring back your jobs , which we have to have back and we want them back soon .
we 're going to negotiate fair trade deals that put american workers back to work , that put america first .
we 're going to stop the product dumping , the unfair foreign subsidies and the currency manipulation that 's absolutely killing our companies .
and by the way , killing our jobs .
we 're going to stop the foreign cheating .
the era of economic surrender , which is what we 've done , essentially , is over .
a new era of american greatness is going to begin and it 's going to start a little ahead of schedule -- we 'll consider the start date november 8th .
that 's when you go out to vote .
gon na be a big day , november 8th .
you got ta get out there .
no state has been hurt worse , really , by hillary clinton trade policies than ohio .
hillary clinton backed her husband 's nafta .
she backed china 's entrance into the world trade organization .
she backed the job - killing trade deal with south korea , which was a disaster , and backed tpp , trans - pacific partnership .
one bad deal after another .
ohio has lost nearly one in three manufacturing jobs since nafta and nearly one in four manufacturing jobs since china entered the world trade organization .
that 's really something .
these are deals made at the top .
we have no leadership .
we 're going to have great leadership .
we 're gon na bring our jobs back .
we 're gon na open new companies .
you 're gon na be so proud of your country once again .
our trade deficit in goods with the world is now , think of it , $ 800 billion .
trade deficit .
can you imagine ?
this subtracts directly from our growth .
our economy grew only 1.1 percent in the last quarter , a total disaster , a number that 's so low they went back and they checked and guess what ?
they found it was too high ; they had to reduce it even further .
that was last week .
this is the legacy of barack obama , this is the legacy of hillary clinton .
if you , for any reason , have a really bad day , and it happens to be hillary , it 'll be four more years of obama , but worse .
it 'll be four more years of high taxes , four more years of isis growing all over the place , four more years of obamacare going up 40 , 50 , 60 percent .
nobody can afford it , the deductibles are so high it does n't work anyway .
you have to be hit by a truck and die slowly , very , very slowly .
you 'll never get to use it .
that 's ok ; do n't get hit by a truck .
i 'm promising you a new legacy for america .
we 're going to create a new american future .
but to do that we have to stop the horror known as trans- pacific partnership .
it 's going to be a horrible deal .
it will be perhaps as bad as nafta .
i do n't think anything will ever top nafta personally , but it 'll be very bad .
our trade deficit with the proposed tpp members countries cost the state of ohio more than 100,000 manufacturing jobs just last year .
imagine how many more jobs would be lost if tpp was actually approved -- if it was actually approved .
hillary clinton , who called tpp the gold standard , would 100 percent approve it if she ever got in .
we wo n't let that happen .
we 'll win this election and we 'll keep america out of tpp .
we will defend our freedom , our jobs and our economic independence .
it 's going to be america first .
my economic plan is going to grow this economy , raise your wages and create millions and millions of new jobs for this country .
here are a few of the things that we 're going to do and we 're going to get them done quickly : a massive tax cut for working americans .
we 're going to eliminate regulations that kill american jobs , and that includes getting rid of obama administration 's new anti - energy rules that will raise ohio energy bills by more than 40 percent very , very quickly .
hillary clinton says she wants to put a lot of coal miners out of business .
she wants to put them out of business .
we 're going to protect our coal miners .
we 're going to protect our steel workers .
we 're going to protect our factories -- how about factory workers ?
the factories that we have left -- the factories that we have left , we 're going to protect our workers .
we 're going to put the miners and the steel workers back to work .
we 're going to get your energy bills way down where they should be .
we 're going to repeal and replace obamacare .
which , by the way , will save another 2 million jobs over the next decade .
we 're going to create jobs for all of our people .
and we 're going to fight to ensure that every young african - american and latino child is put on the ladder of american success .
and what that means is a great education and a great job .
a major part of this agenda includes school choice .
school choice , so important .
merit pay for teachers and support for our great charter schools .
and we 're going to bring your education local , folks .
we 're going to get rid of common core .
common core will be out .
we 're bringing it local .
bringing it local .
i want every single child in this country to be included in the american dream .
another major part of our agenda is immigration security .
we need to protect american jobs , security and safety .
do n't worry , we 're going to build that wall .
that wall will go up .
it 's going to go up .
we 're gon na build the wall .
mexico 's gon na pay for the wall .
we 're gon na stop drugs from coming in .
we 've got ta stop the drugs from pouring into our states .
it 's poisoning our youth and others .
our youth is being poisoned .
people are being poisoned .
and we 've got ta get it stopped and we will get it stopped and we 're gon na get it stopped quickly if i win .
quickly .
last night , i outlined a bold new immigration reform to create prosperity and opportunity for all of our people , especially those who have the least .
we will treat everyone with dignity , respect and compassion .
but our greatest compassion will be for the american citizen .
it will be , from now on , america first .
i had a great meeting yesterday with the president of mexico , where we both expressed our shared desire -- and it is a shared desire -- to secure the border , put the cartels out of business and to keep jobs in our hemisphere .
but let 's also talk about government corruption .
no issue better illustrates how corrupt my opponent is than her pay - for - play scandals as secretary of state .
here is one example of clinton corruption .
as secretary of state , hillary clinton signed off on a deal allowing russians to take an increased stake in a company called uranium one , giving up control of about 20 percent of america 's uranium supply to the russians .
do you know how important uranium is ?
you know what it represents ?
clinton 's approval of the deal netted the owners of uranium company millions of dollars .
in exchange for signing off the deal , some of the former owners of uranium one gave the clinton foundation many millions of dollars in donations .
in addition .
bill clinton received $ 500,000 for a speech .
i mean , think of this .
so a kremlin - backed investment firm that was a big , big beneficiary of the deal .
here 's another example of pay - for - play in the clinton state department .
in 2009 , a telecom giant named ericsson came under u.s. pressure for selling telecom equipment to several oppressive governments including sudan , syria and always iran .
it 's iran .
they 're involved in a lot of stuff are n't they ?
some of these regimes use those technologies to monitor and control their own people .
in june 2011 , hillary clinton 's state department began adding goods and services to a list that might be covered under expanded sanctions on iran and other state sponsors of terrorism .
during that time , ericsson sponsored a speech by bill clinton paying him $ 750,000 ; his highest paying speech .
in april 2012 , the obama administration issued an executive order imposing sanctions on telecom sales to iran and syria , but those sanctions did not cover ericsson 's work in iran .
i wonder why .
a trump administration will end government corruption .
no one will be above the law .
we will have one set of rules for everyone .
in hillary clinton 's world , we have one set of rules for her and another set of rules for everybody else .
i 'm fighting for everyone who does n't have a voice .
we are soon going to have a voice .
i 'm fighting for the forgotten men and women of america -- forgotten .
believe me , forgotten .
i am your voice .
i did n't need to do this folks .
i 'm spending a lot of money .
i 'm not having those big checks written like you - know - who 's getting .
spent a lot of money .
but you know what ?
in the end , it 's going to be so worth it , because we 're going to make america great again .
we 'll make america great again .
hillary clinton is funded by wall street and hedge fund managers .
my campaign is powered by my money , but also by small - dollar donations from people working all across the country who want a better future for their children .
nothing terrifies the ruling class more than when everybody and everyday working people give $ 5 , $ 10 , $ 15 , $ 60 , $ 80 , $ 100 to help us take government away from the special interests and give it back to the voters .
come november 8th , we are once again going to have a government that serves you , your family and your country .
gon na have it .
we 're going to rebuild our depleted military , avoid needless foreign wars , build new friendships overseas and remember those three famous words : peace through strength .
we 're going to work with our allies to crush , defeat and utterly destroy isis .
we 're going to have a new immigration screening test for entry into the united states .
we only want to admit those into our country who share our values and love our people .
and i mean love our people .
my tax reforms will add millions of new jobs and thousands or new small businesses .
my energy reforms will create millions of new jobs and lower the price of your energy bill very , very substantially .
my trade reforms will raise wages , grow jobs , add trillions of new wealth into our country .
we are going to become a wealthy country again .
and we will be able to do things that we 're not even thinking about right now .
we are not even thinking about what we are supposed to be doing .
my infrastructure plans will rebuild your roads , your bridges , your tunnels , your railways , your airports -- and they are a mess .
my regulatory reforms will make it easier for small businesses to thrive , including millions of minority - owned businesses and small businesses all across the country .
so important .
jobs , jobs , jobs .
my government will reform and will make your -- look , what 's the line ?
your voice will be heard again .
it wo n't be the voice of the special interests .
every insider getting rich off our broken system is throwing money at hillary clinton .
i have charts -- i wo n't even show you -- but it shows what hedge fund people are giving to her .
i think i got $ 18,000 , she got $ 48 million .
and i said , " who gave me the 18 ?
not going to get anything . "
it 's the powerful protecting the powerful , insiders fighting for insiders .
i am fighting for you , believe me .
thank you .
every day you turn on the nightly news , you hear about some self- interested banker or some washington insider say they oppose donald trump 's campaign , or some encrusted old politician says they oppose our campaign -- because it really is our campaign .
i am merely the messenger folks , believe me .
i am merely the messenger .
or some big - time lobbyist says they oppose our campaign .
i wear their opposition as a badge of honor , it is a badge of honor .
because it means that i 'm fighting for real change , not just partisan change .
i 'm fighting -- all of us across the country are fighting to give working people control over their own futures .
not like the way we have it now .
where you go home and all of a sudden you get notified you have no job , the company is leaving , going to mexico or some other place .
no good .
we 're not going to do it anymore folks .
we 've been doing it for a long time ; we 're not going to do it anymore .
the media - donor - political complex that 's bled this country dry has to be replaced with a new government of , by , and for the people .
i will fight to ensure that every american is treated equally , protected equally and honored equally .
we will reject bigotry and hatred and oppression in all of its forms , and seek a new future of security , prosperity and opportunity , a future built on our common culture and values as one american people .
i am asking for your vote so you can be our champion and so i can be your champion in the white house .
i will be your champion .
we will fight for victory .
we will fight for real deals .
we will fight for our vets .
we 're gon na be fighting for a lot .
we 're gon na be fighting .
believe me , we 're gon na be fighting .
we 're going to show the whole world that ca n't believe what 's happened to our country , that america is back , bigger and better and stronger than ever before .
and it 's coming back , your jobs are coming back , believe me .
your jobs are coming back .
to every parent who dreams for their children and to every child who dreams for their future , i say these words to you today : i am with you .
i will fight for you .
and i will win for you .
we 'll all win together .
we will make america strong again .
we will make america safe again .
we will make america prosperous again .
we will make america great again .
thank you .
god bless you .
thank you .
thank you , everybody .
november 8th , get out and vote .
thank you .
thank you , everybody .
thank you very much .
it is a great honor and i am very , very grateful being here today in front of so many distinguished people .
i 've met more generals than i 've ever seen in my life .
i like them and they like me .
a lost endorsements , i can tell you .
my special gratitude to general ashenhurst and general hargett and to each and everyone of you .
thank you very much .
thank you , guys .
the national guard of the united states has defended this nation at war , kept our citizens safe at home and rushed into danger wherever it has threatened our people .
our debt to you is eternal .
yesterday was the 15th anniversary of the 9/11 attacks .
the national guard was sent to assist in the aid and recovery , and these are serious , serious bad days for our country , the recovery efforts at ground zero in new york city -- and i was there and i know what you went through .
since 9/11 , there have been 780,000 members of the national guard deployed overseas , including those with multiple deployments .
right now , 10,000 members of the national guard are in iraq , afghanistan and many other countries all across the world and doing an unbelievable job .
members of the national guard come from all walks of life , working every kind of job imaginable , and juggle a thousand different challenges as they raise their kids , serve their states and answer the call of duty for their country .
i am given the honor to serve as your president , which i think will happen , and we 're going to soon find out .
we hope .
and if it does happen , i will pledge to give you the resources , the equipment and the support you need and deserve , and that you 're not getting .
you will have a true and loyal friend in the white house .
whether you vote for me or whether you vote for someone else , i will be your greatest champion .
i will not let you down .
i am running to be a president for all americans , and i 've been especially humbled to have the support of so many of our men and women in uniform .
all americans , you know what i mean .
all across this country , i 've met so many incredible members of both our military and law enforcement community .
there 's nothing i 've enjoyed more than the time i 've spent with our service members , police officers and also our firefighters and paramedics .
these are incredible people .
they embody the goodness and decency of our country .
i was thus deeply shocked and alarmed this friday to hear my opponent attack , slander , smear , demean these wonderful , amazing people who are supporting our campaign by the millions .
our support comes from every part of america and every walk of life .
we have the support of cops and soldiers , carpenters and welders , the young and the old and millions of working class families who just want a better future and a good job .
these were the people hillary clinton so viciously demonized .
these were among the countless americans that hillary clinton called deplorable , irredeemable and un - american .
nobody 's heard anything like this .
she called these patriotic men and women every vile name in the book ; she called them racist , sexist , xenophobic , islamophobic .
she called half of our supporters a basket of deplorable in both the speech and in interview .
she divides people into baskets as though they were objects , not human beings .
hillary clinton made these comments at one of her high - dollar fund - raisers on wall street .
she and her wealthy donors all had a good laugh , you heard them ; they were all laughing .
good , good solid laugh .
they were laughing at the very people who paved the roads -- i mean , and these are the roads that she with all of her security , drive on -- paint the buildings she speaks in , and importantly , all of the other functions .
i mean , if you think all functions in life , including this auditorium and its maintenance .
hillary clinton is an insider supported by powerful insiders attacking americans who have absolutely no political power .
hillary clinton spoke with hatred and derision for the people who make this country run .
she spoke with contempt for the people who thanklessly follow the rules , pay their taxes and scratch out a living for their family ; a hard - earned living , too .
while hillary clinton lives a sequestered life behind gates and walls and guards , she mocks and demeans hardworking americans who only want their own families to enjoy a fraction of the security enjoyed by our politicians .
after months of hiding from the press , hillary clinton has revealed her true thoughts -- that was her true thoughts .
she revealed herself to be a person who looks down on the proud citizens of our country as subjects for her rule .
she views it as her rule .
her comments displayed the same sense of arrogance and entitlement that led to violation of federal law as secretary of state , hide and delete her e - mails -- nobody 's ever done anything like that before -- put classified information in the reach of our enemies , lied to congress and selled   government favors of access through her foundation .
it 's the same attitude that explains why hillary clinton refuses to take accountability for the deadly disaster she helped to create in iraq , in syria and in libya .
to this day , she wo n't take accountability for her role in unleashing -- and that 's what happened -- unleashing isis across the middle east or for putting iran on a path to nuclear weapons .
and as far as isis is concerned , probably unleashing isis here .
we better be very , very smart , tough and vigilant or we 're going to have big problems .
hillary clinton believes she 's above the law , that she is above accountability and that she is above each and every one of you .
our campaign is about giving voice to the voiceless .
it 's about representing the forgotten men and women of this country .
and they have been forgotten .
i 'm here to represent everyone , but especially those who are struggling against injustice and unfairness .
i am running so that the powerful can no longer beat up on the powerless .
i 'm running to take on the special interests , the big donors and the corrupt political insiders .
and of course , never forget , the special interests .
i am running to be your voice .
hillary clinton is a voice for wall street , for hedge fund managers , for top -- really the top ten percent and really the top one percent , and even less than that .
just look at the people funding hillary clinton 's campaign and paying for her speeches tremendous amounts of money .
and you know who she will be representing if she ever won , which i do n't believe is going to happen .
in fact , if you look at the recent polls , the ones over the last few days , we 're doing very well , that i can tell you .
the disdain that hillary clinton expressed toward millions of decent americans disqualifies her from public service .
you can not run for president if you have such contempt in your heart for the american voter , and she does .
you ca n't lead this nation if you have such a low opinion for its citizens .
hillary clinton still has n't apologized to those she slandered .
in fact , she has n't backed down at all .
she 's doubled down on her campaign conspiracy and contempt .
if hillary clinton will not retract her comments in full , i do n't see how she can credibly campaign any further .
let 's be clear .
these were not off - hand comments from hillary clinton .
these were   remarks not at all .
they were given also in an interview and probably a number of interviews .
these were lengthy , planned and prepared remarks .
it was perhaps the most explicit attack on the american voter ever spoken by a major party presidential nominee .
total disrespect for the people of our country .
clinton was using a very deliberate page from the democratic playbook , smearing someone with one of the names , you know , those names in order -- really , in order to scare -- and i mean try and seriously scare them out of voting for change .
and we 're bringing change .
she ca n't bring change .
she 's been doing this for 35 years .
she now talks about change .
there 's no change .
it 's going to be more of the same , only worse .
it 's going to be four more years of barack obama , only worse .
she just took it to a whole new level by applying it to tens of millions of people .
she used these vile words in order to bully and intimidate honest citizens out of seeking government reform .
and there will be reform .
there has to be reform .
people who want their immigration laws enforced -- we have no choice , we have to do that -- and their borders secured , are not racists .
they are patriotic americans of all backgrounds who want their jobs and families protected .
people who warn about radical islamic terrorism are not islamophobes .
they 're not .
they are decent american citizens who want to uphold our tolerant values and keep our country safe .
people who support police and who want crime reduced and stopped are not prejudiced and are not bad people .
they are concerned and loving citizens whose hearts break every time an innocent child is lost and oftentimes killed to preventable violence , and it is preventable .
hillary clinton does n't have to worry about sanctuary cities or jobs moving overseas where so many are moving .
she 's protected from her own policies .
the policies of hillary clinton have produced failing schools , shrinking incomes and the tragic poverty and joblessness in our inner cities .
our inner cities are a disaster .
our campaign is dedicated to changing these policies to make life better for all americans .
we are the campaign of school choice .
we are the campaign dedicated to improving economic conditions for every african american and hispanic worker .
and we are doing amazingly well with african american and hispanic workers , you 've been seeing that over the last week .
we are the campaign that will deliver a government of , by and for the people .
this change agenda includes a new foreign and new military policy .
we are going to put the failed policy of the past , and there are many , behind us .
ideally , way behind us .
we will empower our generals to do the job they were hired to do , and that begins with defeating and destroying isis .
thank you .
instead of endless wars , we want a real plan for victory .
we will abandon the policy of reckless regime change favored by my opponent and we will instead work with our allies to advance the core national security interests of the united states .
america first , remember that .
america first .
my plan calls for a major rebuilding of the entire military and the elimination of the defense -- and we have to do this so quickly , it 's a disaster -- of the defense sequester .
it is a disaster .
have no choice , it is a disaster .
it 's called depletion .
we have been depleted as a military , we ca n't let that happen .
the greatest men and women on earth , but we have been depleted by what 's taken place .
in this rebuilding , we will provide our national guard with the best modern , state - of - the - art equipment in the world , bar none .
the national guard is often the first and the last line of defense for our people .
you were there when the hurricanes and floods and tornadoes strike , always amazes me the courage , the care , the love that you give , amazing .
and the danger is beyond belief .
you were there to protect civilians in times of unrest , you were there to respond to every natural disaster .
you deserve a government that recognizes and honors your contribution and that ensures you have the resources you need to get the job done and to get the job done right .
in a trump administration , the national guard will always have a direct line to the oval office , and i mean direct .
you will have an administration that never loses sight of the vital contribution you make each and every day .
you will have a president who supports , promotes and speaks up for the national guard at every single turn .
the incredible members of the national guard have sacrificed life and limb for our freedom , our safety and our country .
we will never forget our heroes , their families and the ones they 've left behind .
our gratitude is and will be everlasting .
we will protect those who protect us and we will follow your example of unity working in common purpose and for a common cause .
we will be one people under one god saluting one american flag .
we will rebuild our military and our country .
we will make america strong again .
we will make america safe again .
and we together will make america great again .
thank you very much , everybody .
god bless you .
thank you , thank you .
thank you , everybody .
thank you , everybody .
thank you .
wow , it 's a lot of people .
wow .
thank you very much , everybody .
i love north carolina .
we 're going to have a big victory in north carolina .
in 56 days , we are going to win this state and we are going to win back the white house .
believe me .
and by the way , we have thousands of people outside trying to get in .
would anybody like to give up their place ?
anybody ?
no .
no .
thank you all very much .
it 's a great honor .
to win back the white house , however , you must get out and vote .
and remember that this means early voting , which begins on october 20th .
so you have to go out , vote , on the 8th .
or early vote starting from october 20th .
this is our chance , in my opinion , it 's our last chance .
i really believe that .
it 's our last chance to take it back , to fix our rigged system , and to create prosperity for each and every american .
true .
it 's our last chance , folks , this is it .
and after that , we have a whole new different country .
and you are not going to like it very much .
our vision of hope stands in stark contrast to my opponent 's campaign of hate .
hillary clinton has been running a hate - filled and negative campaign with no policy , no solutions , and no new ideas .
true .
by contrast , i have been going around the country offering very detailed plans for reform and change .
all of these reform plans are available on our website , and they are extensive .
but we have no choice , we have no choice .
while my opponent slanders you as deplorable and irredeemable .
i call you hard - working american patriots who love your country and want a better future for all our people .
true .
your mothers and fathers , soldiers and sailors , carpenters and welders , you are lawyers , you are very rich people in some cases .
you are at the top of your class , you are at the top of your university , you are professors , you are everybody .
you are everybody .
you 're democrats , you 're independents , you 're republicans .
above all else , you are americans and you 're entitled to leadership that honors you , cherishes you , and totally defends you and that is what you 're going to get if you vote for donald trump .
every american is entitled to be treated with dignity and respect in our country .
every american .
whether you vote for me or whether you vote for someone else , i will be your champion in the white house .
that , i can promise .
hillary clinton represents only the insiders , the donors , and special interests .
she talks change but why has n't she given it in 35 years ?
for 35 years she 's been here , why has n't she given change , she never will in a million years .
he wo n't do it .
i will be speaking more about hillary clinton 's disqualifying remarks in a minute .
but first , let me invite on to the stage some of our wonderful supporters who can tell you themselves what they think of her very horrible statements that she made three days ago .
folks , come on up .
these are not deplorable people .
that , i can tell you .
come on over .
come on up .
i 'll pick at random .
who wants to speak ?
come on .
come on .
and do n't forget , we 're going to protect our second amendment .
we 're going to repeal and replace horrible obamacare .
and never ever forget supreme court justices .
never .
come on up .
wow .
wow .
that 's -- is n't that great ?
and these people are so representative of everybody throughout our country .
so i have some thoughts on clinton 's remarks and i 'll be sharing them momentarily .
but first , i want to tell you what i 'm going to do to make america far better than it is right now and you know there 's room to make america great again .
we 've outlined the detailed plan on trade , on immigration .
build a wall .
we 're going to build a wall .
we 're going to build a wall .
and who is going to pay for the wall ?
hundred percent .
hundred percent .
they may not know it yet but they 're paying for the wall .
on rebuilding the military , on changing our foreign policy , i 've delivered a plan on defeating islamic terrorism .
on reforming our tax code , on unleashing american energy and on providing school choice to every disadvantage child in america .
we 've released policy after policy , solution after solution every day .
we 're putting forward new ideas to make your life better .
we need change .
we have to have change and it has to happen quickly .
we 're going in the wrong direction like nobody has ever thought possible .
the change will start right away the moment i take my oath of office .
right away .
on my first day , we 're going to immediately terminate every single unconstitutional executive order signed by president obama .
then i 'm going to order a review of every single regulation issued over the last eight years .
all needless job - killing regulations will be canceled .
millions of new jobs will come pouring in .
we 're going to lift restrictions on american energy .
this will create another half a million new jobs a year and that 's just the beginning .
on my first day in office , i am going to ask congress to send me a bill to immediately repeal and replace , i just said it , obamacare .
and this will save another two million jobs .
it is a disaster .
you see what 's happening , your premiums are going through the roof .
your deductibles are so high you 'll never get to use it hopefully because the only way you 'll use it is it has to be a long slow death .
you 'll never get to use it .
i am also going to propose a massive tax cut to unleash prosperity in every city and every state in our country .
big tax code .
i 'm going to instruct the department of commerce to immediately begin a review of all foreign trade practices that unfairly hurt american manufacturing .
you know what 's happening to your area .
i will use every lawful presidential power to achieve relief for our workers and we 're going to protect our workers , not like it 's been for a long time now .
our workers are going to come first .
we are going to protect our workers .
you can read the full seven - point trade plan on my website .
but i have to tell you , when it comes to trade , we 're going to renegotiate some of those horrible deals and , boy , is nafta bad .
north carolina has lost more than 4 in 10 manufacturing jobs since nafta .
think of that , 4 in 10 , 40 percent .
bill clinton signed it and hillary clinton supported it and it 's been perhaps the worst trade deal ever signed not only in this country but actually in the history of the world .
there 's never been a deal like this .
it 's a one - way street out of the united states and into mexico and other countries .
not going to be that way anymore , folks .
right here in asheville , you 've lost one in five manufacturing jobs since china joined the world trade organization , another hillary back disaster .
hillary clinton owes all of you an apology and i think you 'll get that apology right around the same time that she hands over the 33,000 emails that she delivered .
and by the way , hillary destroyed her emails after , think of this , after she received a congressional subpoena and nothing happened .
she gets a subpoena and she said destroy them .
what 's going on ?
they used a special software that most people , even sophisticated people in that world do n't even know about .
they bleached them .
she even made her 13 different phones disappear and some of them , she hammered with a hammer .
explain that one .
i 've never done that .
she obviously had a whole lot to hide including her pay - for - play scandals as secretary of state .
pay - for - play with ubs , with russian uranium , with contracts for her friends and her family in haiti .
nothing is so dangerous to american democracy as when a public official puts their federal office up for sale and that 's what happened here .
that 's what happened here .
hillary believes she 's above the law but she also believes , and you know this , she really believes that she is above the law and so far she 's turned out to be .
what happened to our laws ?
after months of hiding from the press , hillary clinton came out and finally told the world how she feels about the people of this country .
she said tens of millions of patriotic americans are a basket of deplorable .
how can you be president -- how can you be president for so many people ?
she talks about people like they 're objects , not human beings .
she said half of our supporters are irredeemable and not american and describes the other half as having run out of options .
what she ca n't understand or accept is that the great majority of this country now sees right through these lies and deceptions of a failed political establishment and frankly soon to be a failed politician .
the people want change .
they want justice and they want a government that puts the american people first .
whether our supporters have lost a job to a factory that moved to another country or whether a captain in the police department or teacher at a local school , they 're united by their deep and sophisticated understanding of how our political system has abandoned the people .
our system , folks , is rigged .
it 's a word i 've been using for a long time and now it 's picked up by everybody .
they 're all using it but our system is rigged .
for those who have been hit by hard times , they understand better than anyone that it 's clinton 's wall street agenda that has crushed the middle class of this country , crushed it .
hillary clinton spoke with hatred in her heart for these working - class americans .
absolute hatred in her heart .
could we have a doctor , please ?
a doctor .
a doctor , please .
thank you .
a doctor .
thank you .
thank you , doctor .
thank you .
it is about 100 degrees in here , folks .
thank you so much .
we love our supporters , right ?
let 's give her a hand .
yes .
get some water , please .
water .
kevin , get some water , please .
take your time .
do n't worry .
we have all the time , right ?
that 's a great supporter , an unbelievable person , been here for a long time and i just want to thank you .
that 's right .
that 's great .
thank you , darling .
and whether it was a supporter or not , we 're going to take care of him .
that 's what we 're talking about , right ?
right ?
that 's what we 're talking .
and it is pretty hot in here , folks .
it 's like pretty hot .
hillary looks down on people , all the people , and frankly , these are people that have been so unbelievable for our country .
she looks down on the carpenters and the plumbers and the electricians .
she looks down on police officers and soldiers and firefighters and everybody supporting our campaign and we have large chunks , we have everybody supporting us , folks , everybody .
we have people that have been so successful .
we have some that have n't quite been as successful .
let me tell you , we have everybody because everybody knows what a mess our country is in .
she looks down on the people who cook your meals , driver your cars and dig the call that power her electricity .
what she 's done to the minors is unbelievable .
obama and clinton have destroyed the lives of the minors .
that , i can tell you .
and the steelworkers our next and you see that coming .
she called these americans every name in the book , racist , sexist , xenophobic , islamophobic , she said they were not even american , right ?
anybody 's xenophobic , i do n't think so .
i do n't think so .
never in history has a major party presidential candidate so viciously demonized the american voter .
she was attacking millions of moms and dads who love their children and want a better future for all americans .
that 's what they want .
watching these parents tell their children about hillary clinton 's attacks .
let me ask you this question , is there any place in america more fun to be than a trump rally , right ?
right ?
no place .
no place .
watching these parents tell their children about hillary 's attacks .
to every kid in america tonight , i want you to know that your parents are working so hard to make your life better and to make your country better .
it 's ok .
the cameras are following us that is why .
see now , the dishonest media will not report that .
they wo n't report it .
they say we 're bad people .
they 're not going to report that .
so here 's the story , folks .
it 's a few people out of thousands .
the dishonest media , these people , the most dishonest people you 're going to ever find , they wo n't report that .
they wo n't report the gesture .
they wo n't report anything .
but the good news is the cameras follow it .
that 's the only way i could get the cameras to move so they 'll be able to see how many thousands of people we have here , how many thousands of people are outside but the media is disgusting .
let me tell you honestly , somebody said , what have you learned most .
i 've learned , number one , how great the american people are and , number two , how dishonest the media is , totally dishonest .
look at that horrible sign .
look at that horrible disgusting sign .
look at that .
look at that horrible disgusting .
did you see the sign ?
did you see it ?
now let me tell you , nobody 's going to report that .
they 'll say we were rude because we shouted them down .
when are we going to get smart , folks ?
when are we going to get smart ?
you know the truth is that 's why we have a movement .
that is why we have a movement because we 're not going to take it anymore i 'm telling you .
we 're going to put sanity back into the white house .
we are going to have law and order .
we 're going to have safety .
we 're going to have jobs .
we 're going to have education .
we 're going to protect our second amendment .
we 're going to do a lot of great things .
and if i get the chance , i will fight right alongside of our people to deliver a much , much better future for everyone .
we are people -- many of the people in this audience that made more money in real wages 18 years ago than they do today and they 're working harder today and they 've got two jobs .
not going to happen .
clinton made remarks at a high - dollar fundraiser in wall street .
her goal is simple , to bully the american voter out of voting for change .
the people who rigged the system want to keep things exactly as they are .
it 's been very good .
they want to keep our terrible trade deals and they are terrible .
they do n't want renegotiation because they 're on the other side of a lot of those horrible deals that are moving to mexico and other places .
they like them just fine but it 's killing the american job .
they want to trap children and failing government schools .
they want massive regulation to keep small businesses from being able to compete with other businesses all over the world .
hillary clinton can never be president of this country , not .
what she just said shows what a low opinion she has of the american people .
we just ca n't let that happen , folks .
we ca n't let it happen .
you got to get out , november 8th , you got to get out .
october 20th , you start sending in those votes .
you got to do it .
earlier today , i had a chance to spend some time with some of our most amazing americans .
i spent the afternoon with the national guard association of the united states .
incredible people .
these are the heroes who rescue our people in disasters and who fight in our wars .
these heroes are a permanent testament to the courage and character of our nation .
we also honor and remember the lives of the service members who have made the ultimate sacrifice .
there is no greater love than the love shown by the men and women who have laid down their lives for this country and for its people .
nothing greater than that .
our debt to them is eternal and everlasting .
let me also pause for a moment to recognize shelby county police officer tim brackeen who was shot in the line of duty and died today leaving behind a wife and beautiful child .
we mourn this terrible loss that we pledge to always stand with our incredible police and law enforcers .
in addition to supporting our law enforcement , we must also ensure that our men and women in the armed services have the best equipment , resources and tools anywhere in the world .
we do n't anymore .
we do n't .
we are totally depleted .
we have the greatest people on earth but our military services are depleted with the bad equipment , the old equipment , it 's a terrible thing that 's happened .
we must provide them with the best medical care while they serve and the best medical care when they return home to civilian life .
the veteran scandals that have occurred under this administration and that have been dismissed by my opponent are a permanent stain on our government .
it 's just one more way hillary clinton only looks out for herself .
we must take care of our veterans and that includes giving veterans a card that gives them the right to choose treatment in either public va facilities or the private doctor of their choice .
i have to do it .
you look at what 's happening where people are waiting on line five days , six days , seven days , 10 days and they 're dying , 22 suicides a day , 22 suicides a day .
who can even believe that number when a simple solution could be at hand ?
a prescription , a small operation and they 're dying and they 're killing themselves and they 've done so much for us .
it 's not going to happen any longer believe me .
just today , we learned that the va has violated a federal law by failing to make its performance records available to consumers .
the scandals never seem to end but they will end when i 'm elected president and it will end quickly .
and hillary clinton was quoted fairly recently as saying , the va is fine , the va is working .
not working , hillary .
i 've got to know so many veterans .
believe me , it 's not working .
nothing makes me more proud than to have the support of the men and women who wear the uniform .
we 've received endorsements from 120 generals and admirals .
these are the people who know how to keep our country safe .
these are our fighters .
these are our great , great fighters .
so i want to thank each and every one of them and there are more coming .
just today , i was profoundly humbled to gain the endorsement of 13 medal of honor recipients , 13 .
and i ca n't even begin to say how much it means to me to have their support .
these are truly great heroes .
also today , i was thrilled to announce that ambassador r. james woolsey , former head of the cia , one of the most respected people anywhere in our government , is now a senior advisor to our campaign .
this is one of the most respected people .
great man .
we are on a mission of change and that includes a new agenda for our inner cities , our inner cities , folks .
our inner cities are a mess .
the democratic party has run the inner cities for 50 , 60 , 70 and even a hundred years straight .
democratic politicians like clinton disrespect these voters and take them for granted .
they want the vote and they say see you in four years .
they do nothing .
remember hillary 's words super predator .
remember that .
remember those words .
super predator , those are her words .
nearly four in 10 african - american children live in poverty including , listen to this , 45 percent of those under the age of six .
they live in poverty .
their schools are failing and 58 percent of african - american youths are not employed .
approximately 3,000 people have been shot in chicago since the beginning of the year .
for those suffering and hurting , i say , give donald trump a chance .
i will fix it .
what do you have to lose ?
you have nothing to lose .
it ca n't get any worse .
it ca n't get any worse .
you can go to war -- and you know this is true , you can go to afghanistan .
you can go to war - torn countries and you will find that it 's safer than being in the middle of some of our inner cities .
we 're going to give security and safety .
we 're going to give education .
we 're going to get jobs .
we 're going to bring our jobs back from mexico and all of these countries that have been stealing our job .
we 're going to get people working and we 're going to love it .
i will fight for detroit and chicago and baltimore and for every neglected part of this nation and they 're neglected by the democrats .
and i will fight to bring us all together as one american people , i will do that .
and i say to the african - american people , i say it again and again , i will fix it and really what do you have to lose , it ca n't get any worse , what do you have to lose ?
i will fix it .
imagine what our country could accomplish if we started working together as one people under one god saluting one american flag , one american flag .
what 's going on today , folks ?
what 's going on today ?
it 's time to break with the bitter failures of the past and to embrace the new american future .
this is a future we will respect .
the dignity of all americans and that means great jobs , great schools and great neighborhoods and it also means safety , it means safety .
we will have the steadfast support for america and for its law enforcement .
everybody wants that .
everybody wants it .
jobs will return .
prosperity will rise and new factories will come rushing back to north carolina and every other state in our country .
government corruption will end .
honesty will be restored .
republicans are the party and remember these , folks , it 's like people forget .
we have to embrace it .
republicans are the party of abraham lincoln and come november 8th , we will once again have a government of by and for the people .
we will make america prosperous and successful again .
we will make america safe again .
you 'll be able to walk down the street of your inner cities and not be shot .
we will make america strong again and we will make america great again .
thank you , everybody .
thank you .
november 8th , get out and vote .
god bless you .
god bless you .
thank you .
thank you , everybody .
thank you very much .
thank you , folks .
you know , this is where it all began , new hampshire .
this is where it all began .
first victory .
this was our first victory and i 've never forgotten it .
and i made a promise to you .
we 're going to keep the poison out .
you know what that is , the drugs .
we 're gon na stop those drugs .
right -- right here is where i learned more about it than in any place else and we are gon na stop the poison from coming into this country .
you watch .
you watch .
in four days , we are going to win the great state of new hampshire ...   ... and we are going to win back the white house .
and we 've had incredible polls .
you 've probably seen the new rasmussen poll just came out , we 're three points up nationwide and going like a rocket .
many , many polls .
i wo n't even go over all the polls , but we 're leading in ohio , and iowa , all over the place .
i think we 're doing great in north carolina .
i think we 're doing great in pennsylvania too , by the way .
and florida looks beautiful .
florida looks beautiful .
we have so many great polls .
but you have to get out and vote on november 8th .
you have to do that .
we 're on the cusp of historic change that transfers power from a failed political establishment and returns that power to you , the american people .
that 's what 's gon na happen .
that 's what 's gon na happen .
there 's more breaking news , as you probably heard , that i 'd like to share with you right now .
is that ok ?
as you know , the fbi now has multiple open criminal investigations into hillary clinton .
this includes the discovery of another 650,000 e - mails and also a far - reaching criminal investigation into her pay for play scheme at the state department .
last night , cbs news just confirmed that the 650,000 e - mails include brand new e - mails not previously seen by authorities .
she said she gave them all in , right ?
she said , gave them all in .
well , when we saw 650,000 , we figured , i guess there has to become surprises .
wait till you see what they find in those 650 too , it wo n't be pretty .
hillary clinton lied to congress under oath when she said she turned over all her work - related e - mails , and that she did n't send classified information on her illegal server .
meaning , she may now face major problems for perjury .
how can hillary manage this country , when she ca n't even manage her e - mails ?
did you ever see -- hey , folks , let 's forget all of the stuff -- what a mess -- what a mess .
all she had to do was follow the rules and assume people are watching or listening , who cares right ?
what a mess , and for what ?
now we 're going to have her running the country for four years ?
what a -- honestly , what a terrible , terrible mess .
over -- over what ?
over nothing , over what should have been nothing .
all she had to do was follow the rules , unbelievable .
and now she is going to run the country .
she will be under investigation for years , she will be with trials .
our country , we have to get back to work , right ?
well , one of her top people , i guess her top person said -- wikileaks , said she has bad instincts , what a bad thing , bad instincts .
she should fire him , honestly .
that would be good instincts , but she should fire him , john podesta .
in an e - mail said , hillary has bad instincts .
do you want that for your president ?
then bernie sanders said -- bernie sanders said bad judgment , but in all fairness he was running against her .
so he said bad judgment .
but the guy that 's running her campaign says hillary really has bad instincts .
then we 're going to say , let 's make her president .
the fbi agents say their investigation is likely to yield an indictment , however the report also shows that the political leadership at the department of justice is trying as hard as it can to protect their angel , hillary clinton .
why did n't they protect general cartwright , and why did n't they protect general petraeus ?
why did n't they protect a kid who 's taking a couple pictures of a submarine -- that 's an old submarine ?
and they put him in jail -- they put him in jail -- lovely family , lovely mother , they put him in jail because he wanted to have some remembrance of where he worked .
it 's an old submarine , believe me , they have pictures of that submarine that nobody knows about , probably , right ?
they put him in jail .
and you see what she does and she 's allowed to run for president .
folks do you know what it tells you ?
the system is rigged , and i 've been saying that for a long time .
the system is rigged , she should n't be allowed to run .
hillary is engaged in massive criminal enterprise and cover - up .
she created an illegal e - mail server to shield her criminal activity and corrupt pay for play .
she illegally transmitted confidential information -- you 're just not allowed to do that .
forget about the second go round , what she 's in now .
the first go around , you 're not allowed to do it , you 're not allowed to delete after you get subpoena .
she illegally destroyed federal records , including 33,000 e- mails , which she deleted after getting that subpoena from congress .
if she were to win , it would create an unprecedented constitutional crisis , what a mess .
i mean , we went through it with him , with the impeachment and the lies , are n't we tired of this stuff ?
she is likely to be under investigation for a long time , concluding in a criminal trial , our president .
america deserves a government that can go to work on day one and get it done .
real change begins with immediately repealing and replacing the disaster known as obamacare .
and obama , you know , he is campaigning all over the place .
i left miami yesterday , there was the plane .
he is campaigning -- he ought to be in the white house working and getting our jobs back , and building up our military , and creating some semblance of a border -- which we do n't have now .
it 's just been announced that americans nationwide are going to experience a massive , double digit premium hike in obamacare .
in the great state of arizona -- where i just left , and i 'll be back -- premiums are going up more than 116 percent , arizona , 116 percent .
over 90 percent of the counties in new hampshire are losing obamacare , they 're losing the insurers , and that 's going to be next year .
so lot 's of luck negotiating , folks , 90 percent .
premiums are surging , companies are leaving , insurers are fleeing , doctors are quitting and deductibles are going through the roof .
other than that , it 's a fantastic health care , fantastic .
it 's really fabulous , is n't it ?
it was bad before they even did it .
you have to say , i 'm pretty consistent -- i called a lot of things over the years , right ?
but i said obamacare 's not going to work before it was even approved and he got it approved -- he got it approved by lies because he said you keep your doctor , you keep your plan and even democrats that did n't want it , they said all right , well then .
and he got people -- they wish they did n't approve it now , believe me .
it is a catastrophe .
yet hillary clinton wants to double down on obamacare , making it even more expensive than it already is and it does n't work .
i 'm asking for your vote so we can replace obamacare and save health care for every family in new hampshire and every family in this country .
real change also means restoring honesty to government .
my contract with the american voter begins with a plan to end government corruption , which there 's plenty .
first thing we have to do is keep hillary clinton out of office .
that will be a good start .
i want the entire corrupt washington establishment to hear and heed the words , we -- all of us together -- are about to say .
when we win on november 8th , we are going to washington , d.c. and we are going to drain the swamp .
thank you .
thank you .
thank you very much .
at the core of my contract is my plan to bring back our jobs , about time .
the terrible jobs report that just came out shows the number of people not in the workforce increased by another 425,000 people last month .
that 's why you see these phony numbers about five percent unemployed .
people are stopping , they 're not looking for work anymore because they ca n't get a job , then they take them off the rolls .
these numbers are an absolute disaster .
labor force participation has fallen to its lowest level in nearly 40 years , that 's what 's happening .
nearly one in four people in their prime working years are not working .
they want to work , they 're not working .
after eight years , obama is the first president in modern history not to have a single year of three percent growth .
we 're growing at any average of probably one to two percent , nobody even knows and nobody believes the numbers anyway .
the numbers they put out are phony as far as i 'm concerned .
for millions of americans , it 's an economic nightmare .
new hampshire has lost one in four of its manufacturing jobs since nafta , a deal signed by bill clinton and supported by hillary clinton .
this is the one that 's hardest to believe of all .
america has lost 70,000 factories since china entered the world trade organization .
you people know -- new england , boy do you know it .
another bill and hillary - backed disaster .
we are living through the greatest jobs theft in the history of the world , and that 's what it is when you think .
we have a one way highway right into mexico and these other places .
they take our jobs and they take our money , they take out cash .
you know what we get out of it ?
drugs and unemployment .
it 's going to end , do n't worry about it , folks .
do n't even think about it .
it 's going to end .
do n't forget -- and i have to say this , because i tell this story all over the place .
i learn so much in new hampshire because i see this place , it 's so beautiful .
to me , it 's one of the most beautiful places on earth .
you -- nice , beautiful winding roads -- even the roads , everything 's so -- the trees and the little lakes and streams .
and i sat down because i have so many friends up here , because i worked hard during those primaries .
remember , i was supposed to lose the primary .
i won in a landslide , right ?
remember they had the story   the day before .
it looks like trump could lose new hampshire .
and the numbers came out , it was a land slide .
but what i learned is -- because it was so -- it was sort of shocking because i considered -- you know , i love this kind of look .
and i consider with the trees and the whole thing -- so beautiful .
and i sat down with groups of people .
you know , it was n't always big rallies because i 'd sit down with people .
say , " what 's the problem ? "
every single group said heroin .
i said , " heroin ? "
because it did n't make sense to me .
you know , you look at the streams and the lakes and the trees and then they say heroin and it was shocking .
that 's why i 've never forgotten it .
i never forgot those meetings in every single group .
and then i met with your police .
you have the great -- you have such great law enforcement up here .
but they said the same thing .
and so much of their crime is caused by drugs .
they come from the southern border largely .
and i said to you -- i said to you and you remember this , if i make it , we are going to stop that problem and then we 're gon na work on all of the people who are so seriously addicted .
and there are things happening -- you know , there are things happening with medicines that the federal fda is not even releasing .
they 're not even releasing .
there are things that come out that potentially could really help .
but we 're gon na work on the people that have become so seriously addicted because it 's tremendous .
it 's not only our youth .
you know , i say poisoning our youth , but it 's a lot of other people .
but i learned that from new hampshire .
then i go to other states and they say very similar things .
but honestly never as much fervor as drugs in new hampshire , and it just really had a great impact .
i said to you i 'm gon na solve the problem if i get there .
and boy , are we are getting close .
now we 're getting close , right ?
true .
we 're gon na solve it .
when you see the rusted out factories and empty buildings , just remember this .
hillary clinton 's policies and others like her , her friends , did this to us , all of us .
just look at the devastation .
rockwell laid - off 169 people in manchester and moved their jobs to mexico .
fisher -- and these are recent .
fisher scientific laid - off 213 people in hudson and moved their jobs to mexico .
the woman -- i just overheard her say , " i did n't know that . "
right ?
now you know .
now you know .
she was a little louder than she thought .
that 's ok .
she did n't know .
now she knows .
car component technologies laid - off 559 workers in bedford and moved their jobs to canada and to mexico .
a trump administration will stop the jobs from leaving america , believe me , and we will stop the jobs from leaving new hampshire .
the theft of american prosperity will end .
they have taken away our prosperity .
from now on , it 's going to be america first .
there 'll be consequences .
there will be consequences .
if a company wants to fire their workers , leave new hampshire , move another -- you know , to another country , wonderful .
enjoy yourself , right ?
and then ship their products back into the united states , they will pay a 35 percent tax , ok ?
and let me just tell you a little -- right now , they move , they build , they have lots of fun and they just send it right through a very weak border .
first of all , they 're gon na have to send through a very strong border , but that 's ok .
but they 're gon na have a 35 percent tax .
here 's what 's going to happen : they 're not gon na move because it does n't work anymore .
they 're not gon na move .
they 're gon na stay in this country .
they 're gon na stay in new hampshire .
they 're gon na stay in this country .
it 's so simple .
but the politicians will never approve that because the special interests and their donors want them to be able to go and -- you know , it 's   good for them , but it 's not good for us .
a trump administration will renegotiate nafta , and if we do n't get the deal we want , we will terminate nafta and get a much better deal for our workers .
we have to have jobs ...   you know , i -- i said before , it 's a one -- it 's a one - lane highway .
we have to have a lane coming in our direction too , folks .
we have nothing .
we get nothing .
we will also immediately stop the job - killing trans - pacific partnership .
that 's gon na be the next disaster .
that 's another beauty .
that 'll take the jobs you have left .
as part of our plan to bring back jobs , we are going to lower taxes on american business from 35 percent to 15 percent and we 'll keep our business .
we 're right now the highest taxed nation in the world .
and remember , hillary wants to raise taxes , big league .
we will massive cut taxes for the middle class .
she wants to raise them big league .
does n't even make sense .
we will also -- that 's right ; $ 1.3 billion -- $ 1.6 billion .
trillion ?
not a , trillion .
you 're right .
nobody can even believe it .
one point -- go ahead .
that 's right .
he read the -- he read her page .
and if she says that , it 's going higher .
you know that .
$ 1.3 trillion .
can you -- it 's inconceivable .
we 're the highest taxed nation in the world .
remember that .
we will also cancel -- we 're gon na save ourselves altogether , ok ?
he says , " save us . "
we 're gon na all save ourselves .
this is a movement -- i 'll tell you , this is a movement like has never been before .
and you know , i 'd say it all the time .
and they do n't even question it because the dishonest media , among the world 's most dishonest people .
they do n't even question .
and now , we 're gon na -- we 're gon na -- we 're gon na be so strong again and so smart again .
we 're gon na be -- you do n't have to worry about saving .
it 's gon na be well beyond saving , ok ?
we will also cancel billions in global warming payments to the united nations , money that we do n't even know what they do with it .
we do n't even know what they do with it .
and use that money to support america 's environmental infrastructure .
for instance , up here .
what we want .
we want crystal clear , clean water .
right ?
everybody .
we want beautiful -- right ?
we want beautiful air to breath .
we want safety .
other than that , that 's all we want .
the rest we want are companies to go out and compete with oil .
they ca n't compete because of all of these restrictions .
but we want clear water , clean air , and we want safety .
that 's to me , what i like .
and that 's to me -- and i 've won many environmental awards by the way .
i 'm -- i 've actually been called an environmentalist , if you can believe that .
that includes protecting the great bay and the white mountains of new hampshire .
we 're gon na protect them -- they 'll be protected .
they 'll be better protected than they are right now with a lot less intrusive nonsense .
our plan will end excessive federal regulations that are harming fisherman on the sea coast , you know all about that .
they 're making it impossible .
they 're making it for the miners , for the fishermen .
they 're making it impossible for the steel workers with all the dumping of steel all over the place .
we will become a rich nation again -- a truly rich nation .
some people think that does n't sound nice -- it 's not politically correct .
we have to .
but to be a rich nation , we much also be a safe nation .
hillary clinton wants a 550 percent increase in syrian refugees flowing into our country .
that 's over and above the thousands and thousands being let in right now by obama .
her plan would mean generations of terrorism , extremism , and radicalism spreading into your schools and throughout your communities .
when i 'm elected president , we will suspend the syrian refugee program .
and we will keep radical islamic terrorists the hell out of our country .
sorry .
had no choice , we have no choice .
and we all have a heart and will build safe zones in syria , we 'll help them .
we all have a heart .
but we see what 's happening to germany and to france and to all of these -- it 's a disaster .
it 's a disaster .
look at nice this summer .
look at what 's going on in paris and all of these -- all of these different places .
we 're gon na work , but we 're -- you know , we owe $ 20 trillion .
we 're not gon na spend the money .
i 'll get the gulf states to put up the money .
they have tremendous money .
they need us , they have to step up to the plate .
they need us , we 'll get them to put up the money , we 'll lead the effort , and we 'll build safe zones all over syria .
and we 'll take care of it .
we 'll get other people to pay .
we 'll get other people to pay .
who said that ?
who ?
that statement could only be made in new hampshire , i have to tell you .
you people , if the press hears that statement , you 'll be in trouble .
but somehow i think he 'll be able to handle it .
a trump administration will also secure , defend the borders of the united states .
and yes , we will build a great wall .
we received the first - ever endorsement from our ice and border patrol officers .
we will work with them -- these are great people but the way , would 've been a lot easier if they did n't -- look , if hillary got in , all they 'd have to do is stand there and let people walk right in front of them .
these are great people .
they know what is happening to our country .
they see what 's happening to our country .
we will work with them to stop the drugs from pouring into new hampshire and throughout the country and poisoning our youth .
the immigration officers warned in a letter that hillary 's plan is the most radical immigration proposal in u.s. history , and that will lead to the loss of thousands and thousands of lives , it 's a quote from them .
as secretary of state , hillary clinton allows many , many people -- she allowed so many people , the most dangerous and violent criminal aliens to go free , because their home countries -- very intelligently -- would n't take them back .
we get these people that were n't supposed to be here , that are violent criminals , drug dealers , gang members , heads of gangs .
we put them in a plane , we send them back , their countries say , we do n't want them .
we do n't want them .
we 're not taking them .
they 'd call the secretary of state -- or her , or her people -- they wo n't take them back .
that 's ok , bring them back , let them out , and then they kill people .
ok or they do other things that are very bad .
i promise you that when we deport some real bad ones , there will never be a time when that plane -- or whatever form of transportation they want to use -- there will never be a time when that plane comes back with that person sitting in the .
ever , never , never happen .
they do n't respect us , these other countries do n't have respect .
hillary supports totally open borders , there goes your country .
and strongly supports sanctuary cities like san francisco , where kate steinle was murdered by an illegal immigrant , deported at least five times .
a trump administration will cancel all federal funding to sanctuary cities .
we will end illegal immigration , stop the drugs from pouring into our country , deport all criminal aliens and save so many american lives .
we will also reap -- and it 's just safe   -- it 's just -- does n't that make sense ?
we will also repeal the obama - clinton defense sequester .
and rebuild our badly depleted military .
greatest people on earth -- the greatest people .
our navy is the smallest it 's been .
listen to this , how sad , and then you see china in the south china sea , building their fortresses and taking our money .
they take our money and they build their fortresses , we 'll have a great relationship , i have a great relationship with china , i 've made a lot of money dealing with china , china 's terrific .
look , dealing with china is great , but i 'm -- and i 'm not angry china for doing this stuff .
i 'm angry at our people for allowing it to happen .
our navy is the smallest it has been since world war i , you believe that ?
we will build the 350 ship navy that our country needs , and really is requesting , which means lots more work for the portsmouth naval shipyard .
right ?
great shipyard , not too busy , but it 's a great shipyard .
we 'll make it busy .
and you know , things like that -- number one , we 're building our defense , it also puts our great people to work , right ?
it 's great .
we 'll also expand the center of excellence at portsmouth to recruit a large number of skilled craftsmen like pipefitters and welders that we need to expand our fleet .
i 'm honored to have the endorsement of more than 200 top admirals and generals and 22 medal of honor recipients .
i was with them last night .
near fort bragg -- we were right near fort bragg last night .
we had some amazing people , we had over 20,000 people .
it was the most unbelievable evening and we had tremendous numbers of admirals and generals and we had a lot of medal of honor winners , amazing , it was an amazing evening .
our new foreign policy will put america first .
you have n't heard that for a long time .
hillary brought death and disaster to iraq , syria , libya , she empowered iran and , she unleashed isis .
now she wants to start a shooting war in syria in conflict -- and this in conflict with a nuclear - armed russia that could seriously lead to world war iii .
i think she 's an unstable person to start off with , i really do .
i think she 's unstable .
she and obama created it through the vacuum .
hillary ... 
  wars that never end , wars that we never win .
and now it 's in worse shape than it 's ever been before and we have to rebuild our country , folks .
we could have rebuilt our country twice and the middle east now is far worse than it was when we started this whole mess .
they 've dragged us into foreign wars that have made us less safe and they 've left our borders wide open at home .
is n't it interesting how we fight for other people 's borders , lose our lives -- the lives , the money -- most important are the lives , the great lives .
we lose lives , the money , and yet we want to have open borders , right ?
explain that .
we fight for borders for other countries -- half the people never heard of these other countries .
they want borders and then we leave our borders open .
and they 've shipped our jobs and they 've shipped our wealth to other countries .
to all americans , i say it is time for new leadership .
we need change .
we need change .
the last thing we need is four more years of obama with isis ... 

  that 's really nice .
i think we 're going to have a great , great day on tuesday in new hampshire .
you know , one of the big commentators , political commentators -- i thought i 'd tell you , it 's only good for your ego -- but just said whoever wins new hampshire is going to win .
it 's interesting , right ?
she said , " you 'll win by five . "
only five ?
i want more than five .
let 's win .
justin   concluded .
just think about what we can accomplish in the first 100 days of a trump administration .
we 're going to have the biggest tax cut since ronald reagan and maybe beyond .
and hillary wants to raise your taxes .
we 're going to eliminate every unnecessary job - killing regulation , killing businesses .
we will cancel every illegal obama executive order .
we are going to protect religious liberty .
rebuild our military and take care of our great , great vets .
we 're going to take care of our vets .
and i mean really take care of them , not like all the lip service they 've had for 25 years .
our vets -- by the way folks , are treated so poorly , the stories are horrible .
stories -- great -- that 's great .
hold that up with pride .
we love you , man , we love you .
that is beautiful .
thank you .
we 're going to take care of our vets .
we 're going to provide school choice and put an end to common core .
we 're going to have education local .
we will support the great men and women of law enforcement .
something which you folks like a lot , we will save -- we will save our very much under siege second amendment .
and appoint justices to the united states supreme court , who will -- right ?
who will uphold and defend the constitution of the united states .
it 's time to cut our ties with the failed and bitter politics of the past .
hillary clinton is the candidate of yesterday .
we -- you -- you -- we , are the movement of the future .
common sense , intelligence .
our movement represents all americans from all backgrounds and all walks of life .
we 're asking for the votes of republicans and democrats and independents and first time voters -- of which there are plenty .
you just have to look at the lines in florida , north carolina and all over the place .
you look at what 's happening , tremendous numbers of people that have n't voted in 20 years or first time voters .
we 're fighting -- like him , he just said like him -- well , thank you , man .
he just said , i voted . "
is that your first time ?
that 's beautiful , thank you .
lot of people , lot of people .
i mean you have people , literally -- and they show the lines in florida and texas .
remember they said , texas is in play -- two weeks ago i said , really ?
i thought i was doing great in texas .
these people , they 're horrible people .
texas -- they go , texas is in play and then they have the lines they 're a mile long .
and then you have this wonderful guy , mr. miller -- sid miller , gets on one of the shows , how are you doing in texas ?
he says this is a total blowout for trump , now they 're saying it 's in play .
so , these lines are a mile long , we never had lines like this .
and people that have never voted before are coming onto the lines wearing trump shirts and hats and buttons falling off that .
these are people that never voted .
these are people that did n't give a damn for politics because they never saw anybody that they liked .
they love the country as much as anybody , but they never -- like you -- but they never saw anybody that they felt good about and they did n't vote .
and now they go from that , they go from being a non- political person into wearing trump shirts and buttons .
it 's a beautiful thing .
it 's a beautiful thing .
but texas is a total blowout .
but you remember , right ?
texas is in play .
these characters .
they 're just bad people , the media .
they are bad people .
bad people .
and then one of them said this morning , " we were wrong about texas . "
a total blowout .
we 're going to have a lot of blowouts , i think .
i 'll never forget it , folks .
i 'm telling you , four , five days ago , before the lines formed , " texas is in play . "
i said man , that would be terrible .
i do n't wanna lose texas .
that would be terrible .
total blowout .
we love the people of texas .
we are fighting for every citizen who believes that government should serve the people , not the donors and not the special interests .
we 're fighting to unlock the potential of every american community and every american family and hope and pray and yearn for a better future .
i 'm asking you to dream big , because with your vote , we are just -- can you believe this -- four days away .
four days away .
we 're four days away from the change you 've been waiting for your entire life .
i 'm ready .
i 'm ready .
i 'm ready .
he just -- a vet .
he 's a great veteran .
he 's just shouting , " are you ready ? "
i 'm ready .
i promise .
i did n't need this , folks .
i -- i was -- hey look , i was on the other side .
i understood the other side very well .
it was very nice , very enjoyable .
but i love this country and we had to do this .
believe me , we had to do this .
and i 'm ready .
thank you , everybody .
thank you .
thank you .
i appreciate that .
thank you very much .
together , we will make america wealthy again , we will make america strong again , we will make america safe again and we will make america great again .
god bless you , everybody .
god bless you .
thank you very much .
thank you , new hampshire .
get out and vote .
in one day , we are going to win the great state of pennsylvania and we are going to take back the white house .
this election will decide whether we 're ruled by a corrupt political class or whether we are ruled by yourselves , the people .
it is time to reject a failed political elite that has bled this country dry .
to all the people of pennsylvania , i say , we are going to put the miners and the factory workers and the steel workers back to work .
we 're bringing our companies back .
the trade policies of bill and hillary clinton have destroyed manufacturing in your state and throughout the country .
i want to take this moment to share a message with all of the democratic voters in our country , thirsting -- thirsting for change .
you 're tired of a government that works only for wall street and the special interests .
you 're tired of the reckless foreign policy .
the crazy wars that are never won .
hillary clinton is the last stand for the wall street and special interest donors and to special interests themselves .
and hillary is the face of failure -- she 's the face of failure .
she 's the face of failed foreign policy .
real change begins -- she is indeed the face of failure .
look at what she 's done with e - mails , look at the mess -- look at the mess , and look at the corruption .
real change begins immediately with the repealing and replacing of the disaster known as obamacare .
this is a great room .
we had great victories in this room by the way .
great victories in this room .
and i went to school in pennsylvania .
and my kids went to school in pennsylvania .
so , i guess we assume it 's a good place to learn .
look , have you been seeing the polls by the way ?
oh , boy .
oh , boy .
see the dishonest people back there , the media .
the totally dishonest group .
they are so dishonest .
they are so dishonest folks .
you ca n't even read articles in certain papers anymore .
new york times is a total .
we 're doing fantastically well in north carolina , i think we 're leading .
we -- i believe -- are leading in florida .
and now , hillary just announced she 's going to additional stops .
she 's going to michigan , traditionally not really a republican state .
but you know , i 've been talking , i was man of the year in michigan a number of years ago .
and i started telling and talking about your car business is being stolen from you .
i 've been saying it for years and years and years .
and you know what ?
michigan now agrees .
we 're leading in michigan -- we 're leading .
and when i heard that crooked hillary is going there tonight , she had to .
nobody thought in terms of michigan .
when i heard i figured , you know what ?
i have nothing to do tonight , so i 'll go there tonight and give it the last word .
ok ?
so after this , i 'm going to new hampshire , and then i 'm going to michigan .
oh , we 're going to have a great victory tomorrow folks , we 're going to have a great victory .
they have no idea -- the dishonest media has no idea .
actually , they do have an idea .
they 're saying , what is going on ?
and look at these people and look at this enthusiasm , there 's nothing like it .
by the way , and just i have to say , this is considered -- the history of this country .
this is actually -- and you 've been hearing it .
this is considered the greatest movement , nobody 's ever seen anything like this folks .
nobody 's ever seen anything like   where we give $ 150 billion to iran .
where we give them $ 400 million in cash , but that turns out to be $ 1.7 billion in cash to iran , for hostages .
for hostages , which our president lied about .
and just one other thing , why   he ought to be working on jobs , on getting rid of isis , on our borders , on our healthcare which is failing so badly .
boy oh boy .
and she ca n't get anybody to go to her rallies , so she gets jay - z.   he uses the worst language i have ever heard .
and by the time he 's finished , what 's happened ?
what happens , he and beyonce right ?
they 're finished , by that time most of the people have left .
so she thinks she 's getting people , by the time she speaks they 're all gone anyways .
she should just take a small room and talk , -- just take a small room and talk .
it 's just been announced that the residents of pennsylvania are going to experience a massive double digit premium hike .
so high that i wo n't tell you what it is , it 's very high .
all 67 counties in pennsylvania , most of which i won in the primaries , right ?
almost all , almost everyone of them .
are losing obamacare insurance next year , that puts you in a bad position .
but the truth is , it 's not going to matter .
because we are going to repeal it and replace it -- not going to matter , do n't worry about it .
so you can leave here happy .
premiums are surging , companies are leaving , insurers are fleeing , doctors are quitting , and deductibles are going through the roof .
yet , crooked hillary clinton wants to double down on obamacare , making it even more expensive than it is right now .
i 'm asking for your vote , so we can repeal and replace obamacare and save healthcare for every family in pennsylvania .
real change also means restoring honesty to our government .
hillary clinton is the most corrupt person ever to seek the office of the presidency of the united states .
she 's threatened national security   and then to cover her tracks , she deleted 33,000 e - mails after receiving a congressional subpoena .
she should not   she 's being protected by a rigged system .
and part of the rigged system is the dishonest media , believe me .
they 're rigging the system .
true , it 's true .
do n't worry , they never show the crowds folks , they never -- they show my face , boom boom -- never show the crowd .
it took over a year for the fbi to review 50,000 e - mails and then just eight days they reviewed 650,000 e - mails ?
so now , it 's up to the american people to deliver justice at the ballot box tomorrow .
you 've got to get out and vote .
let 's swamp them .
pennsylvania , let 's swamp them .
you 've got to get out .
our country has never , ever done anything like they 're doing right now when it comes to justice .
james cartwright , four star general , two weeks ago , admitted to one mistake .
and he did it on the basis of national security he said , and i can understand that .
he may go to jail for up to five years .
general petraeus 's life has been destroyed for doing one , one hundredth of what hillary clinton did .
so sad , so sad .
it 's -- honestly it 's a disgrace .
and now she 's allowed to run for president .
and general cartwright will end up being in jail .
my contract with the american voter begins with a plan to end government corruption and take back our country from the special interests and the donor .
i want the entire corrupt washington establishment to hear the words from all of us .
when we win tomorrow we are going to washington , d.c. to drain the swamp .
they say we 're tied in pennsylvania , i do n't think so -- i do n't think so .
i think we 're going to blow them out tomorrow in a lot of different ways , blow them out .
no way .
this is not the sound of a second place finisher , that i can tell you .
no , they have us tied .
do n't forget we were 12 points down three weeks ago .
and then after the debates , all of a sudden we started going up .
we started going up and it was great .
and now they have us even .
but i actually think we 're much better than that in pennsylvania , i do -- and so do you .
get out there   contract , is my plan to bring back our jobs .
pennsylvania has lost almost 40 percent of it 's manufacturing jobs since nafta .
a deal signed by bill clinton and supported by his lovely wife , hillary clinton .
america has lost 70,000 factories since china entered the world trade organization , another bill and hillary backed disaster .
we are living through the greatest jobs theft in the history of the world .
a trump administration will stop the jobs from leaving america .
and we will stop the jobs finally from leaving pennsylvania .
simply -- and you have n't heard this .
very simply , if a company wants to fire their workers , leave pennsylvania , and move to   like mexico , and then ship their products back into the united states .
we will make them pay a 35 percent tax on those products .
and you know what 's going to happen ?
they 're not going to leave .
and if they do , that 's ok .
the country will make a lot of money .
but they 're not going to leave -- they 're not going to leave .
now , your politicians could have thought of that , some of them , some of them ca n't , for they have other problems .
we will renegotiate nafta , one of the worst deals , probably the -- not probably -- the single worst trade deal ever made in the history of this world , it 's true .
we 'll stand up to china , and stop the job killing trans - pacific partnership , which hillary clinton wants .
you know , she called it the gold standard and then she lied during the debate .
and she said , i never said that , i said , yes you did , you called it the gold standard .
turned out she was lying -- turned out .
of course you could look at it differently .
it is the gold standard for the other side , not for the united states , for the other side it 's good .
how about this -- how about this ?
how about getting the questions for the debate ?
they fed her -- illegally , they fed her the questions for the debate , donna brazile .
they fed her the questions to the debate .
and she never came and ... 

  they fed her the questions to the debate .
and she did n't say , i ca n't do this , i 'm sorry , it 's so unethical .
can you imagine if i was given the questions to the debate ?
what would have happened ?
the biggest story all over the -- you do n't even read this .
you read a little bit about donna brazile , but you do n't read this .
they gave her the questions to debates , numerous debates against bernie sanders .
and bernie sanders , he is really upset , i would bet you he would wish that he did n't give her that little nod , because he made a deal with the devil , you know it .
he ruined the legacy -- he really had a very important legacy going folks .
he ruined his legacy when he did that .
and he 's got to be very embarrassed -- he 's got to be very , very embarrassed .
as part of our plan to bring   35 percent to 15 percent .
and we will massively cut taxes for the middle class , the forgotten people -- the forgotten men and women of this country , who built our country .
we will massively lower taxes .
it 's in our plan .
and i 'll tell you .
hillary , you see her plan .
she is going to raise taxes substantially folks .
we 're the highest taxed nation in the world .
she 's going to raise taxes .
figure that one out .
we will lift the restrictions on american energy   and ban shale ....   you folks ca n't be too happy about that i guess .
we are going to unleash an energy revolution right here in pennsylvania .
we will cancel billions of dollars in global warming payments to the united nations , billions and billions and billions .
and use that money to rebuild the infrastructure of the united states .
and we will put our miners back to work and we will put our steel workers back to work -- they 're going back to work .
we will rebuild our inner cities .
the african - american community , the hispanic community , living in the inner city , have been treated very unfairly .
crime that is so bad , and i say it , you ca n't sometimes walk to a store , you get shot .
horrible   democrats have ruled the inner cities , unabated , unbroken .
we are going to fix our inner cities .
we 're going to bring back jobs .
we 're going to bring back safety .
we 're going to bring education to the inner cities .
and i say , because there 's such unbelievable potential in terms of people within our inner cities .
and i say , honestly folks , what do you have to lose ?
it 's so bad now .
what do you have to lose ?
i will fix it   we are going to spend and we are going to bring those jobs back   do you have to lose to the african - american community , and to the hispanic community ?
and by the way , take a look at what 's happening in florida and other places .
the african - american community likes donald trump and they 're not liking voting for hillary clinton very much .
they 're not showing up , they do n't want to vote for her .
the hispanic community , the numbers are becoming great .
you know the cubans , they gave me an award , bay of pigs award , last week .
the entire cuban community of miami , bay of pigs association .
no , but a lot of trends are very disturbing to the media .
and my numbers with the african - american community are -- i knew that was going to happen , i knew it .
but we 're going to fix the inner cities .
we will become a rich nation again , but to be a rich nation   hillary clinton wants a 550 percent increase in syrian refugees flowing into our country .
her plan will import generations of terrorism , extremism and radicalism into your schools and throughout your communities .
when i 'm elected president , we will suspend the syrian refugee program and we will keep radical islamic terrorists the hell out of our country .
have not choice .
we have no choice .
a trump administration will also secure and defend the borders of the united states .
and yes , we will build a great wall .
are you ready ?
and , who is going to pay for that wall ?
100 percent correct , they will .
they have -- unbelievable how they 've done with our country .
i was with the president of mexico , three months ago -- terrific , it was a terrific meeting .
but you know , when you have highways going into a country , it 's got to be like a two way highway .
right now , they get all the jobs , they get all the factories and plants , they get all the income , they get all the money , the taxes .
we get unemployment and we get drugs , we get nothing .
we get nothing .
that will all change folks .
it will change very , very fast .
and it will be -- it will be a two lane highway , maybe a one -- maybe one lane for a little while , but one way coming here -- but just for a little while .
we have to catch up , this is a lot years .
a lot of years we 've been abused by people who do n't know what they 're doing .
a lot of years , we 've been abused by stupid politicians , very stupid politicians .
supports totally open borders .
there goes your country .
and your plan gives your social security and medicare benefits -- you know , she wants to give them to illegal immigrants .
we 're going to take care of our veterans folks -- we 're going to take care of our veterans .
hillary also strongly supports sanctuary cities like   they come back , five years .
they come back again , 10 years .
believe me , nobody 's coming back .
ok ?
we will cancel all federal funding to sanctuary cities .
we will stop illegal immigration , deport all criminal aliens , and dismantle every last criminal gang and cartel corrupting our citizens   have to do it .
we will also repeal the obama - clinton defense sequester , and rebuild our badly depleted military .
this will be a national effort .
and it means a new future for philadelphia 's navy shipyard .
right ?
i know it well , i went to school in philadelphia , i know it well .
it 's going to be activated again , really activated .
i 'm honored to have the endorsement of more than 200 top admirals and generals and 22 medal of honor recipients , and the list is growing .
the list is growing rapidly .
and they told me on mosul , the other night i was in fort bragg -- right near fort bragg .
we had 25,000 , 27,000 people in a field , it was unbelievable .
and some of the generals and admirals came up to me -- we had a lot of them there .
they said , mr. trump , you are so right on mosul , you 're so right .
you know , i 've been saying , the element of surprise .
four months ago , we say , our leaders , we are going to attack mosul in   mosul in three months , we are going in .
because we are going to get the leaders of isis who are in mosul .
well you have to understand , they 've already left when you said the four months right ?
we will be going into mosul in one week , these people are so stupid .
the element of surprise .
the great general douglas mcarthur , right ?
spinning -- spinning in his grave .
the great general george patton , can you imagine what they must be ?
let 's assume they could actually see what 's happening -- maybe they are ?
can you imagine what they must be thinking ?
these were great warriors , great   what we 're going to do , when we going to be there , where we 're going to enter .
oh boy folks .
we 're gon na have such a different country -- you 're going to be so proud of your country again .
going to be so proud .
would n't it be nice if nothing was said by our politicians and by obama   and then had a news conference a week later and said , total victory .
they 're having a very hard time right now .
the leaders and the people have gone .
and the other fighters are entrenched , and it 's much more difficult than they thought , because of that .
but the generals said , you are so right on that mr. trump , you 're so right .
hillary and our failed establishment have dragged us into foreign wars that have made up less safe and never end -- they never end .
shipyard jobs   borders wide open at home .
that will all change when we win the presidential election .
because from now on , it 's going to be america first -- america first .
is everybody going to vote tomorrow ?
get your family , get your friends .
no matter what you do , you 've got to get out and vote .
the whole world is laughing at us .
they 're laughing at what 's going on in our country .
when you look at trade , we do n't win   trade , trade , with the world , trade   with a trade deficit with the world .
with china , almost $ 500 billion trade deficit , who negotiates these deals ?
you know who negotiates them , political hacks .
political hacks dealing against the toughest , smartest people , that have been trained to , they 've been trained to do nothing but this , they laugh at the stupidity of our country .
but you know what ?
we have the greatest negotiators in the world .
we have the greatest business people in the world .
we 're going to use these great business people -- carl ichan endorsed me , so many others .
we 're going to use our great leaders , our great business people , it 's time -- it 's time .
think of it   work , all this everything and we have a deficit , $ 800 billion .
to all american 's i say it 's time for change , it 's time for leadership .
in summing up , just think about what we can accomplish in the first 100 days of a trump administration , we are going to have the biggest tax cut since ronald reagan , hillary 's going to raise your taxes .
she 's going to raise your taxes .
we are going to protect your social security and medicare , and you know what hillary 's going to do ?
you know what hillary 's going to do   we will eliminate every unnecessary , job killing regulation , a .
we will rebuild our badly depleted military .
and we are going to finally take care of our great veterans .
provide school choice and put an end to common core , we 're bringing education local .
and women , these are great people , of law enforcement .
and we will save our second amendment , which is under siege   going to do big , big , bad numbers on your second amendment folks .
and appoint justices to the united state supreme court , who will uphold and defend the constitution of the united states .
i ca n't believe i 'm saying this .
it started on june 16th , last year , june 16th .
it 's a long time -- thank you , i love you too darling .
all together as americans , we 're a divided nation -- we 're a very badly divided nation .
we 're going to be brought together .
just imagine what our country could accomplish by working together as one people , under one god , saluting one american flag .
would n't it be nice ?
i 'm asking you to dream big .
vote .
we are just one day away from the change you 've been waiting for , for your entire life .
you 've got to go out and vote .
get everybody to vote .
it will be the greatest vote you 've ever cast in your lifetime .
because together , we will make america wealthy again .
we will make america strong again .
we will make america safe again .
and yes , we will make america great again .
thank you , everybody .
thank you .
god bless you , everybody .
god bless you .
get out and vote .
thank you pennsylvania .
thank you .
thank you very much .
wow , this is a wonderful crowd at this time , this is beautiful .
a lot of people coming in from outside .
so they 'll just come in .
should we wait ?
should we wait ?
we 'll start , right ?
ok .
it 's great to be back into hampshire , really .
this is a state and special place .
you know , this is where i had my first victory , we do know that , right ?
right ?
it 's such a -- i mean it 's a special place , it really is .
and you know what really amaze me when i came here and i got to know so many people , so many are in the room , so many great friends , and they said the biggest single problem they have up here is heroin .
and i said how does heroin work with these beautiful lakes and trees and all of the beautiful , it does n't , but it 's the single biggest problem .
and i said that if i win , i get the nomination and i win , we 'll going to build that wall and we 're going to stop that heroin from pouring in .
and we 're going to stop the poison of the youth .
we 're going to build the wall , believe me .
we are going to build the wall but we 're going to stop the poison from pouring in and destroying our youth and plenty of other people .
and we 're going to work on those people that got addicted and are addicted .
and i 'll tell you what , we 're going to do a real job for the state of new hampshire .
and i owe something very special because again , this was my first victory and this is where it all started , so just remember .
look at how many people are here , look at what happened recently .
hillary clinton , bernie sanders had very few people at their rally yesterday and that 's because they do n't like hillary , and bernie sold out to the devil .
you know if bernie -- if bernie had made his deal and just done something where maybe he did nothing and just run away , he would have been a legendary character , he would have been a legendary political figure .
but the deal he made with hillary was not the right thing and it was n't representative of what he should have done to his people and we 're going to have a lot of bernie 's people supporting us especially because of my views on trade .
we 're going to have a lot of bernie people but he should never have made the deal .
and i 'll beg you , he waste , he did n't make that deal , that was not the right deal for him to make .
the people of new hampshire and everywhere else do n't care about bernie anymore because now , they 're looking to the future and the future is going to be something special .
i love the people of new hampshire and we 're going to fulfill every single wish , every single promise , we 're going to do something very , very significant for you .
you 're strong , you 're independent and you are free .
we 're going to work very hard together over the next 40 days , can you believe it , 40 days , this started june 16th to new york city and here we are .
and we 're going to win the state , we 're going to win back the white house , we 're going to make america great again .
we 're going to take on the special interest , the lobbyist and the corrupt corporate media that have rig this system against everyday americans and they 've rigged it for a long time .
we 're going to create millions of new jobs and we really need them , we need jobs .
people have given up looking for jobs .
we 're going to create trillions of dollars and new wealth for our communities and rising wages for every worker in america .
we 're going to create a new government that serves you and your family and your country .
we 're going to end the clinton corruption and restore ...   i mean did you see what happened yesterday ?
did you see what happened yesterday ?
with the director of the fbi talking about the e- mails ?
i do n't think i 've ever seen a thing like that , it 's an embarrassment .
i do n't think i 've ever seen a thing like that in my life and it really is a sad -- it was a sad , sad -- honestly , it 's a sad time for the united states .
it 's a very , very sad time .
and yesterday was a sad , a very sad day .
let 's see what happens .
i think -- i actually believe because of what happened yesterday , i think that whole thing has a long way to go .
so we 're going to see what happens .
hillary -- right ?
i mean is it incredible ?
hillary clinton is an insider fighting only for herself and for her donors .
i 'm an outsider fighting for you .
everything ...   everything you need to know about hillary clinton , sometimes referred to as crooked hillary , can be understood with a simple but very important phrase , " follow the money . "
the large corporations who support terrible trade deals , offshore jobs , they take these jobs , they offshore the jobs , they 're donating to hillary clinton .
it 's called , follow the money .
the wall street investors who have rigged the regulations against the middle class , they 're donating to hillary clinton , follow the money .
the wealthy donors want to shutdown american energy , they 're donating to hillary clinton , follow the money .
the special interests who want to open borders are donating to hillary clinton , again just follow the money .
in her campaign for president , hillary clinton has received $ 100 million in contributions from wall street and hedge funds .
she and bill were paid $ 150 million for speeches since bill left the oval office , and she does n't speak well , figure that one .
in fact they had a very small group of people which you here yesterday , very small crows , very , very sad .
hundred million dollars , i do n't think so folks , what 's going on ?
the same groups paying bill and hillary for the speeches were lobbying the federal government .
twenty - two groups paying bill clinton for speeches lobbying the state department while hillary clinton was secretary of state favors and access were granted to those who wrote checks .
she put the office of secretary of state up for sale .
and if she ever got the chance , she put the oval office up for sale too .
she deleted and bleached 33,000 e - mails after a congressional subpoena was issued .
after -- think of it , after she gets a subpoena -- she gets a subpoena , she sees the subpoena , she then gets rid of 33,000 e - mails on top of a lot of other things .
if you did that in your civilian life , you would have problems for the rest of your life .
thirteen phones missing , several destroyed with a hammer .
who in this room has destroyed their phone with a hammer , anybody ?
anybody ?
oh , there is one person .
what business is that person in i want to find out ?
yes .
well , benghazi is a horrible thing .
you saw what happened about taking 5th amendment and her ring leader 's getting immunity deals will call them really the fbi immunity five .
nobody has ever seen ?
they gave so much immunity , there was nobody left to talk too .
there was nobody left except hillary .
they probably gave her immunity too .
do you think hillary got immunity ?
yeah , she got the immunity .
she had something .
you know , when you think of it , she did so much worse than anybody else .
people that did a tiny fraction of what she did , their lives have been destroyed and here she is running for president .
it 's a dishonestly , it 's a disgrace .
foreign enemies with easy access to hack her server and they did lies to congress under a -- about turning over her work related e - mails .
remember she said on her e - mails , it was about yoga classes and it was about a wedding , 33,000 yoga , wedding .
she and her financial backers will say anything , do anything lie about anything to keep their grip on power , to keep their control over this country .
the american people have had it with years and decades of clinton corruption and scandals , corruption and scandals .
and impeachment for lying -- impeachment for lying .
remember that , impeach .
they 're tired of the lies , they 're tired of the tribunal politics , they 're tired of being talked down too , look down upon and treated like second class citizens and they 're phenomenal people .
you are phenomenal people .
but clintons are disordered pass , we will be very bright and clean future .
while our campaign outlines big changes and bold solutions to make your life better , the clinton campaign focuses only on small and petty destructions .
this will be the year the american people say , finally , enough is enough .
it 's gon na start with new hampshire .
hillary clinton has been a disaster for so many communities but especially for african - american communities .
i do n't think african- americans are going to come out and vote for clinton .
they 're too smart and they know they are just being used by her and her campaign .
they also know that she 'll do nothing for them once the election is over , she never does and that will never ever change .
many of them will never forget her calling young african - american men super predators .
not nice .
same thing goes for hispanic voters and they are tired of being used by people like hillary clinton that have no intention of doing anything for them once the election is over .
a trump administration will bring prosperity to all of the people of our great country .
we 'll bring prosperity .
look at what happened to your jobs .
look at what happened to your jobs .
look at what happened to all of those companies that left and went to mexico and other places and you are probably the number one group of people that were affected if you think about it and the whole country .
my economic agenda can be summed up with three very beautiful words , jobs , jobs , jobs .
we 're going to pass the biggest tax cut since ronald reagan and we 're going to lower .
that 's right .
and remember she 's raising taxes substantially .
and we 're going to lower the business rate from 35 percent all the way down to 15 percent making america into a magnet for new jobs and growth .
every wasteful and unnecessary regulation will be eliminated along with every illegal executive order .
we will unleash the power of american energy , we 're going and we 're sitting , right now , sitting on $ 50 trillion of untapped energy reserves and we 're going to put that wealth into the pockets of the american people .
and we 're going to start reducing debt .
common core will be ended and disadvantage ...   and disadvantage children will be allow to attend the school of their choice , choice , big word , choice .
very important word .
the catastrophe known as obamacare will be repealed and replaced .
and it 's dying of its own volition anyway .
you see what 's happening , it 's dying .
and the disastrous trade deals like nafta that have caused so much pain in new hemisphere will be renegotiated and i mean renegotiated for your benefit not to the benefit of mexico , we 're going to either change it or we 'll start all over again folks and it will be a big , big difference believe me .
nafta was signed by bill clinton and supported by crooked hillary and your state has lost one and three manufactory jobs since it was approved , it 's a catastrophe .
it 's the worst trade deal ever negotiated and ever made -- not only in the united states , probably anywhere in the world .
there 's never been a deal like this .
you 've lost one and four jobs , think of it , since china entered the world trade organization so you lost one and four -- this another deal with the clintons .
and hillary clinton has been on the wrong side of every major trade deal in her career , and if that she gets the chance -- and this is a 100 percent -- she would approve to trans - pacific partnership which will destroy so much more of your manufacturing in the state .
hillary clinton is merely a vessel for the special interest trying to script this contrive its wealth , its jobs and its status as a sovereign nation .
remember she called tpp the goal standard .
and then during the debate the night where every single online poll said , we won -- which is great -- every single online poll .
and during the debate the other night , she was saying , no , she never said that she said it , i mean she said it and then i had to put up -- then i had to put up with the anchor and fight the anchor all the time on everything i said .
what a rigged deal , i 'll tell you where in such a rig sits   -- it is terrible .
what 's going on in this country is so sad but it will change .
remember november 8th , november 8th .
she called it the goal standard , it 's the goal standard for destroying wealth and jobs .
she 's a globalist who has made a career of taking jobs from our country and giving them to other countries .
i 'm not running to be president of the world , i 'm running to be president of the united states of america and we 're going to do a great job .
from now on it 's going to be america first , america first .
have you ever wondered why it 's that old things that the american people want , they never seem to happened .
things they want just do n't happen .
just thing about it , for how many years have the american people asked for a tax code to be fixed or for infrastructure to be repaired .
we 've been talking about this for years or for the waste to be removed from our budget .
for many years and how many have voters pleaded for secure borders , fair trade deals , just fair deals , we 're going to make great deals by the way , we 're going to make great deals , but just fair deals and quality schools that serve parents and students .
all the things you 've ever wanted for your country have been denied , they 've been denied .
the reason is very simple , it 's because the financial interest who control our politics and our media do n't want this changes to happen .
the special interest control totally hillary clinton , look at the money .
somebody said she 's spending on commercials in certain areas , 50 to one and we 're tied or i 'm leading .
how do you do that ?
fifty , think of it .
fifty commercials to every one i 'm putting up , and we 're tied , and i 'm even leading in some of these areas .
she 's there chosen representative .
she 's been there for 30 years and has never done anything for you or your family .
she 's there for only one reason to protect their donors and collect their money .
our campaign is taken on big business , big media and big donors , we 're taking them on for you .
that 's what we 're doing .
i did n't need to do this .
believe me , i built a great , great company , i did n't need to do this , we 're going to straighten it out .
we want you to have the future that you want and that you deserve .
that includes very importantly keeping your family safe .
new fbi statistics just out , show that homicide rose 15 percent last year in america 's large cities and that is the biggest single year increase in 45 years .
you do n't hear these numbers , right ?
nobody tells you .
more than 3,000 people had been shot in chicago since january , that was n't a long time ago , 3,000 people .
that 's -- say it again .
that 's -- say it again .
yes we can .
he goes , " yes , we can . "
boy .
that can only happen in new hampshire , right ?
right ?
the fail politicians and the arrogant media do n't want me to talk about the crime and the violence that 's happening at this country .
they just want me to go along with the status quo , well , i have news for the people trying to silence me and you and trying to silence all of us .
we will never back down , we -- we -- we will never back down from fighting , we are going to save american lives and we 're going to turn this whole big ship around and it 's going to be turned around quickly .
that also means keeping our nation safe from radical islamic terrorism .
hillary clinton does n't say the words and certainly president obama will never say the words .
we 'll also going to keep our country safe from drugs .
new hampshire has suffered so greatly from the heroin crisis and the drugs pouring across the border .
the rate of heroin overdose has nearly quadrupled in the state .
once again , our politicians have tragically failed this country and its people and specially more than any place to state , i 've never seen anything like it with what 's happening with the drugs more so than other places and other places are disaster but we 're going to turn it around , we 're going to turn it around for new hampshire .
i 'm going to stop the drugs from pouring across the border and that is a promise .
the people getting rich of the rig system or the people throwing their money at hillary clinton .
our campaign is about breaking up the special interest monopoly in washington d.c. we 're trying to disrupt the collision between the wealthy donors , the large corporations and the media executives who are among the most honest people anywhere that i have met .
they 're all part of the same corrupt political establishment and they 're not alone when hillary clinton slanders you as deplorable and irredeemable .
you do n't look deplorable to me , and you know , look irredeemable .
i call you hardworking american patriots and together , we 're going to save our country .
together , we can accomplish anything we want .
we have a movement going on , it 's a movement like they 've never seen in this country .
some of the great pundits have said and they say it often , some of the pundits that do n't even like me says the single greatest political phenomenon they have ever seen .
we had in florida the other night , we had 25,000 people .
no matter where we go , we have rooms that have packed with unbelievable americans .
and i 'll tell you what , come november 8th , i think the world is going to see something that 's really going to be special .
but that means you have to show up and vote .
so if you 're sick , you 're not feeling well , it 's like you just do n't think you 're even going to make it .
and the doctor comes in and he looks at you and he says , you 're right , you 're not going to make it .
we do n't care , right ?
you have to get out of bed and you have to vote .
you have to knock on doors , you have to pick up that phone , you have to campaign on the streets , spread the love then we have in this room to the people of our country .
we 're going to bring our system together , we 're going to bring our country together , we 're going to have unity , we 're divided nation in so many different ways .
we 're divided nation .
just turn on your televisions at night and you 'll see what a divided nation we are in this no reason for to beat the system and -- i will fix it .
to beat the system , you have to lift up your voice , pound the pavement and get out that vote .
visit our website -- i always hate saying that because it 's sounds so like boring .
but that 's the way it is , visit our website .
you have 40 days until the election .
you have 40 days to make every dream you ever dream to your country come true .
do not let this opportunity slip away .
i do n't believe were ever going to have this opportunity again .
this is it .
this is it .
you will never going to have this opportunity again .
you have one magnificent chance to deliver justice for every forgotten men , woman and child in this nation .
there are many .
the arrogance of washington d.c. will soon come face - to - face with the righteous verdict of the american voter on november 8th .
you know that , you know it .
on november 8th , we 're going to show the whole world that america is back , bigger and bigger -- oh you know that , right ?
you know .
you know it .
america will be back , i promise , bigger and better and stronger than ever before .
bigger and better and stronger .
here are just some of the things -- and these are great things -- that will happen for your country .
we 're going to lower your taxes , she is going to raise your taxes .
we 're going to eliminate every unnecessary regulation that are strangling your businesses , she 's going to add more regulation .
we 're going to repeal and replace job killing obamacare .
we 're going to make childcare more affordable and available to the families and to the mothers , we need help .
childcare , something that my daughter ivanka feels very strongly about .
so do i. we 're going to bring back our manufacturing jobs which have been ripped away from us by incompetent politicians .
we 're going to keep radical islamic terrorist out of our country .
did you see the other day where they were going to deport 800 people and they made a slight mistake .
instead of deporting these 800 people , they made the 800 people citizens of the united states .
and they want to say , well , that 's ok , you can change it around ca n't you , if you made a mistake .
and they said , that might not be constitutional .
can you believe this , what 's going on ?
and the mistake also was they think it was n't really 800 people .
it was 1800 people .
this is like the $ 400 million in cash that we gave to iran , 400 -- but this is in cash .
we gave it to iran as part of one of the worse deals i 've ever seen in the history of -- in my life , i 'd never seen anything like it .
but as part , we gave them $ 400 million in cash but that turned out to be wrong also , it is $ 1.7 billion in cash .
you know what , $ 1.7 billion in cash is i think would be starting around here will go up to ceiling .
who can authorize this ?
who would be so stupid to authorize that ?
you 're right .
we 're going to save the second amendment which is under siege .
we are going to support the man and women of law enforcement .
we 're going to appoint justices to the supreme court who will uphold and defend the constitution of the united states .
we will rebuild our roads , our bridges , tunnels , highways , airports , schools and hospital .
american cars will travel the roads .
american planes will soar the skies and american ships will patrol the seas .
american steel will send sky scrapers , new beautiful skies scrapers into the clouds .
american hands , hands , hands will rebuild -- will rebuild this nation .
and american energy harvested from american sources will power this nation .
american workers will be hired to do the job not workers from other countries .
we will put new american steel into the spine of the united states .
i will fight for every neglected part of this nation and i will fight to bring us all together as americans .
imagine what our country could accomplish if we started working together as one people under one god saluting one american flag .
it 's time to break with the bitter failures of the past of which we have many and to embrace a new inclusive and prosperous american future .
and i say it all the time , we do n't win anymore .
we do n't win .
when was the last time you see us have a win ?
when do we have companies moving into our country ?
we do n't have it .
just look at new england , look at ohio , look at all of -- look at pennsylvania , look at what 's happened .
now , we 're going to turn things around , folks .
we 're going to start winning again .
we 're going to win so much if you people are going to be angry at me .
you 're going to say , mr. president you 're winning too much .
we 're not used to it , we can not take it anymore .
please stop winning .
and you know what i 'm going to say ?
sorry , folks , we have a lot of ground to capture .
once more we will have a government of by and for the people .
we will make america wealthy again .
we will make america strong again .
and we will make america great again .
thank you all very much .
thank you .
thank you .
god bless you everybody .
god bless you .
thank you .
thank you .
thank you very much .
thank you very much .
i have to tell you that the fire marshall -- they turned away thousands of people , they turned away -- thank you very much .
they turned away thousands of people -- look at the size of this place .
they turned away thousands , they were giving orders that no more than a thousand people .
now , hillary clinton , i have a picture here which is pretty sad .
she had , she had , last week or a couple of days ago , look at -- totally empty .
but is the mayor a democrat ?
is there a democrat over here ?
that 's what i heard .
he ought to be ashamed of himself .
they turned away thousands of people , but that makes it better for you , right ?
it 's very sad .
you know .
it should n't be so much about politics , folks .
we 're gon na do a town hall so we 're gon na be talking about questions and this and that .
i 'll say a few words .
but outside , i met two gentlemen from piketon who really were misrepresented very badly , very badly , by president obama and they 're gon na come up .
come up fellas .
i just met them .
because we 're gon na bring back our jobs , we 're not gon na let our jobs go to mexico and all these other countries , we 're gon na renegotiate the horrible nafta deal which is maybe the worst deal every made from an economic development standpoint -- i 'm not just talking in this country i 'm talking about in the world -- we 're gon na bring back our jobs .
and we 're also gon na stop radical islamic terrorism .
we 're not letting the people come in .
we 're not letting them come in .
and they can play all the games they want .
but we 're not -- you know hillary clinton wants a 550 percent increase from syria coming into this country over obama .
and you 'd actually say what is she doing ?
so here 's a letter from president obama to these two gentlemen that have worked so hard and are having a hard time , and maybe in just a little while you could just say exactly what 's going on .
thank you both very much .
same old stuff , politicians .
all talk , no action , wo n't happen .
and you know hillary will be nothing more than four more years of obama .
four more years of isis .
four more years of a military that 's being depleted and not taking care of our vets .
she said a few months ago our vets are being taken care of just fine .
she said , " no , no , it 's over - exaggerated , i know the vets .
i think i have tremendous support with the vets . "
raised a lot of money and gave a lot of money to the vets .
i will tell you something .
the vets are not being taken care of well at all .
the suicide rate is hard to believe , even , when you hear the numbers and you know the numbers i 'm talking about .
they wait in line for two , three , four , five days -- think of it , going to a doctor and waiting for five days -- longer than that -- and people are dying waiting in line .
so we 're gon na take care of our vets .
we 're going to again secure , and very important , we 're gon na secure our borders .
we 're gon na secure our borders .
we 're gon na build the wall .
we 're gon na build the wall and mexico 's gon na pay for the wall .
and the reason -- some of the politicians have said , you know they 're not going to pass it .
no , no , you do n't understand .
they 're going to pay .
they are making so much money , mexico -- they 're taking our business -- a friend of mine builds plants , that 's what he does , plants .
if he had to build an apartment , he would n't know where to begin , but he builds massive plants , among the biggest in the world .
and i said to him recently , how are you doing ?
he said , unbelievable .
now he 's from this country , and he 'd like to do well in this country .
but i said , how are you doing ?
he said , unbelievable .
i said , that 's good .
so you 're doing a lot of work in the united states ?
not so much .
i said , well how are you doing unbelievably ?
you would n't believe what 's happening in mexico .
it 's the eighth wonder of the world , that 's what he told me .
i said , what does that mean ?
he said , they 're building among the biggest plants we 've ever built .
it 's unbelievable .
companies are moving out of the united states -- columbus , by the way -- they 're moving out of the united states , they 're moving out of ohio , i asked him , they 're moving out of michigan , big league   the cars -- he builds car plants .
he builds computer plants .
builds them all .
and they 're moving out of the united states .
so i said , how 's the united states doing ?
he says , not so good .
he said , but mexico is the eighth wonder of the world .
that 's going to end , folks .
we want mexico to do fine , but we 're not going to let them take our jobs anymore .
we 're not going to let it happen .
you look at this area , i mean , i have statisticians , right -- good statisticians -- they love to do this .
i ca n't imagine doing it and being too much fun .
to me , it would be a little bit boring to do .
but i 'll tell you , the numbers are horrendous .
first of all , i do n't know if you just saw the number for growth of our country .
did you see that ?
growth -- 1.2 percent .
1.2 percent !
we 're sinking .
we 're sinking .
that 's one of the lowest numbers ever .
i think it 's the lowest number ever in terms of trying to make a comeback .
1.2 percent .
but in columbus -- and i looked at this , and this is bad , this is bad -- ohio has lost one in three manufacturing jobs since bill clinton signed nafta .
bill clinton signed it .
and hillary clinton wants it .
think of that .
hillary clinton 's disastrous trade policies are responsible for the manufacturing job losses in ohio and throughout the other states of this country .
i 've got   a machine .
and i 'll tell you , the problem with a machine , it totally controls the press .
you look at cnn , it 's called the clinton news network .
all day long , trump , trump -- all day long , cnn , trump , trump , such a bad guy .
i just want to bring back your jobs .
i want to bring back your safety .
because we 're not safe .
550 percent more people coming in from syria and other territories , and we have no idea who they are .
and i 've gone to the best law enforcement officials and they said there 's no way of you telling , they have all sorts of false things .
you know , they stole our passport machine , you saw that .
they make passports better than we do , ok .
they have -- think of it , 550 percent more than -- obama , he 's letting in thousands and thousands of people .
the people in ohio , the people in the rust belt -- and they call it the rust belt for a reason , because everything 's rusting and rotting .
you lost your jobs .
they 're moving to mexico .
remember my friend with the plant .
when you 're going to vote , remember this , november 8 -- when you go to vote , remember my friend with the plant , where he says it 's the eighth wonder of the world .
and we 're going to renegotiate -- if you want , unless you do n't want to do this .
we 're going to renegotiate nafta , and it was very funny .
the other day , i saw hillary clinton saying -- first time ever -- we are going to start renegotiating our trade deals .
that 's been me for years .
that 's been me .
number one , she wo n't do a good job of it , for a lot of reasons , but one of them is that she 's totally controlled by the special interests .
and i 'll give you an example .
i just saw this number .
just read it coming up here .
donald trump has raised $ 19,000 from hedge funds .
now i do n't know how it got in there .
i do n't even want it .
i 'll send it back .
hillary clinton , from hedge funds , has raised $ 48.5 million .
think about it .
$ 48.5 million .
i hope you do n't own -- i have a friend , he 's very wealthy .
he does n't own a hedge fund .
but raised 48.5 million -- i have 19,000 .
i think i 'll send the 19,000 back .
probably a nice person , but think of it .
but here 's really what 's important to me .
so i funded , as you know , my primary .
people were very happy .
i 'm continuing to fund my general election .
but we 're also taking small donations , which in the primary was n't a big factor because we did n't really -- we sold hats and things , little things , it was cute and people like it and people put in small money .
but i funded it , and i guess i 'm into everything for 60 million or over 60 million or soon will be over 60 million , but i 'm continuing to fund my campaign .
but we 're also raising money from people where they send in a check , small donors , right .
you 've sent in a check ?
who sent in a check ?
wow .
whoa .
that 's fantastic .
so , we only started last month , and she 's going to have like a fortune .
she 's going to have like a billion , billion and a half , because she 's going to be totally controlled .
like we talk about uranium , the two gentlemen , great people -- well , she had a lot to do with russian uranium .
you saw that deal .
and got paid a fortune for allowing russia to come in -- talk about uranium , that 's big stuff , ok .
got paid a fortune .
and we 'll be talking about that during the campaign , do n't worry about it .
but -- so we started , really , around the middle of june , and we had a tremendous june , and they were saying , donald trump did n't raise any money .
well , we did n't start .
we started in the middle of june , and we raised , i think it as $ 27 million from the small donors .
that was around 60 some odd dollars apiece .
and we also raised , from other people , about -- i do n't know , the total was about $ 51 million , ok .
that was in june .
we hardly -- that was like for half a month .
because people want to see something happen with our country .
but here 's what 's really good news .
this is just going to be reported , i think , today or tomorrow .
we have raised , with the small donor , $ 35.8 million .
think of that .
i believe it 's 517,000 donors .
think of that .
that 's in a month .
so we raised 35.8 million , even a little more than that , and the average price of the donation was $ 69 .
how incredible is that , right ?
and it 's not even to me the money .
it 's to me the concept -- in all fairness , bernie sanders was doing that , you know ?
because there was some movement , now , it was a movement on the other side of the plate .
but you know what ?
he had one thing in common with me .
he knew that the trade deals are destroying our country .
the difference is he could n't do anything about the trade deals .
i 'll take those trade deals and make them so good that 's what i do .
i love taking bad deals and making them good , that 's what i do .
i take bad deals and make them good ; nafta 's a bad , bad , bad deal .
and i 'm gon na make it good .
but think of that .
so we raised $ 35.8 million , an excess of that in a month .
and then in addition we raised money that has n't been tabulated yet from people that are putting up larger numbers .
but that 's going to the republican national -- largely -- to the republican national committee and -- i 'm -- and i 'm putting up money to run my campaign , ok ?
so when you see -- when you see that clinton , crooked hillary , crooked -- she 's crooked as a three dollar bill , let me tell ya .
she is crooked .
when you see crooked hillary with $ 48.5 million from hedge funds and trump at $ 19,000 , when they call me because they wanna stop a company from doing something or when they call me because they want one of your companies to get the green light to move into mexico and fire everybody , believe me i 'm gon na take care of these -- i 'm gon na do what 's right for you .
she 's gon na do right for her donors .
i 'm gon na do right for you so it 's gon na be a big difference .
it 's gon na be a big difference .
so -- so i 'll just tell you , we 're battling a lot of things .
but we 're battling the press because the press is very dishonest , ok ?
the press is very dishonest .
so -- so as an example , as an example i gave a very good answer over the weekend to one of the shows   on russia going into the ukraine .
i said very simply they 're not gon na do it on my watch , essentially .
i said russia will not go into the ukraine , now i said that .
and the next day , the story comes out and we really let it roll a little bit .
actually , i think it was usa today ; a couple of them covered it accurately , what i said .
but a couple of paper said donald trump does n't realize that the crimea was already taken .
i know it exact -- two years ago , approximately ok ?
approximately .
it was taken during obama 's watch .
so when i said believe me , russia 's not going into ukraine , all right ?
they 're not going into ukraine .
the person said but they 're already in ukraine .
i said yeah well , that was two years ago , that 's -- that 's -- i mean you wanna go back ?
you wanna have world war iii to get it back ?
that was during obama 's watch .
so during obama 's watch -- you know all the tough guys statements , right ?
so he talks about donald trump is not strong on russia .
first of all , i have to say this .
would n't it be great if we actually got along with russia ?
am i wrong in saying that ?
would n't it be great ?
ok ?
you know russia , like us , has nuclear weapons folks .
it would be really nice if we got along with russia and others that we do n't get along with right now and would n't it be nice if we teamed up with russia and others , including surrounding states and maybe nato and we knocked the hell out of isis and got rid of these people ?
would n't that be nice ?
right ?
but -- but even beyond that , even beyond that putin said some very good things about me , people say , " oh , trump 's going to be weak with putin , " because putin is saying nice things about me .
ok , all right .
and i said he 's a strong guy .
they immediately say , " oh , trump likes " -- but , look , i do n't like or dislike .
i just say it this way .
would n't it be great if the united states and russia got along , combined , knocked out isis , maybe did other positive things ?
you know , we forced them through stupidity into an alliance with china .
you know why ?
because of oil .
because china needs oil .
we were driving both crazy .
they formed -- and from the time i was young guy , i 've always learned , do n't ever let china and russia get together -- we forced them together .
obama forced them together .
because you did n't get along with either and they eventually -- china came in and said , " let 's make a deal on oil . "
they 're together .
in fact , they 're doing naval exercises together someplace .
and you look at china , they 're building one of the largest military installations in the world right smack in the middle of the south china sea .
and then they talk about donald trump and russia , or donald trump , but -- believe me , folks , somebody can say nice things about me -- he did call me a genius but these are minor details -- somebody can say nice things about me -- it has -- it makes no difference .
it makes no difference .
all right ?
i have been dealing a long time .
a lot of times i will make much better deals with people that say terrible things about me .
i do n't care what they say about me ; i want the deal .
you know , on trade , one of the people that 's standing back there -- one of the dishonest media -- " well , what 's your definition of trade ? "
i said , " well , your fair trade -- you have all sorts -- you have so many different types of trade . "
but here is my definition of trade .
because right now we are being ripped off -- $ 500 billion trade deficit with china -- $ 500 billion .
and they give us product , we let them in , no tax , no nothing .
you want to try and make a deal with china ?
you ca n't get your product in , and if you do you pay tax , and if you do you also have to build plants over there .
and they do n't even want that ; they do n't want you in .
they 're one - sided deals .
so when they said , " what 's your trade deal ? "
i said very simply , " i want to make great deals for the united states . "
we do n't have to name it .
you have fair trade .
you have all sorts of names .
i learned every single one of them in college .
now we have added a couple .
here is the problem .
we have stupid people doing our negotiating .
we have stupid people doing our negotiating .
i 'll give you an example .
if a company in ohio said they 're going to leave , we 're going to fire -- which as you know , many companies are leaving -- and by the way , as you are sitting here right now -- right now , we have companies negotiating with mexico and other places to close up in ohio and to move into mexico or other places .
ok ?
as you 're sitting here right now .
some of you people think you have good jobs .
guess what ?
carrier thought they had good jobs , ford thought they had good jobs ; lots of   -- hundreds and hundreds -- thousands of companies have left -- thousands .
millions of jobs .
and hillary clinton is weak and she is ineffective and there is no way you can allow four more years of this stuff to go on .
there 's just no way in my opinion .
but let 's say -- and by the way , your steel mills in ohio where china is dumping steel to put you guys out of business -- they 're dumping -- you know that ?
who 's in steel over here ?
am i right ?
they 're dumping steel to put the steelworkers out of business .
and hillary said the miners -- any miners in here ?
miners ?
i love the miners .
oh , west virginia was good to me , i 'll tell you .
and ohio was good to me .
a lot of miners in ohio .
miner .
but hillary clinton said , " we 're going to put the miners and the mines out of business . "
now , she said that before probably an environmental group or something , but then she tried to back up .
but they remembered she said it and she got clobbered in west virginia .
smart people .
she got clobbered in west virginia .
so , we 're going to have clean coal , and we 're going to have steel , and we 're going to make our products again , and we 're going to have the people in columbus and all of ohio and all of michigan and all of these other states -- you know , i did great in michigan .
i did great in ohio , too .
unfortunately i did n't have a long time to campaign .
if i would have spent two more days here , i would have won ohio too , because i won practically everything else .
we got almost 14 million votes .
think of that .
more than anybody in the history of republican primaries .
that includes some great people like ronald reagan , dwight d. eisenhower , who won the second world war , right , he did win the second world war .
got elected because he won the second world war .
i got more votes than him , that 's good , right ?
and remember this , i had 17 people .
i was n't running against two people .
i had 17 people .
hillary clinton , i got a similar number to hillary clinton , and she had bernie , and she had a hard time putting bernie away .
and bernie -- poor bernie .
he looked so upset .
you know what , he made a mistake .
he should n't have made a deal .
sometimes -- he lost , he lost .
first of all , it was rigged , and i 'm afraid the election is going to be rigged , i have to be honest .
because i think my side was rigged -- if i did n't win by massive landslides -- i mean , think of what we won in new york and indiana , california , 78 percent .
that 's with other people in the race .
but think of it .
i hear more and more that the election on november 8 -- can you believe , we 're almost there .
this started on june 16 of last year and i said , wow , let 's go do it .
takes guts to do this , believe me .
and everybody said -- no , it takes guts .
i could be having a very nice life right now .
i do n't have to be with you people , ranting and raving .
could have a very nice life .
but it takes guts .
and everybody said , this is the greatest field .
i remember charles krauthammer saying , this is the greatest field ever assembled in the history of republican politics , or something to that effect .
this is before i got in .
and i said to my wife , you know , it 's a great field .
charles krauthammer and others are saying this is the greatest field ever assembled .
it 's also the largest field ever assembled .
so i have the greatest , largest field ever assembled .
and then one day , i just , i had it .
i watched the iran deal , this horrible deal be done , where we give back $ 150 billion and they 're making nuclear weapons , and we 've made a power out of iran .
they were struggling for their life and we 've made a power out of iran .
in fact , they were in serious trouble , when they were all marching in the streets , it was over , and obama came to their rescue , if you remember that .
first term .
that was a bad day .
that was going to be over for them , and we came to their rescue .
now we 've made them into a power , ok .
a big power .
but i saw the iran deal and i saw the stupidity on trade , where companies are leaving -- one of them was , carrier left indiana .
1,400 people fired , moving to indiana , they 're going to make their plant , they 're going to build it , they 're going to take their air conditioners , make them , sell them right back into indiana and other places , no tax , no nothing .
with me , they 're going to be taxed 35 percent and you know what ?
they 're never going to move .
they 're never moving , folks .
they 're never moving .
did you ever see -- because i love this stuff .
you know , people say , not a politician .
remember when they said a certain person ?
well , he got clobbered .
raised tremendous amounts of money , and everybody thought he 'd do really well .
but they say -- but he has n't been an active politician for eight years .
i 've never been a politician , and we 've won in a landslide .
so -- but i do n't get credit for that .
they do n't give me credit .
what are you going to do ?
i was joking -- i was joking , because some people thought i was a little bit too tough -- and i have been -- certain people that i ran against in the republican primaries have never come back .
and they probably wo n't .
and that 's ok .
i do better when they do n't come back .
i do better if i have them as my opponent as opposed to my ally .
no , no , but we have a few .
you know their names .
we have a few .
they have n't come back .
they have n't come back .
i 'll tell you , i was honored at the convention for two reasons .
number one , i had 35 million people watching .
hillary had what , 28 million people , this final speech , so we had more people watching .
the press built up that convention like it was the greatest democrat convention -- i actually thought -- i liked the republican convention .
i would rather watch -- i would rather watch ivanka trump than any of their celebrities , i can tell you .
i would rather watch don and eric and tiffany and melania did a great job .
i would rather watch them than any of their celebrities .
you know , they all said , well donald trump had his kids -- is n't that nice if you have kids that are capable enough to go up and do it ?
you know why people have n't had their kids go up ?
because their kids ca n't do it .
and i can understand that .
that 's a hard thing to do .
my kids went up , they were brave , they were strong .
tiffany , we pushed her out on the stage , go .
she never did it before .
tiffany said , this is really scary , and we just said , just go do it , and she did beautifully .
she never spoke to anybody -- it 's true .
the biggest group she 's ever spoken to is like 18 people in a class , where she was a very good student , i have to say .
but they did a great job .
but i actually liked the republican national convention better -- i 'll tell you what .
we had a much better looking stage , number one , which is important .
we won for stage .
but we got a very unfair press .
when bernie sanders had his people leaving the room , nobody covered that .
if i would have had people leave the room , it would have been a national scandal .
when a certain man got up -- and i knew his speech .
i said , look , let him speak , what difference does it make ?
and -- he says -- a certain man got up and he spoke , and everybody in the room booed the hell out of him .
in fact , i saved his life when i walked back into the room .
but everybody in the room -- and his numbers went down like from 68 to 20- something .
that 's called unity , folks .
that 's unity .
that 's a good thing , not a bad thing .
that is unity .
and -- but the problem we have -- the biggest problem we have , i think , is the press . "
the new york times " is totally dishonest .
totally dishonest . "
the washington post , " gotten a little bit better lately , i took away their press credentials .
i should do it with " the times , " but -- the problem is , you get more publicity from doing -- just let them rot .
but " the new york times " is really , really dishonest , and it 's failing .
i do n't think they 'll be in business more than two or three years .
look at their numbers .
they 're failing .
but they do a number that 's unbelievable .
every story is bad .
in fact , sometimes i 'll say , oh , great .
this was so good , i 'm going to have a great story tomorrow in " the new york times . "
you know , they 'll call .
always turned out to be a disaster .
they -- it 's so dishonest .
and yet hillary .
hillary .
crooked hillary they write beautifully about .
right ?
washington post , similar .
it was really bad , now it 's gotten a little bit better i must tell you .
washington post got a little bit better .
cnn is so dishonest .
clinton news network , so dishonest .
unbelievable .
do you know what they call it ?
it may be the clinton news network , but nobody wants to watch hillary .
all day long , it 's trump .
all day , all the time .
that 's what it is .
but it 's so much inaccurate information .
and by the way i think their ratings are going to go down really sharply now .
they 've been asking me to go on for months .
i wo n't do their shows .
and the reason i wo n't is because it 's so dishonest that until they straighten up i 'm not doing their shows .
and when people finally realize that i 'm not doing their shows they stop watching .
that 's what happens .
and i must say , i do n't say this for a reason , and they 're tough .
they 're very tough on me .
but fox has at least been fair .
they 've been fair .
fox has been fair .
so at some point , at some point we 're just gon na keep barreling through .
people asked me to run .
people asked me to run .
at wheel donald trump   letters and everything .
you know we have 22.5 million people between twitter and -- can you believe it ? --
you know i have a lot of people , they say , " do n't use twitter anymore . "
i say " why ?
i get 22 million people between that and facebook and instagram .
i 'm a very modern person in a way , right ? "
you know who says do n't use twitter ?
your enemies .
why would n't i use it ?
why would n't i -- if i have all these millions of people , and it 's a great way to get a message out .
so when they write falsely , or say something totally false on the today show , or good morning america , i 've put out a tweet .
and you 'll see all over television -- we have breaking news .
and i may be tweeting from bed .
ok ?
it 's true .
it 's instantaneous .
if i put out a beautiful , long , perfectly scripted press release like i did yesterday nobody puts it out .
if i put out a 140-character tweet they go crazy . "
we have breaking news . "
they break into every story .
so you got to use it .
well , here 's a story .
i love ohio .
i 've been here , i work here .
i do n't know if you know -- i worked in cincinnati for a period of time .
i had great success .
it was one of my first jobs .
i did it with my father .
it was called swifton village .
and we bought something that was a disaster .
it was empty , it had 1,154 units .
it was a total disaster .
and we bought it from hud .
and turned it around .
i was here , i did a great job , it gave me great confidence because it 's good to head   with a good job , and then we sold it , at a tremendous profit , and we went on to the next .
and i loved cincinnati .
and interestingly , after i sold it , the job went very bad .
the job went very bad .
i mean -- my timing was very good .
i listened to people but i really listened to myself and the timing was beautiful .
we had it for a number of years but we sold it .
and the day i sold it , to the day we closed contract , was bought by a reit .
one of the early reits .
it lost a lot of its occupants .
that 's how the timing was .
it was perfect timing .
i just think of cincinnati , the queen city , i love cincinnati .
i love kentucky .
i go to kentucky for fun .
i wo n't tell you what -- can you imagine that story if they find out about that ?
but i love kentucky .
and kentucky likes me .
boy did i do well in kentucky .
kentucky .
we love kentucky .
and we 're gon na take care of the miners in kentucky .
believe me .
we 're going to take care of the miners in kentucky .
but i had a great time in cincinnati and i had a great time in ohio .
the people of ohio are special people .
and they 're smart people .
and they know what is happening to them , they know great things are gon na happen .
we are gon na turn this state into a manufacturing behemoth .
we 're gon na bring your jobs back .
we 're gon na bring your companies back .
we 're gon na bring companies that left , are gon na come back because it will no longer be economic for them to continue where they are .
we 're gon na bring companies back .
we 're gon na bring companies back .
you know i tell this one story , you 've heard about , with carrier in indiana .
which i won in a landslide , that was supposed to be the firewall , remember that ?
indiana will be his firewall .
they said , new york , we 've expect him to win pennsylvania , we expect him to win .
won maryland , rhode island , delaware -- we won them all .
we expect him .
but indiana is going to be the firewall .
right ?
and then bobby knight called , and bobby knight -- how about bobby knight ?
we love bobby knight , right ?
winner .
he 's a winner .
bobby knight .
and he came out -- 900 games , three national championships , last undefeated college team , won the olympics , won the pan am games .
other than that , eh , he 's a good coach .
right ?
we love bobby knight .
and what a job .
and what a tough cookie .
and he said to me , " i hope you 're gon na run for president . "
this is before i knew him .
he called me . "
you should run for president .
you 'll be great . "
i said , " bobby i have n't decided . "
this was before june 16th , a few months . "
i have n't decided . "
he said , " just run . "
and then when i ran i called him and he said , " i 've been waiting for you to call . "
and we went to indiana and it was incredible .
but the thing that happened , that i 've been talking about for a year , and it happened to be in indiana , was when carrier air conditioner fired 1,400 people .
right ?
they fired 1,400 people like dogs .
like dogs they fired them .
it 's on tape .
had i not seen it on tape , on television , it would n't have had the impact that it had .
these are people who had worked there , some of them for more than 30 years .
and they would follow me around all over indiana , and i 'd have the people from carrier .
so let me just tell you , if i were negotiating and let 's say i heard they were gon na close , and if i said , " folks .
want to meet with you .
where 's your president ? "
they send their president along .
said , " let me tell you .
you 're leaving 1,400 great people .
now if you want to stay within the united states that 's a different deal .
the states will compete against themselves .
right ?
but you want to move to mexico ?
you want to build a plant ?
i wish you luck .
but if you do that you 're going to pay this 35 percent tax . "
here 's what 's gon na happen , folks .
folks .
here 's what 's gon na happen .
so simple .
they 're not gon na leave .
they 're not gon na leave .
because it does n't work economically for them to leave .
so now they 're not gon na leave .
and if they do leave that 's ok too because we 're gon na make a fortune .
ok ?
we 're gon na make a fortune .
now i 've been watching this country for seven or eight or nine years , even before obama , working on plans to stop people and companies from leaving the united states .
i 've seen low - interest loans , i 've seen zero - interest loans -- i 've seen it all .
i 've seen it all .
i 've seen every plan you can imagine .
i 've seen where they give them money , they do everything .
a lot of these companies do n't need money , they just want to make more .
but you know what ?
my plan , which is so simple -- we do n't need anything .
nice and simple .
and when i say that to the company -- if you 're running a company , you in the blue , and you 're running a company and i say to you , if you leave ohio , i wish you a lot of luck , enjoy the warm climate in mexico .
but if you leave ohio , you 're not going to make your product and sell it back into ohio where you have all these unemployed people .
what 's going to happen is you 're going to have a tax to pay to get the product back in .
now , when you hear that , you 're not going to be very fast to leave .
you 're not going to actually leave , ok .
almost 100 percent , you 're not going to leave .
it 's just not going to work .
because the economics do n't work anymore .
now , when my friend talks about , it 's the eighth wonder of the world , mexico , i think that 's great .
i respect mexico .
i love the mexican people .
i have thousands of mexican people that have worked for me over the years .
thousands and thousands , they 're great .
but their leaders are too smart for our leaders , ok , and they 're stripping our country , and they 're stripping ohio .
so hillary clinton does n't talk this way .
hillary gets up and she reads her teleprompter , we are going to build new roads .
we are going to build new schools .
we are going to build -- we are going to build .
and just like the two gentlemen that came up here , you 'll be let down 100 percent .
but me , this is my thing .
i 've been talking about this for years .
you know , somebody said , it 's amazing , trump 's been talking about this for 20 years .
it used to be japan .
remember when i talked about japan ?
now it 's china , but it 's still japan .
japan made a fortune devaluing their currency .
china makes a fortune with currency manipulation .
it 's cheating .
it 's cheating .
and when i sit down and say , listen , you 've got to stop this , you 're killing us , you 've got $ 500 billion trade deficits for us , you got to stop it -- we have rebuilt china .
and when i tell them this , and when i say , listen , you got to do it , you got to do it -- see , we have all the power , but nobody knows it .
like , when we catch them cheating , ten percent tax right across the board .
every good coming in from china , right .
now , here 's what 's going to happen -- number one , they 're going to stop cheating .
and if they do n't , we collect ten percent , we make a fortune .
but they 're going to stop cheating .
there 's nobody that tells them this .
when they come over , president obama , they put a tent on the white house lawn , right , and they give them a steak dinner like you 've never seen before .
although i would have a ballroom .
i offered to build a ballroom , you know -- they turned it down .
i was going to put up $ 100 million to build a ballroom at the white house , because having a tent is not that good .
it 's not even that safe , a canvas tent .
and they never even got back to me .
that 's the way it is .
if i were president , somebody offered that , i 'd say , give me the top five american architects in the untied states .
get them over here .
all of you , come up with a ballroom that holds 1,000 people , 1,000 people , and they 'll come up , and one of them will be beautiful , and we 'll build it .
i 'll take the guy 's money .
believe me , i promise , somebody wants to build a ballroom at the white house .
they turned me down .
no interest .
no interest , because that 's the way the country is .
so , i 'm only saying to the people of ohio , to the people of columbus , i want to tell you , we 're going to turn this country around and we 're going to make it so strong and so great , and we 're going to run it smart .
we 're not going to run it stupid like it is .
you 're not going to have -- when i look at your numbers , when my statistician writes all this stuff out , it 's just one bad number after another .
it 's a terrible -- i mean , honestly , it 's a terrible thing .
look , columbus , columbus .
ohio has lost one in three manufacturing jobs since bill clinton signed nafta , right .
columbus has lost one in four manufacturing jobs since bill clinton signed an agreement to put china into the world trade organization .
hillary rammed through the job killing trade deal with south korea -- that 's been a killer .
the deal with south korea has been a killer .
i buy thousands of television sets , thousands and thousands -- nobody makes television sets .
remember , we used to have sylvania , for those of us that are old enough , we had general electric , we had all these companies -- we 've got nobody .
we do n't make television sets .
we do n't make a lot .
soon , we wo n't make anything .
and you can only have so many nursing homes in a factory .
a lot of factories were taken , they were made into nursing homes .
i think that 's great .
but you can only have so many of them .
we need jobs .
look at this .
i mean , abandon   diplomatic personnel -- so many different things .
supports , i told you this -- supports at 550 percent increase , it was sort of amazing , because the press is always saying , well , you 're wrong , and you exaggerated that number , no matter -- if you said , two and two are four , they will get these super liberal groups to say , well , he 's not really right .
it 's not really four .
you know , when i read off the crime statistics about the police that are being shot , like in dallas and other places , and i read about it , and i said we had a 50 percent increase in police shootings , and they said , well , yes , but that was only for this year .
but if you go over 10 years or 12 years , or if you go over 7.3 years , a little bit less -- look , folks , the country is a mess .
we 're going to make it strong again , we 're going to make it safe again , you 're going to be so proud of it .
and you 're going to be proud of your president , but more importantly , you 're going to be proud of your country .
so why do n't we take a few questions , and when we 're finished with the questions , let 's go back to work , and those of you that do n't have work , hang in there .
jobs will be back sooner than you think .
ok , believe me .
yes , go ahead .
right .
ok .
there ca n't be a better question , other than on defense .
because we 're going to build up our depleted military , most importantly -- defense is always number one , do n't you think ?
but , we 're going to build our depleted -- we 're going to take care of our vets .
ok .
obamacare .
number one , we 're going to repeal it and replace it 100 percent .
it is a total disaster .
you saw what 's happening in texas .
blue cross blue shield , working through obamacare , 60 percent increase .
here 's the thing -- nobody knows this .
the numbers are so bad on obamacare , so bad , that on november 1 , they 're going to be announced .
those numbers are presidential election changing numbers .
those numbers are going to be so high , beyond anything we 've had , and president obama is trying to change the date to december 1 , because when people see what 's going to happen to obamacare and to your health care numbers , they 're so astronomical that people will never vote for crooked hillary clinton .
they 're never going to vote for her .
so -- and you asked a very interesting question , the way you phrased it was very interesting .
because you have a lot of part- time workers now that never had a part - time job in their life .
you have people in this room -- do n't raise your hands , but you have people in this room that are making less money now than they made 18 years ago in real wages .
less money .
and , in some cases they 're making less money , and working two jobs and that 's largely because of obamacare because companies save money by breaking it up .
so , they 'll take full - time , beautiful employees that have worked for companies for years and they 'll say i 'm sorry , you 're going to be a part - time employee from now on .
obamacare has been a disaster .
obamacare is so unfair , and , you know , you had a lot of people that had good plans .
we have to take care of people that ca n't , that do n't have the money to take care of themselves .
you look like a rich guy , ok ?
at least modestly rich , i think .
could be very rich .
but , we have to take care of people that ca n't afford it .
and , i 'm all for that .
and , we have something coming i think that 's going to be great .
and , a lot of republicans would say that 's not republican .
let me tell you , it is republican , folks .
you know , every time i 've ever said it i 've never had anybody other than the eggheads , you know the people that said trump is never going to run .
and , if he runs , i do n't think he 'll do very well .
we got a six , we got a 12 , we got 24 , i mean , forget it .
but , you know what ?
other than these so called , " eggheads " we never -- and i mean this , we never had anybody in an audience when i said we 're going to have a great plan .
we 're getting rid of the boundaries , we 're going to have great private competition , and you 're going to have plans now that we ca n't even talk about because these companies will come up with plans and it 's going to be so much less expensive , and so much better .
and , for the people that ca n't afford that , we 're going to take care of them .
and , i tell you what , i 've never had one person -- and i have the biggest crowds of anybody , i 've never had one person stand up and say that 's not republican , except for the eggheads .
they say , you ca n't do that .
we got to take care of people .
we ca n't have people dying in the streets .
we ca n't have our vets , as an example , dying waiting in line because they ca n't get to see a doctor .
and , without vets , interestingly , but , without vets when you have these massive waits we 're going to have our vets go to the local doctors , or the local hospital , private or public , take care of themselves .
they 're not going to be committing suicide .
many are committing suicide because of the waits , they ca n't stand it .
they ca n't stand the pain .
simple procedures can save their lives .
simple procedures .
a little incision , a small operation , a pill .
a pill can save their lives and they 're dying waiting for a doctor , and we 're going to -- and my plan is filed .
policy .
we 're going to have people , they ca n't get in , they 're going to go .
they 're going to see a local doctor , they 're going to see a local hospital , public or private .
we 're going to pay for the bill .
and , by the way , that 's number one from the humanitarian standpoint , that 's great .
and , even less importantly because ultimately we got to save people , it 's going to be less expensive .
and , we 're not going to have the problems that we have where people are committing suicide .
so many people every day .
vets are committing suicide because they ca n't even get to see the doctor to help them .
one of the big reasons of vet suicide .
so , we got to take care of that , and we 're going to take care of the obama -- we 're going to repeal , replace , we 're going to take care of everybody , ok ?
thank you , good question .
ok .
yes , go ahead .
well , it 's really a great question , ryan , because the thing that maybe surprised me the most is -- to me , taxes are very important .
it 's all taxes .
it 's such a big cost , or can be a big cost .
now we have a tax bill , or we have a tax law that 's very complicated , but it 's a big cost .
if you would have told me going around -- and i 've met so many small business owners , and so many large business owners , that if they had their choice between bringing our taxes down .
now , i have the largest tax decrease   of anybody that 's run for office .
larry kudlow loves it , a lot of people love it , but it 's the largest tax decrease of any person running for office from the beginning , republican or democrat , ok ?
hillary is going to have to double taxes .
is going to have to double your taxes .
hillary clinton will double your taxes .
we 're bringing it down to 15 percent .
we 're simplifying the system .
people that are making very little are going to pay nothing until they can break into the system .
and , you 'll save a lot of money bureaucratically that way .
but , people that are making very little are going to pay nothing .
instead of sending in complicated returns , and paying nothing .
but , we have a very beautiful plan , very simple , very simple , and very important .
but , if you would have told me after speaking with thousands of people that regulations , if they had their choice , you can have either reduced regulation -- because people ca n't open businesses .
they ca n't run their businesses .
you can either have lower taxes or reduced regulation , people would take the regulation .
that surprised me .
that 's how bad regulations are .
you 're looking at the energy business .
the energy businesses is being put out of business .
it 's being put out of business .
many small business owners have come up to me saying , " mr. trump , i 'm going to lose my business because the regulations . "
so , we 're going to take care .
we 're going to cut down the regulations .
i would be between 85 and 90 percent .
ok ?
now , some are necessary , i know , for safety , but some are necessary .
but , i 'll bet we can cut every year .
every year , it must be a cottage industry .
they have people that just write regulations all day long .
we 're going to cut down regulations between 85 and 90 percent .
we 're going to take care of the environment .
we 're going to take care of safety , but we 're going to let it be that we 're going to be a growing , growing .
when you look at 1.2 percent , that set a record .
that means we 're drowning .
that means we 're going in the opposite direction .
so , we 're going to take care of regulations , we 're going to have very , very , big cuts in regulations .
ok , another question ?
who 's got the mike ?
go ahead , yes .
hi .
good .
good place .
heroin .
yeah , i will cut off the source .
build the wall .
i will cut off the source .
good question .
very well asked .
thank you very much .
heroin .
so , my first victory as a candidate , number one , was new hampshire , which is a beautiful , beautiful place .
beautiful trees , beautiful meadows , beautiful little roads .
and i got to know the people of new hampshire very well , and i did unbelievable .
we won in a landslide in new hampshire .
that was at the beginning when we had all these people competing .
it 's a great state , and they have unbelievable people , and i got to know the people .
and , i 'd go into meetings , and i 'd say , " so , what 's your biggest problem ? "
and they would always say , " heroin .
heroin . "
i said , " what do you mean , heroin ? "
they 'd say , " heroin . "
i 'd say , " this does n't look like it 's a heroin like problem type place . "
they say , " mr. trump , it is flowing across our southern border .
it 's cheaper than candy .
our kids are being poisoned .
they 're being addicted , not only kids but kids .
they 're being addicted . "
they 're dying and for some reason new hampshire more than any other place talks about it -- that 's why i 'm so glad you asked that question .
but -- heroin .
so i said , " so where do you think it comes -- what 's the source ? "
it 's the southern border .
it comes through the southern border .
i said , " let me tell you .
if i win , i 'm going to stop it .
i 'm gon na stop it . "
now we had 16 , 500 border patrol agents who are unbelievable people .
who if they did n't endorse me would have a much easier job , because all they have to do is stand there and people walk right through them .
right ?
with me they 're gon na stop people from coming into our country .
ok ?
they 're gon na stop them .
and they 're not gon na have to work that hard because of the wall .
i asked them , " how important is the wall ? "
they said , " very important , very important . "
new hampshire told me about heroin .
and i said " wow . "
and i said , " if i win , i 'm gon na stop heroin from coming into this country and there are going to be big repercussions and i 'm gon na get the government of mexico and other governments to stop it or they 've got problems . "
with all the money we give them , they 'd better take better care .
they 're not taking care of us .
they 're not taking care of us .
you know i 've talked about trade deficits .
we have a massive trade deficit with mexico .
that does n't include the drugs that are coming across .
we get the drugs , they get the money .
like this .
big vans coming across .
drugs coming in , money going out .
those days are over , folks .
those days are over .
so i won new hampshire .
i then went down to all different places .
we did great in massachusetts , home of tom brady .
we love tom brady .
but we did great in massachusetts , we did great -- sort of everywhere .
but i see what a huge problem -- it 's not just in new hampshire .
it 's all over the place .
heroin is all over the place .
mothers and fathers are losing their children .
and heroin is a very addictive thing .
it 's very hard to get out of that addiction , of heroin .
it 's very , very hard .
and that 's the other thing we 're gon na do .
we 're gon na take all of these kids and people , not just kids , that are totally addicted and they ca n't break it , we 're gon na work with them , we 're gon na spend the money , we 're gon na get that habit broken .
but we 're not gon na let this crap come into our country and poison our youth and poison our people and it comes in mostly from the southern border .
and hillary clinton is n't gon na do that .
number one , she 's not strong enough to do it .
she would n't have a clue .
so ladies and gentlemen , thank you very much .
november 8th .
you 've got to go and vote .
i 'll be back .
i 'll be back so much you 'll be sick of me .
but november 8th , you have to go and vote .
we 've got to win this election .
this is a big one .
ohio is a very important state , we have to go , we have to win this election .
i love you all .
thank you .
thank you very much .
thank you .
great people .
great people .
thank you .
thank you .
and thank you , maria , for the introduction , it was beautiful , and for the work that you and your organization do to honor these stolen american lives , and that 's what they are , stolen american lives , and to advocate for justice on behalf of all american victims .
we thank you .
and thank you , folks .
what you have to go through is unbelievable .
i 'm honored to be here today and to shine a national spotlight on a group of victims who have been forced , and i mean truly forced , into the shadows .
your stories are not featured in the news .
you have no demonstrators taking to the streets on your behalf .
you have no special interests taking up your cause .
and the politicians ignore your cries for help .
but i never will .
i will never .
and i 've known many of you for a long time now , it seems like a long time , but i 'm still here and you 're still here .
right ?
we 're still fighting .
i 've met many incredible people during the course of this campaign , but nothing has moved me more deeply than the time i 've spent with the families of the remembrance project .
by the way , are doing such an incredible job .
and the strength and the courage that you 've shown in your very often lonely fight for justice will get there .
you are the heroes , you are , and your actions will help us to save the next thousand american citizens from losing their brothers and sisters and sons and daughters and parents .
the most fundamental duty of government is to protect american lives .
anyone who fails to understand this is not fit to hold public office .
every day our border remains open , innocent americans are needlessly victimized and killed .
every day sanctuary cities are left in place , innocent americans are put in harm 's way .
every day we fail to enforce our laws in a day , and this is absolutely happening all the time , is a day when a loving parent is at risk of losing their child .
and it 's happening every single day .
all across this country , dining room tables have an empty seat at the family table because our government abandoned its duty and failed to enforce its basic laws .
there are a lot of numbers in the immigration debate .
i 've been talking about it for a long time .
and obviously , people agree with me because you see what 's happening , you see the numbers , you see the polls , you see what 's going on at the rallies .
a lot of people agree with me , almost , it seems , everybody agrees .
you almost say , what 's not to agree with ?
what 's not to agree ?
but let me give you the most important number of all .
that most important number of all is the number of american lives that is acceptable to lose in the name of illegal immigration .
let me tell you what that number is : zero , zero .
our nation should not accept one lost american life because our country failed to enforce its laws .
what do you tell the mother who just buried her daughter because someone was released at the border who should have been sent home or should have been imprisoned in another country ?
what do you tell the young boy who will grow up without a dad because a criminal was deported five times , but was allowed to keep coming back and coming back and coming back into our country , doing tremendous harm ?
what do you tell the wife who 's lost her husband because a sanctuary city released an illegal immigrant from behind bars ?
this has to end .
it will end if i become president .
i promise you , it will end .
thank you .
thank you , everybody .
thank you .
thank you .
i love you .
we love everybody in this room , special , special people .
not one more american life should be given up in the name of open borders .
just look at what happened in the last few days .
last week , it was reported that authorities detained an illegal immigrant in the austin area who was responsible for nearly a dozen sexual assaults and had been previously deported five times within a three - year period .
earlier this week in kansas , a sheriff 's department master deputy was killed apparently by an illegal immigrant .
the driver was arrested for dui in california in 2001 and for traffic violations in kansas .
deputy collins was killed only hours after his daughter 's 4th birthday .
a few days ago , two correctional officers in california were critically wounded after being shot by an illegal immigrant who overstayed his visa .
this individual had been convicted of child rape and was slated to be deported , but his home country refused to take him back .
he was simply too bad , too tough , too evil , they said we refuse to take him back .
one of the victims has six children , is an air force veteran and a high school football coach .
the other victim is a mother and a grandmother .
when hillary clinton was secretary of state , the matter of this country , and think of this , think of this , that matter of this country , refusing to take back the deported citizen came before hillary clinton 's desk , oftentimes , many times , but she failed to take forceful action and ignored the federal law requiring her to suspend visas to countries that do n't take back their citizens .
she did n't want to get involved -- a politician , politicians .
according to a report from the boston globe , from the year 2008 through 2014 nearly 13,000 criminal aliens were released back into u.s. communities because their home countries would not take them back .
they were too tough , they were too angry , they were too evil , they do n't want them back .
and we do n't force them back .
we want to be nice people and we want to be nice and politically correct , and they 're all roaming the streets .
most of these 13,000 releases occurred on hillary clinton 's watch .
she had the power and the duty to stop it cold and she did n't .
now , my opponent will never meet with you , never meet with you , no interest .
you know that because you 've been trying for a long time , year , they 've been trying for years .
she will never hear your stories .
she will never share your pain .
she will only meet with the donors and the special interests and the open - border advocates .
her plan calls for total amnesty in the first 100 days , which means " obamacare , " social security and medicare for illegal immigrants .
her plan falls for catch - and - release on the border , sanctuary cities , ignoring visa overstays , closing detention centers , and a virtual end to immigration enforcement in the united states of america .
hillary clinton has even announced that she plans to go around congress and implement amnesty by executive order , violating our constitution and putting the entire nation in grave peril .
hillary clinton is the person , and i mean the first person , to ever run for the presidency of a country effectively proposing to abolish the borders around the country that she 's supposed to be representing .
but the media does n't want you to know that , so they 'll never ask her any questions about her plan , wo n't be talked about at the debate , which is going to be a very interesting period of time .
like how she 'll afford to give lifetime welfare and entitlements to illegal immigrants or how many people will be victimized because of the illegal immigrants that will be released from federal custody right at the border or inside of the border .
she 's not asked to explain what she 'll say to the american workers who lose their jobs when she prints out millions of work permits for those here totally against the law , many of whom have very , very substantial problems .
your   stories are ignored by our political establishment because they are determined to keep our border open at any cost .
to them , your presence is just too inconvenient .
that 's all it is , it 's an inconvenience .
but help is coming , i 'll tell you that .
on november 8th , we 're going to win the white house .
and we are going to deliver justice for every american family and every single american victim .
you know what that means .
you know what that means .
together , we will save american lives and prevent the next thousand american parents from suffering the same fate as the people in this room today .
their loved ones will not have died in vain , believe me .
they will not have died in vain .
since 2013 alone , think of this , since 2013 , the obama administration has allowed 300,000 criminal aliens to return back into the united states and its communities .
these are individuals encountered or identified by ice , but who were not detained or processed for deportation .
according to the federal government 's own data , there were more than 2 million convicted criminal illegal immigrants inside of the united states right now , 2 million .
and we wonder , why do we we have such crime , why do we have such violence ?
and this is true violence .
this is violence like most people have never even heard of before .
however , this figure does not include the many individuals who have committed crimes , but escaped justice , fled the jurisdiction or were otherwise never caught .
and many of the folks are in that position where you even sometimes know who they are , and yet they 're never caught .
we 're going to catch them .
we 're going to catch them .
many crimes committed by people here illegally remain open cases .
and yet , our government knows a lot about the people that did it , but they do n't go after them .
they 've killed people , they do n't go after them .
at the same time , hundreds of individuals who have been given visas and refugee -- and think of this , they 've been given visas , their refugee admissions into the country subsequently were charged with terrorism , and nobody does anything about it , nobody does anything about it .
it 's the most unbelievable thing that i 've seen .
that 's why i 've become -- it 's , like , become a personal passion for me when i see these people .
and there 's so many people .
remembrance project , there are so many people .
this is a small group .
a lot of people , it 's a small group compared to what we 're talking about .
the devastation is unbelievable .
so we 're admitting people here with no idea of who they are and we do n't know very much about them .
we do n't know what they believe .
we do n't know if they have love in their heart for our country or if they have hatred in their heart for our country .
whether it 's drugs , terrorism or violent crime , our government is utterly failing in its core mission to defend and protect the people of this country .
the border patrol agents , these are incredible people , they endorsed me , the first time they 've ever endorsed a presidential campaign .
thank you .
they 've warned that hillary clinton 's plan would put the entire country in grave danger .
i fully understand that .
they called it radical and deeply dangerous and warned it would trigger an unprecedented national crisis .
they know , they know better than any consultant , they know better than anybody , the border patrol agents .
let 's just   to prevent the next family from suffering the same terrible fate .
that is what is at stake in this election .
so i am now going to invite some of the bravest people i know , and i mean that 100 percent , to come up here and speak .
let 's start maybe from this side .
we 've picked five families , and if you could say a few words .
so how about we start over here ?
come on , perfect .
thank you .
thank you everybody .
thank you very much .
these are a few of the stories .
there are thousands of these stories .
and we have to work very hard and we have to be very smart .
these are truly wounded families and , sadly , they 'll never be the same .
i spoke to some of the families , we met for an hour backstage , and i said , does it get better with time ?
and they actually said it does n't and sometimes it gets worse with time , which is something that 's incredible .
so i just want to thank all of the folks , great , brave people , and they 're representing a lot of other people , a lot , thousands and thousands of people where similar things have happened .
and i think i 'd like to ask maybe maria to come back up .
and we 're going to ask her to say a few words .
thank you , maria .
thank you very much .
thank you .
well , thank you very much folks , and i really appreciate it .
and to these unbelievably strong and brave people , we will fight and we will win .
and again i say , your loved ones will not have died in vain .
believe me , ok ?
thank you , everybody .
thank you very much .
i do n't think they 're telling the truth , because when i look at all of the women at our rallies , i think we 're gon na do very well with women for trump .
thank you .
in 18 days we 're going to win the state of north carolina and we are going to win back the white house .
our opponents have spent more money than ever before in history on this campaign .
they 've raised it from special interests and yet , we are leading in three recent polls that just came out over the last day .
rasmussen , los angeles times , and investor 's business daily , we 're leading .
and by the way , the last one as they tell me , the most accurate poll of the last cycle .
so that 's a good sign .
that 's a good sign .
because i honestly -- i believe we 're going to win .
this is what 's going to happen .
we have two great congressmen in the group , and they told me what 's going on in their districts .
it 's unbelievable .
their areas unbelievable .
jimmy duncan of tennessee is here someplace .
where 's jimmy duncan ?
jimmy .
incredible guy .
and he said , you wo n't believe what 's happening in tennessee .
and mark meadows .
did you ever hear of mark meadows ?
and much more importantly , his wife .
the real leader in the family , right ?
thank you mark .
thank you for being here .
thank you both very much .
these are great people , but they 're just telling me the level of excitement and the people coming out -- i think we 're going to have -- beyond the brexit -- i think we 're going beyond brexit .
you know about brexit .
i think we 're gon na have it .
early voting is underway so make sure you send in your ballot .
we can not take a chance of blowing it .
we can not take a chance .
we have something , we 're so close , it 's a movement like they 've never seen in this country before , never , ever seen .
do n't blow it on november 8th .
together we 're going to deliver real change that puts america first .
we 're going to renegotiate our terrible trade deals , end illegal immigration , stop the massive inflow of refugees , reduce surging crime , cut taxes and regulations -- so important ...   and hillary is going to raise your taxes big league , you 've seen that .
we 're going to unleash job - producing american energy , rebuild our military and take care of our veterans who have not been taken care of .
and of course , one of the true staples to my campaign , and i say to our campaign , repeal and replace obamacare .
your jobs will come back under a trump administration .
your incomes will go up under a trump administration .
your taxes will go way , way down under a trump administration .
your companies wo n't be leaving north carolina under a trump administration .
there will be consequences for that .
we will be strong and a really strong and powerful nation again .
our military is so depleted .
we 're gon na build it up .
america has grown weak , and so weak that the philippines have broken with decades of pro - american foreign policy , to instead leave for the orbit of china and russia .
you saw that yesterday .
the hatred -- i mean , why is obama campaigning .
he ought to be out working .
he ought to be out ...   i mean , i 'm gon na send the congressmen back to washington with that message .
but we 'll send the real message on november 8th .
right ?
we 'll send the real message on november 8th .
but every time i look at him he 's campaigning .
you see the philippines .
the heads of the philippines -- they 're so angry .
he leaves for china , he 's now negotiating with china .
we 've been in the philippines practically forever .
a very important strategic ally .
and what happens ?
china and russia are probably gon na take it , and i see him out there campaigning for crooked hillary .
come on , come on .
give me a break .
strength will also require growth .
right now our economy is n't growing at all .
we had only around one percent growth last quarter .
gdp a disaster .
you know , when china has one percent it 's over , they do n't have one percent .
they have seven percent , that 's considered terrible .
india has eight percent , that 's considered bad for them .
they do n't like it .
we have one percent and everything 's supposed to be fine .
but we 're going down .
if hillary gets in she 's gon na raise your taxes and the one percent is going to be negative and that 's going to be almost unheard of , but that 's gon na happen .
i made a lot of predictions .
if that happens , and if she gets in , you 're gon na have such negative growth you will have problems like you 've never had before , and our companies and our jobs will flee , believe me .
i 'm going to get us to 4 percent growth and create 25 million jobs over a 10-year period .
many workers are earning less today than they were 18 years ago .
they 're working harder and longer and they 're making less .
some of them are working two jobs and even three jobs but still taking home less pay than they were taking home 18 and 20 years ago .
but i 'm working harder too , folks .
i 'm working harder , there 's no doubt about it .
i 've got three stops today .
we 've got three of these today .
we 've got three .
you know , i 've got three , on occasion i have four , i think i have one rest day where i have two -- but these are massive rallies and we 're gon na do this for another 19 days .
right up until the actual vote of november 8th , and then i do n't know what kind of shape i 'm in but i 'll be happy and at least i will have known , win , lose or draw , and i 'm almost sure if the people come out we 're gon na win .
but i will be , i will be happy with myself because i always say , i do n't want to think back , " if only i did one more rally i would have won north carolina by 500 votes instead of losing it by 200 votes . "
right ?
if only i did .
so i never , ever want to look back , i never want to say that about myself .
we have to work , you have to get everybody you know out there .
companies like carrier are firing their workers and moving to mexico .
ford is moving all of its small car production , announced two weeks ago , to mexico .
that 's on top of a $ 2.5 million plant that they already built .
when i 'm president , if companies want to fire their workers and leave for mexico or other parts of the world , there will be a tax of 35 percent for any product they want to ship in to this country ...   ... and you know what 's gon na happen ?
because i 'm a free trader .
a lot of people do n't believe that .
i 'm a free trader .
but our politicians have made such horrible trade deals that they 're killing our workers , they 're killing our companies and our companies are being forced to move .
including the fact that taxes are so high .
there will be consequences .
and we 're not gon na lose a company in north carolina , have them go to mexico or someplace else , make their products , sell it back in here -- which we will have a very strong border -- and there are no consequences .
and i 'll tell you what 's gon na happen when we do this .
for years our government has tried to stop our companies from leaving .
guess what 's gon na happen ?
they 're not gon na leave anymore .
because all of a sudden it wo n't work .
if they do at least we 're gon na make a lot of money when they ship their products across the border .
ok ?
the politicians -- you 've never even heard of this .
you 've heard it from me over the last six months .
for me it was so simple .
you want to move , good luck .
enjoy the heat .
but let me tell you .
when you make your air conditioner , you make your car , you do this , you 're gon na leave all those people unemployed -- there are consequences .
you 're gon na pay a tariff or a tax .
hillary clinton has raised countless millions of dollars and they 're not leaving -- from big donors who want to ship our jobs to other countries , including millions of dollars from corporations and countries pushing for the next nafta .
the next horrible trade deal , it 's called the trans - pacific partnership .
do n't let it happen , that will be the rest of your jobs will be gone .
the rest of your jobs .
that 's how our system is corrupt and broken .
we 're going to take on big donors .
we 're going to take on big business and big media .
that have enriched themselves at your expense .
and i did n't need to do this folks .
and i was part of the other side for a long time .
i understand the game as well as anybody -- as well as anybody .
but i saw the game , and i saw it first hand , and this country has been great to me .
i love this country .
and i said , our country will not survive if we continue to play that game .
so this is always a tough thing to do , but i 'm doing it .
and i am so invigorated by the kind of reception .
look at this , to the corners of the room .
make america great again .
that 's what we 're going to do .
it 's all about making america great again .
we 're going to do it .
and i understand it .
i understand it from both sides , believe me .
and i think you know that .
thank you .
the media is so corrupt that hillary was given the exact questions to a previous debate .
you remember this ?
right ?
just recently .
word for word , given the questions .
here are the questions .
here are the questions .
nobody gave me the questions .
now i do n't know what i do .
would i turn the people in ?
or would i take the questions ?
she was given the question .
i think i 'd turn them in , i think i 'd say , wait a minute , what 's going on over here ?
i want to know was she given the question to my debate .
but it does n't matter because we won .
so ...   based on everything we won .
i hope , that especially the last -- i think the first one , you know , was fine .
i thought it was good .
i mean , i never did this stuff before in all fairness .
but i think we did well , i think it was good .
they gave me this great commission on public , on presidential debates .
they 're wonderful , except they gave me a broken mic .
but that 's ok .
i 'm screaming into the mic all night .
but i think the first one was fine .
and i think we won easily the second one .
and the third one was our best .
right ?
third one ?
but she was given the questions to a debate by donna brazile , who is now under pressure to resign .
she should be , she should resign .
but i ask you , why did n't hillary say i ca n't do this ?
i ca n't do this .
i ca n't take -- i ca n't take these questions .
nobody from the media is asking that question .
why is it , they 're putting a lot of pressure on donna brazile , she was on television the other night .
it was brutal .
they 're putting a lot of pressure on her .
but tell me , she handed the questions to hillary .
hillary read the questions , figured out the answers , put whatever she had to do .
and then , why did n't she say i 'm not allowed to do this ?
years ago , years ago , there was a show called " the $ 64,000 question . "
does anybody remember ?
do n't say it .
because it 's old .
really ?
a contestant , go ahead , charles , go ahead , what ?
correct .
how do you know it ?
look how young this guy is .
a contestant got the questions in advance , prior to the show .
and his life was ruined .
but hillary got the questions in advance and the press does n't even bring it up .
can you imagine if i got the questions in advance and they found out ?
can you imagine if i got the questions and they found out ?
they would re - invent a much more sinister form of the electric chair , is that right ?
yes .
yes .
but i have to ask the press to find out why are n't they asking hillary why she did n't turn in the people that gave her the answers .
and those questions .
but this is even bigger than what we 're talking about , because we 're playing for the presidency of the united states .
hillary clinton is the most corrupt politician ever to seek the office of the presidency .
let 's do this .
let 's do this .
november 8th , let 's win .
let 's win .
let 's win .
we win , we have lots of options .
but we got to win .
what a waste of time if we do n't pull this off .
you know these guys have said , " it does n't matter if you win or lose , there 's never been a movement like this in the history of this country . "
i say it matters to me whether we win or lose --   -- so i 'll have over $ 100 million of my own money in this campaign .
so if i lose , if i lose , i will consider this -- and the nice part about saying that , and i only tell you that because that means i 'm not taking all of this money from all of these people that hillary clinton 's taking money --   and you know her and her husband made $ 250 million .
i said during the second debate , i said , " so why are n't you putting $ 5 million , $ 10 million , $ 15 million , $ 25 million -- i 'm putting in over a hundred , why are n't you putting in $ 10 million into your own campaign .
they 're not putting anything .
and we 're fighting this juggernaut because they have billions of dollars they 've raised .
and we 're fighting -- i turned on the other day , i was in florida , and i was in pennsylvania -- i turned on the television .
it was ad after ad after ad .
most of those ads were phony ads .
most of the things in those ads were false .
they were false .
i never said it , they know i did n't say it .
they have different things .
i wo n't go into things because my people go crazy .
they say do n't be particular , just -- i like to deny things .
i like to   because -- but they say oh talk about jobs .
but these things are so false , all of these things are so false , are such lies .
but hillary -- it 's ad after ad after ad , all paid for by wall street and special interests , all paid .
and i 'm saying to myself , " i think they said in florida the number of ads gon na be 50 to one , and we 're tied in florida and i think we 're gon na win florida . "
but the ads are phony ads , they 're untrue , mostly untrue .
there 's a little truth in there , but mostly .
and remember when you 're watching television you see one of the thousands and thousands of ads , just remember put wall street on top .
it 's wall street .
that 's who paid for it or largely paid for it .
now from wikileaks we just learned she tried to get $ 12 million from the king of morocco , for an appearance .
more pay for play .
that 's why i 'm proposing a path   of ethics reforms to make our government honest once again .
it 's time to drain the swamp in washington , d.c.   those reforms include the following .
a five - year ban on white house and congressional officials becoming lobbyists after they leave government service .
a lifetime ban on white house officials lobbying on behalf of a foreign government .
thank you .
a complete ban on foreign lobbyists raising money for american elections .
additionally i am going to push for a constitutional amendment to impose term limits on all members of congress .
not only will we end government corruption but we will end economic stagnation .
so important .
our country is doing poorly .
my plan for the economy can be summed up in three great , beautiful , powerful words -- jobs , jobs , jobs .
they 've been taken away from us .
at the center of my jobs plan will be fixing our terrible trade deals .
they are terrible .
they are the most incompetent deals ever made .
by the way , nafta , signed by bill clinton .
thank you very much , president clinton .
it 's been a one - way highway into mexico for our jobs , our cash .
we get the drugs , they get the jobs and the cash , right ?
forty - seven million americans are living in poverty and 45 million americans are right now , in this country , on food stamps .
we have nearly an $ 800 billion annual trade deficit in goods with the world and the worst so- called recovery since the great depression .
north carolina has lost nearly half of its manufacturing jobs since nafta .
half .
you 've lost half of your manufacturing jobs since nafta .
a deal signed by bill clinton and strongly supported by hillary clinton .
listen to this .
we 've lost -- and i always say , it sounded like a typographical error .
it 's not -- i thought it would be 700 , 7,000 -- we 've lost 70,000 factories since china 's entry into the world trade organization .
another bill and hillary backed deal .
we 're living through the greatest jobs theft in the history of the world .
nobody 's ever lost jobs like this .
the deal that she made with south korea was gon na bring us 100,000 jobs .
no .
it 's brought them 100,000 jobs .
we 've lost jobs .
we do n't win anymore .
by the way , to get jobs .
we do n't win on anything anymore .
we attack a city -- mosul .
we attack mosul .
i 've been reading about the attack for four months .
the reason they want to attack it , a primary reason , is to take the leaders of isis out because that 's where they think they are .
and i say , whatever happened to a surprise attack ?
so i 've been reading about mosul and the attack and i talked about it at the debate -- did everyone hear me talk about that during the debate ?
and i said to myself , " how are you going to get these people " -- these are tough , smart people .
what you do is you do a sneak attack or a surprise attack , right ?
right ?
we 're too predictable . "
we will attack mosul .
and three months from now , we are going to get their leaders , because we believe that that 's where they 're staying .
we believe " -- here 's obama -- " we believe they are in mosul , so in three or four months , let 's see " -- he does -- " three or four months , we will be attacking mosul , because we want to get the leaders of isis . "
ok .
well , in the meantime , the following day , they 're out of there .
they 're spread all over the place .
in the meantime , have you seen what 's gone on ?
much tougher than we thought .
because now they 're dug in , they 're ready .
and it 's much , much tougher than we thought .
general douglas macarthur , general george patton , who was too mean and too tough .
today he could n't make it in the armed forces , because they 'd say he 's not politically correct .
he had a very foul mouth .
he used bad words .
but his people loved him .
and his people would die for him .
but he had a foul mouth .
but he won .
he would win .
can you imagine him saying , " we 're going to be attacking mosul in four months to see if we can get their leaders ? "
and what they 're finding is they 're gone .
i told them that four months -- what are you mentioning this for ?
now , if they would have said , " we will never ever attack mosul .
mosul is " -- no , i would never do this .
me , i would -- because i always like to tell the truth .
but somebody could say , " we will never , ever attack mosul . "
and then the next day you hit them like you 've never hit anybody .
that would never do .
i would n't .
i would not do it .
we have a bunch of babies running our country , folks .
we have a bunch of losers .
they 're losers .
they 're babies .
we have a president -- all he wants to do is campaign .
his wife , all she wants to do is campaign .
and i see how much his wife likes hillary .
but was n't she the one that originally started the statement , " if you ca n't take care of your home " -- right ? -- "
you ca n't take care of the white house or the country ? "
where 's that ?
i do n't hear that .
i do n't hear that .
she 's the one that started that .
i said , " we ca n't say that ; it 's too vicious . "
can you believe that ?
i said that . "
we ca n't say " -- they said , " well , michelle obama said it . "
i said , " she did ? "
now , she said that , but we do n't hear about that .
let me tell you , if hillary clinton gets elected , we 've got four more years of obama .
we have a disaster .
we have isis all over .
we wo n't win anymore .
and your taxes are going up .
and she wants to double up and triple up on obamacare , which has to be repealed and replaced .
it 's a disaster .
a trump administration is going to renegotiate nafta , stand up for   foreign cheating , and stop the jobs from leaving our country .
we are going to start making things in america again .
we are going to start making things in north carolina again .
we are bringing back our jobs .
america first .
remember that .
in order to bring back manufacturing to north carolina , ohio , michigan , pennsylvania and so many other places , we 're going to undertake a major reform of our federal bureaucracy .
american trade policy is currently mismanaged by dozens of competing bureaucracies spread across the departments of agriculture , commerce , labor , state and treasury .
and u.s. trade representative has -- does n't know where he 's going .
my administration , under it , all trade policy will be consolidated into one office .
it will report to a thing called the american desk .
and i 'm gon na be calling every day like three times a day , " how are we doing american desk ? "
american desk .
the mission of the american desk will be to protect the economic interest of the american worker and the national interest of the united states .
we are losing our manufacturing all over the country .
north carolina 's been hit hard -- almost the hardest .
but we 've been losing it all over the country , folks .
it 's coming back , and it 's gon na come back fast .
and they 'll be a day soon -- soon .
during my administration -- four years , eight years , does n't matter -- it 's coming back soon .
where apple and other companies like apple are going to start making their product in our country not in china and vietnam and all over the .
america first .
as part of our plan to bring back our jobs , we 're going to lower our business tax from 35 percent to 15 percent .
we 're also going to rebuild our inner cities .
african americans and hispanics living in inner cities are suffering gravely .
you walk through these places and you 're with your child and you get shot .
there 's no education .
there are no jobs .
there 's no safety .
nearly 3,500 people have been shot in chicago since january 1 .
you believe that ?
3,500 .
that 's worse than these war zones we 're talkin ' about .
homicides are up nearly 50 percent in washington , d.c. and more than 60 percent in baltimore .
and the murder rate in the united states is the highest it 's been in 45 years .
and the dishonest media , they never tell you that .
and it 's getting worse .
so , the conditions are terrible , and i say to the african american community and to the hispanic community , and voters , what do you have to lose ?
vote for donald trump .
i will fix it .
i will fix it .
i will fix it .
and the democrats have been taking advantage of the african american community and the hispanic community for years .
they get their vote and then they say we 'll see you in four years .
they do n't do a damn thing for 'em .
we 're gon na fix it .
we 're gon na make lives much better in this country for everybody .
we will be a rich nation once again .
but to be a rich country we must also be a safe country .
our national security at the border is a mess , very unsafe , very terrible situation .
speaking in secret to a foreign bank , i will build the wall .
i promise .
speaking in secret to a foreign bank .
hillary clinton said her dream is for totally open trade -- there goes your business -- and open borders -- there goes your country .
there goes your .
oh , we love wikileaks .
boy , they have really -- wikileaks !
they have revealed a lot .
they 've revealed that there is a great hostility toward catholics .
they 've revealed that there is a great hostility toward evangelicals .
any evangelicals in the audience ?
well , i 've done great with evangelicals , including here , where we won our primary big .
but the evangelicals and the catholics and people of faith , i think they are going to be voting for us bigly .
i think they 're going to be voting for us ...   hillary 's plan includes an open border with the middle east .
meaning generations of radicalism and terrorism spreading and growing within ours shores .
so let me state this as clearly as i can .
if i 'm elected president of the united states , i am going to keep radical islamic terrorist the hell out of our country .
it 's unbelievable .
they 're letting people come in from syria and hillary clinton wants to increase it by 550 % and already thousands and thousands .
this will be in trojan horse .
remember this .
and we do n't want to be the generation , we do not want to be the people that in 200 years people are laughing at for allowing it to happen .
we will also stop the crisis of illegal immigration .
a trump administration will secure and defend our borders .. without borders , we do not have a country , folks .
we do not have a country .
we will build a wall and mexico will pay for the wall .
believe me .
mexico has done very well on our back ; they will pay for the wall .
they 're making a tremendous amount of money off of us .
you have to see the -- the lines -- i was in laredo , texas .
you have to see the lines and lines , miles long of trucks pouring into mexico and it 's a one - way street , folks .
it 's a one - way street .
it 's -- going to stop .
and i was with the president of mexico three months ago .
great guy , really had a great meeting .
but it can not go on like this .
they ca n't continue to outsmart our politicians and if it is me , they 're not going to outsmart us .
we have the first ever endorsement from our ice and border patrol officers .
first ever .
first time they 've ever endorsed .
and secretary of state , hillary clinton , allowed thousands of criminal aliens to be released because their home countries would n't take them back because they 're smart .
they do n't want to take back killers and drug dealers and all of the people that we 're sending back .
it was just reported , and hillary took it -- she said , all right , look , bring them back , bring them back .
they wo n't take them .
bring them back .
we do not want to disturb one of these , right , that we practically support .
we do n't want to .
believe me .
we 're going to take these people out day one , the people that are the criminals , which is drug lords , gang members , etc . --
killers .
we 're bringing them back to their countries .
there will not be one foreign country that will not say thank you mr. president for sending him back .
thank you , sir .
they will be so happy to get then .
and i do n't mean that exactly , but the point is they 're going to be taking them back .
they 're not coming back to us .
that i can .
can you imagine ?
she did n't want to make waves , she did n't want to make waves .
so we have these people , thousands , all over our streets and our cities .
it was just reported that a man deported from our country 10 times in six years has been charged with raping a 12-year - old girl .
in august , texas police arrested a serial illegal immigrant rapist , who 'd been deported five times .
his victims included one 68- year - old woman with a cane , who took his offer to drive her home .
raped her .
he left her on the side of a dirt road .
horrible , horrible condition .
the 65-year - old air force veteran , marilyn pharis , was raped and beaten to death with a hammer by a repeat offending criminal illegal immigrant who should have been deported many times , but never was .
what kind of a government allows its citizens to suffer such horrors ?
take a look at remembrance -- remembrance -- remind ?
remembrance project .
these are great mothers and fathers and people who have lost their loved ones to illegal immigration .
take a look , remembrance project .
you will never see anything so sad in your lives , and for no reason .
either we win this election , or we 're going to lose our country .
a victory in november will be a victory for you , the american people .
in closing .
thank you , thank you .
in closing , here are some of the amazing things we are going to do for our country , starting in 2017 .
very positive stuff .
we 're going to have the biggest tax cut since ronald reagan , perhaps even bigger .
we 're going to eliminate every unnecessary job- killing regulation .
we 're going to defend religious liberty .
very important .
we 're going to provide school choice for every low income child in america , and we are going to end common core .
disaster .
we 're   bringing   our education .
we 're going to be supporting the men and women of law enforcement .
we 're going to save our second amendment , which is under siege .
and we are going to appoint justices to the united state supreme court who will uphold and defend the constitution of the united states .
you have 18 days to make every dream you ever dreamed for your children , for your relatives , for your friends , for your country , to come true .
our campaign is powered by a love for this country and our love for our fellow citizens .
we 're in a divided country now .
there 's going to be love .
there 's going to be love .
it 's a campaign about rejecting the cynicism and elitism of our failed political establishment .
i 'm going to fight for every citizen of every background , from every stretch of this nation .
i 'm going to fight for every child living in poverty .
i am going to fight for african - americans who have not been treated fairly .
i am going to fight for every mom who lost a child to illegal immigration and drugs and gang violence .
you take a look .
it is a huge epidemic .
i am going to fight for every community whose jobs in factories have been ripped out of the states like north carolina and shipped all over the world to mexico and other countries but all over the world .
i am going to fight for every person in this country who believes government should serve the people , not the donors and the special .
i am going to fight to bring us all together as a nation .
imagine what our country could accomplish if we started working together and we will as one people under one god saluting one american .
you are going to look back at this rally in 10 years , in 20 years , in 40 years , you 're going to look back for the rest your life .
you are going to remember this day .
this is a movement like people in this country and throughout the world have never ever seen before .
eighteen days , you are going to look back at this election and say this is by far the most important vote you 've ever cast for anyone at any time .
because starting in 2017 , we are going to start winning again and you are going to start being really , really proud of your country .
we do n't win anymore .
we 're going to start winning again .
we are going to start winning again .
we 're going to make america wealthy again .
we are going to make america strong again .
we are going to build up our depleted military and take care of the greatest people on earth and we are going to take care of truly the greatest people on earth are veterans .
we are going to take care of our veterans .
we 're going to make america safe again , and we will make america great again .
thank you .
god bless you , everybody .
get out and vote .
thank you .
god bless you .
thank you very much .
hey , fellas , can we move over a little bit ?
fellas ?
fellas ?
fellas ?
hey , can we move over a little bit , please , could we ?
we need room .
come on .
thank you .
could you move over , please ?
we want the people to be able to see .
we all love each other .
we want room , right ?
well , it 's great to be in florida .
my second home , i live here , i stay here , i love this place .
and i want to tell you , so i guess we have , like , 11,200 here and outside we have over 10,000 people .
would anybody like to switch places ?
you are great !
there is no place like being at a trump rally .
no place .
no place .
thank you very much .
in 28 days we 're going to win florida and we are going to win back the white house .
we 're going to win them back .
i 'd like to begin tonight by extending our thoughts and prayers to those recovering from the tragic aftermath of hurricane matthew .
and i watched and fortunately it took a little bit of a turn to the right , to the east , and we got a little lucky , but it was still very bad .
so to everybody , our thoughts and prayers are with you .
thank you .
due to the hurricane , voter registration it 's been extended .
did you hear about this ?
through tomorrow , so register , you 've got to go and register or we 've really -- you know , we 're doing something that 's incredible , it 's a movement .
but if we do n't win , all it is is a little asterisk in history .
there 's never been anything like this .
so go and register , make sure you get out and vote november 28th .
if you 've already registered , request an absentee ballot today and vote really early .
we 've got to win .
the hillary clinton documents released today by wikileaks make more clear than ever just how much is at stake in this election , so much corruption .
this election will determine whether we remain a free country in the truest sense of the word or we become a corrupt banana republic controlled by large donors and foreign governments .
the election of hillary clinton would lead to the destruction of our country , believe me .
it will lead to the destruction of our country .
today we learned amazingly that the department of justice fed information to the clinton campaign about the e - mail investigation so that the campaign could be prepared to cover up her crimes .
what is going on ?
rudy giuliani said it .
this is collusion and corruption of the highest order and is one more reason why i ask my attorney general , i will ask , to appoint a special prosecutor .
we have to investigate hillary clinton and we have to investigate the investigation .
this was a disgrace .
this was a disgrace .
hillary bleached and deleted 33,000 e - mails after congressional subpoenas .
can you imagine that ?
they got a subpoena from the united states congress and then they deleted everything .
if you did that in private life , you go to jail .
and then destroyed her phones , some with a hammer , boom .
anybody destroy your phones before with a hammer , anybody ?
no ?
anybody ?
no ?
and people have gone to jail for doing far less .
she also lost , think of this , she was secretary of state , lost as much as $ 6 billion in taxpayer money while she was running secretary of state .
now , some people say it was misplaced .
oh , billions of dollars misplaced .
these wikileaks e - mails confirm what those of us here today have known all along .
hillary clinton is the vessel , a corrupt global establishment that 's raiding our country and surrendering the sovereignty of our nation .
this criminal government cartel does n't recognize borders , but believes in global governance , unlimited immigration and rule by corporations .
it also believes in no borders , just come on , folks , come on in .
speaking in secret to a foreign bank , again just revealed , hillary clinton said my dream is a hemispheric common market with open trade and open borders .
well , there go the rest of your businesses and there goes your country , folks .
she does n't say that .
behind closed doors when she thought no one was listening , she pledged to dissolve the borders of the united states of america , no borders .
you do n't have borders , we do n't have a country .
wikileaks has given us a window into the secret corridors of government power where we see a former secretary of state announcing her desire to end forever the american independence that our founders gave to us and wanted us to have .
american soldiers has fought and died to win and keep america 's freedom , and now hillary clinton wants to surrender that freedom to these open borders , open trade and a world government .
and by the way , we want a government for the united states .
we 're very happy with it .
we 're very happy with it .
crooked hillary is so radical on immigration that as secretary of state she refused to make foreign countries take back their criminal aliens .
we have them all over the place .
she did n't want to bring them back .
bring them back -- the countries were smart , they say we do n't want them .
we say , ok , we 'll take them .
and then you look at the crime and you wonder why .
and by the way , do you know , it was just announced , that murder is the highest it 's been in our country in 45 years .
you 've heard that , right ?
one such killer who was set free on hillary 's watch went to a jail , came out and went on to kill a beautiful young american girl named casey chadwick .
people have heard that name , beautiful , wonderful person .
the killer , who had already been convicted for shooting a girl in the head , should have been sent home .
instead , he was set free and stabbed casey in the face and neck 15 times violently and stuffed her body in a closet .
the corrupt establishment in washington wants to surrender america 's borders , even as they send our troops overseas to protect the borders of foreign countries .
we are protecting the borders of foreign countries , but not our borders .
a trump administration will secure control , defend and protect the borders of the united states .
we are going to protect .
and the border patrol agents just gave us , as you know , their endorsement , never did it before .
ice just gave us their endorsement .
sheriff joe from arizona just gave us his endorsement .
even chelsea clinton , the wikileaks e - mails show , expressed serious concerns about conflicts of interest at the clinton foundation and the state department .
during a recent trip to florida , i had a chance to spend some time with the incredible residents of little haiti .
the haitian community has contributed so much to this country and to this state .
i also learned from them firsthand how much they despise the clintons for what they did to the people of haiti .
new e - mails revealed today by abc news show that during the deadly earthquake in haiti , which killed over 150,000 people at least , the clintons could n't stop cashing in .
as people were dying in haiti , clinton insiders were separating out requests from friends of bill or william jefferson clinton vips so that their business interests or contracts would receive very special treatment .
people who were labeled not friends of bill were placed very much on the sidelines .
in their biggest project , the clintons used $ 400 million in aid and u.s. taxpayer funds to build what amounted to a massive sweatshop .
and guess who set it up ?
cheryl mills , hillary 's chief of staff who helped destroy her e - mails , and then got immunity from the fbi that included the destruction of her computer .
never been anything -- folks , there 's never been anything like this .
there 's never been what 's gone on here with the e - mail destruction , with the deletion of thousands and thousands .
and last week it was revealed that two boxes of e - mails and information were missing .
they were missing , they 're gone .
the company that benefited from mills 's actions then invent a company that put a lot of money in a company owned by cheryl mills .
they invested .
today , haiti 's death toll from hurricane matthew is on the rise .
we should never forget how bill and hillary clinton handled haiti the last time out .
to all of our friends in haiti and to all of our friends in little haiti who are so amazing , your day of justice is coming .
and it arrives on november 8th .
we 've got to do this .
got ta do it .
we 've got to do it .
not only have the clintons ripped off haiti , but the new e - mails show members of the clinton team attacking catholics .
while this is offensive , it 's just the latest evidence of the hatred that the clinton campaign has really for everyday americans .
and you see it and you see so much from these wikileaks .
you see so much , there 's so much .
we 've all read the reports and heard the stories about how disrespectfully she treats law enforcement , you 've seen it , how disrespectful she is to the secret service and many others in uniform even there to protect her .
and by the way , these are weapon - carrying people .
they carry weapons .
hillary clinton wants to really dismantle our second amendment , you know ?
so maybe she should start with her security people not carrying weapons .
does that make sense to you ?
maybe .
maybe she should .
she even smeared all of america 's police officers as essentially racist .
you heard that recently , essentially racist .
and by the way , i want to give a shout out and salute to our great people of law enforcement , our police have done an amazing job .
i 'm proud of the fact that i 've always treated the working people of this country with dignity and respect , especially our military and law enforcement personnel .
these are amazing people .
the wikileaks e - mails show that hillary 's staff even has given up secret notes on when she needs to smile .
it 's all a phony deal with her .
by the way , did everybody see the debate , right ?
gotten good reviews , good reviews .
we 've gotten good reviews .
we 'll see what happens .
but pat buchanan said the greatest of any presidential debate , the greatest performance .
thank you very much , folks .
thank you .
and we had eight online polls and every one of those , that 's time magazine and drudge and so many others , and every one of them said we won by a massive margin .
so let 's hope it all boils down to winning on november 8th .
otherwise , honestly , i 've wasted my time , you 've wasted your time .
i will have spent over $ 100 million on running for office .
that 's a lot of money , a lot of money .
that 's not the thing .
if i do n't win , it will be the single - greatest waste of time , energy and money .
and , you know , somebody told me recently , a pundit said it does n't matter whether you win or lose .
what we 've done , all of us , what we 've done , but what i 've done , has never been duplicated , there 's never been anything like this in american history .
you look at our crowds .
i mean , bernie sanders was second , his crowds are tiny .
did you see hillary clinton today ?
she had this little crowd and they say , oh , it was the biggest crowd .
she had nothing !
she had nothing !
and they 're talking on television because the media 's rigged .
let me tell you ...   ... the best thing she 's got going , in my opinion the only thing she 's got going , is the rigged media .
she 's got nothing going .
can you imagine working with her for four more years ?
the last thing we need , the last thing we need is another four years of barack obama .
we do n't need that , believe me .
that 's what we 're going to get if we get her .
but the e - mails also show yet again that the dnc , democratic national committee , rigged the democratic election , the primary process , to take it away from bernie and give it to hillary clinton .
the dnc vice chair was caught feeding information about bernie sanders 's plans to the clinton campaign .
you 're not supposed to do that .
it 's supposed to be -- you know , if i was bernie i would n't be too happy after watching what came out today on wikileaks .
bernie was used .
and in all fairness , bernie made a deal with the devil and he made a big mistake .
he could have gone down as something very important in american history .
when he made that deal , he sold out , he sold out , and very , very bad .
but to all the bernie voters out there , do n't vote for a wall street sellout like hillary clinton .
and remember this , the one thing i had in mind and the one thing we had in common with crooked hillary was borders .
the borders are much stronger , that 's why i have all the endorsements from everybody on the borders .
but bernie knew that we were getting ripped off on trade and he was right , except my numbers are much different .
we 're going to redo it .
we 're going to have unbelievable trade deals .
we 're going to make unbelievable deals .
but to the bernie sanders people , you got sold out .
but remember this , i 'm much stronger on trade , so much stronger on trade than bernie .
and trade was a big deal because he was right , we are getting sold out .
our jobs are being lost , our jobs are being taken , we 're being sold out .
a vote for hillary is a vote for more reckless foreign invasions , more wall street cheating , more terrible trade deals .
and as confirmed just today by wikileaks , hillary also wants to cute medicare and social security .
she wants to do that .
a vote for trump is a vote for america first and it 's a vote to protect medicare and social security .
believe me , we 're going to protect our medicare .
we 're going to protect our social security .
she 's not going to do it .
she 's also going to raise your taxes big league , folks , and we 're going to lower your taxes .
minor , minor thing , but just remember it .
wikileaks also shows something i 've been warning everybody -- everybody -- about for a long time .
the media is simply an extension of hillary clinton 's campaign .
it 's just one more way that the system is rigged , a big way , really a big way .
reporters who work for these outlets , like the washington post or the new york times , may think of themselves as journalists , but they 're actually just cogs in a corporate political machine .
the dishonesty of the new york times is unbelievable .
the dishonest of the washington post is unbelievable .
the dishonesty of all of those cameras , so many of them , not all of them , is unbelievable .
the e - mails show the new york times , the boston globe , univision , a third - rate reporter named john harwood , what a third - rate reporter that one is , remember he did the debate and made a total fool of himself , he 's with cnbc , all doing favors for the clintons .
and reporters smothering the clintons with praise .
why ?
why ?
you saw hillary on the debate stage .
do you think that 's really worthy ?
do you really think that 's worthy , folks ?
do you think that 's what this country is all about ?
the new york times even gave clinton veto power over her quotes in a major story .
i 've never heard about that .
i 'd like to have veto power when they misquote me all the time .
it 's actually corruption .
the e - mails also show that hillary was given the cnn town hall questions before her big debate against bernie sanders .
is that possible ?
donna brazile , the dnc vice chair , e - mailed , " from time to time i get questions in advance , " she said .
oh , that 's fair .
do you think that 's fair to bernie ?
i 'm starting to feel , really , are n't we starting to feel sorry for bernie sanders , like , a little bit , right ?
the media ca n't report on the establishment because the media largely is the establishment .
and the corrupt media is teamed up against you , the american people .
and i used to get great press until i said i 'm running .
and then they said he 's running , we do n't want him to run .
but i used to get great -- who got better press than me ?
i got great press , a lot of press .
my wife said the other day you used to get such great press , now every single story is a slant .
and i 'll tell you what , it 's libelous , it 's slanderous , it 's horrible and it 's really unfair .
but we 're going to beat the system , we 're going to beat the system .
we 're going to break up the failed establishment , end the chronic corruption and create a new and bright american future .
i did n't need to do this .
folks , i did n't need to do this , but we have to do it .
and we have the greatest people on earth .
the people of our country , these are the greatest people on earth .
i 've gotten to know so many .
our veterans are so incredible , they 're not being taken care of .
our military , our police , we have the greatest people on earth .
hillary clinton , the candidate of the past , today dredged up al gore .
did you see him ?
anybody see him ?
did n't he say he was the founder of the internet ?
he was n't .
to campaign with her in florida .
al gore wants to eliminate the combustion engine , essentially , and flies around the world on jets and pushes plans that would help create china , make it stronger .
they make so much of our product , they make so much .
they make so many of our big windmills .
and , you know , when they 're making them , that steel , and all of that stuff that they talk about going up into the air , but if it 's got to go up into the air , maybe we should be making them instead of china , germany and other places .
the obama - clinton epa spent billions on failed climate projects instead of repairing water infrastructure in cities like flint .
remember flint ?
what a shame .
my administration will address important environmental priorities , like the everglades , and ensure quality water all across america , including the fixing of water problems like lake okeechobee .
it 's amazing , you know , lake okeechobee .
they 're always letting the water out .
do you ever notice we always have droughts ?
they 're always letting the water out .
i said keep it in , we wo n't have so many droughts , we wo n't have any droughts .
but lake okeechobee -- and , you know , a lot of things have happened .
hillary has received millions of dollars from donors who want to shut down american energy altogether .
radical activists , like tom steyer , have promised to spend more than $ 70 million this election to get clinton and democrats like her elected .
in return , clinton wants to shut down energy production all across the united states .
wait until you see your energy bills .
we 're going to put the miners and the steelworkers of our country back to work .
we 'll do it .
hillary clinton and al gore support the paris deal which will cost america over $ 5 trillion and cause florida electricity rates to skyrocket over the years , skyrocket .
think of it , we 're going to spend $ 5 trillion .
and you know what 's going to happen ?
we 're going to become noncompetitive with other countries .
other countries are eating our lunch right now .
they 're eating our lunch .
we 're going to become noncompetitive .
the paris deal also allows china , the world 's largest polluter by far , to increase emissions for more than a dozen years while the united states makes drastic cuts immediately , right now .
what 's that all about ?
why are n't we doing it together ?
what 's that about ?
who negotiates our deals ?
it 's one more way the clintons have surrendered american prosperity to china and so many other countries .
we are led by people that are grossly incompetent .
they 're grossly incompetent .
how about the $ 400 million in cash that they gave iran that turned out to be $ 1.7 billion ?
you know what $ 1.7 billion is ?
it 's like this stage loaded up with money .
nobody 's ever seen it .
can you imagine these people in iran when they see the money ?
they say , can you believe this ?
boy , did we hit the jackpot .
three years ago , before we made them rich , as a country they were ready to go , but we made them rich , we made them rich .
how about the 800 people ready for deportation ?
remember , two weeks ago , ready for deportation , they made a mistake , they all became united states citizens , right ?
and these were people that were not exactly too good , that 's why they were being deported .
but the 800 turned out to be wrong .
somebody actually said trump was wrong on the number .
i said , oh , man , here we got .
was it 400 , was it 799 ?
not , i guess it was , what , 1,700 , 1,800 it turned out .
it was much more than the 800 .
they said i was wrong because i was low .
the whole thing is crazy .
so i said , you know what ?
that 's ok , just reverse the -- you know , you can deport them .
they said that would n't be constitutional .
hey , folks , folks , we 're being led by stupid people .
we 're being led by stupid people .
and hillary clinton will be worse than obama .
if i 'm elected president , we are going to start winning again .
we do n't win anymore .
the wikileaks speeches even showed clinton praising the president of china for promising to assert his authority .
my energy proposals will unlock the $ 50 trillion in energy reserves right here in america .
this means new jobs in florida , not new jobs in china .
we 're going to make america first , folks .
america first .
it 's all part of our plan to make america rich again .
but to make america rich again , we also have to repeal and replace the disaster known as " obamacare . "
bill clinton , in a rare moment of truth - telling , said " obamacare " was a crazy system where people wind up with their premiums doubled and their coverage cut in half .
now , on this he was right , right ?
on this he was right .
we 've got to give him credit .
oh , boy , did he suffer that night .
can you imagine ?
that was last week .
he suffered gravely when he went home .
the next day he came in , he said -- he made another -- sort of , i 'm only kidding , i 'm only kidding .
premiums are going to surge next year here in florida beyond what you 've ever seen before and all across the country .
i just left texas , great state , they 've gone up 60 percent through blue cross blue shield , 60 percent .
and remember this , the election on november 8th , they 're trying to announce many of these massive increases after the election .
do n't let it happen .
you 're going to have 100 percent increases , you 're going to have 95 percent increases .
but you 've already got 68 percent , 72 percent .
insurers are fleeing , patients are losing their doctors .
remember , you can keep your doctor , you can keep your plan ?
twenty - eight times , obama said that .
he lied !
and the best students do n't want to be doctors anymore .
they used to want to be doctors .
doctors have more accountants working for them now than they have nurses , it 's so complicated .
it 's a giant mess , a giant catastrophe that will destroy american health care for good if we do n't get rid of it .
and this election is going to be so pivotal in terms of your health care , in terms of costs for health care .
so remember , you 're going to get great health care at a far , far reduced cost .
it 's going to be much less expensive .
this " obamacare " is a nightmare .
it is a nightmare .
and by the way , hillary clinton wants to go to single payer .
the government 's going to take care of your everything .
it 's going to cost so much money .
you know , in canada , where they have a better version than what she 's talking about , when people with some money want an operation , they come into the united states to get it .
it 's slow , it does n't work , does n't work anywhere .
we have concepts that are so good .
in fact , concepts that are so good that they 'll only get better , so much less money .
so we have to repeal and replace " obamacare . "
it 's killing the country and it 's killing the people that have to pay for it .
but you have to get out if we 're going to do it and you have to vote .
we 're going to replace " obamacare " with health savings accounts so you can choose the private doctor that you want .
at the center of our economic revival , we 'll be fixing our terrible , terrible trade deals .
if you remember , on june 16th of last year , that is when i said we 're going to run .
you know , it takes a lot of guts and courage to do this .
i started off , there were 17 people , great people , all nice people , some did n't , you know , honor their pledge , but these are minor details , right ?
but we had some great people , many of whom are supporting us , dr. ben carson we have , a great guy , great guy , good man .
chris christie , i mean , we have incredible support .
mike huckabee , he 's been so great on television , he 's so good .
he 's so good .
he said the other night donald trump won that debate by a landslide , but that does n't mean the press is going to report that .
they all reported trump won .
but mike huckabee said it better .
he said trump won it easy , not even a contest .
but that does n't mean that the cnns of the world will say that .
ok ?
they wo n't ever say it .
they will never say it .
if the late great abraham lincoln debated and he was representing our point of view , cnn would say abe lincoln went down to a massive defeat .
i mean , these are dishonest people we 're dealing with .
these are very , very dishonest people .
and it 's really a shame .
and their ratings are not very good either , that 's good .
you know why ?
because some people they lose credibility .
the new york times is losing credibility .
remember , they wrote the story about trump with women ?
it was on the front page of the new york times , that i was a little bit lewd -- lewd ?
but they had the story a few months ago with women and they put it on the front page of the new york times and then the women called in and said i did n't say that .
i like him a lot , he 's a great guy .
you know , from 30 years ago and 20 years ago and 15 years ago .
and i was so honored that they had the courage to do it .
but the times never gave me , you know , any kind of a retraction .
it 's a disgrace .
what 's going on with the media is disgraceful and it 's happening to all of us , believe me , it 's happening to all of us .
forty - seven million americans are living in poverty and 45 million americans are on food stamps .
this is the legacy of obama / clinton .
my economic reforms on energy , taxes , regulations and trade will create at least 25 million new jobs over the next 10 years .
it 's going to be unbelievable .
i will be the greatest jobs president that god ever created , believe me .
the state of florida has lost one in four manufacturing jobs since nafta and china deals happened .
thank you , i love you , too , darling .
i love florida !
i love the people of florida !
i 've created many , many jobs in florida , many , many jobs .
you know , jobs in miami beach , doral is a tremendous success and mar - a- lago and the clubs and we 've done all of that .
hillary has done nothing for florida .
and remember , when we were in the primary , i ran against marco , jeb , all these guys , and we had a great -- hey , look marco 's been very , very nice lately and i hope he wins , i do .
but we won by 21 points .
remember that ?
everyone said , what happened ?
how about all of these states ?
you know , i went into a couple of states , trump was one point down , does n't look like -- and then we win by , like , 14 points .
we could have this happen .
we 're pretty even in florida and i 'm a little disappointed because hillary has n't created a job and i 've created thousands of jobs in florida , thousands .
i mean , at doral i have over a thousand people working just at doral itself .
mar - a - lago , trump international , many , many jobs , buildings along the beach in miami .
you know , we 've created a lot of jobs .
so , florida , if you guys do n't vote me as a victor i 'm going to be very angry at you .
hillary does n't come down to florida .
she comes down to florida to try and get your vote , then you wo n't see her anymore .
if hillary clinton gets in , the manufacturing that 's left in florida , ohio , north carolina , pennsylvania , michigan will be shipped to other countries , shipped overseas and go to mexico .
look , there 's no doubt about that .
if i win , day one we 're going to announce our plans to totally renegotiate nafta which is a one - way street for businesses to leave our country .
they get the businesses , they get the cash .
and you know what we get ?
we get the drugs , that 's what we get .
we get nothing .
we get unemployment and we get drugs .
the years of all - talk , no - action politicians like her will end .
i 'm not controlled by special interests , so i 'll immediately begin to go to work on this .
that 's why i 'm putting up my own money , for the most part , other than we 're getting massive amounts of small contributions , average $ 61 .
you saw the numbers .
in fact , they 're going to be announced tomorrow , set records for a republican on the small contributions .
i love that .
i love that .
and we 're doing good .
and we just came out with a new commercial on crooked hillary .
she 's crooked as a $ 3 bill .
i used to say a $ 2 bill , but now they make $ 2 bills .
if we do n't get the deal we want on nafta -- remember this , remember i said it -- we will leave nafta and start over again and make a much better deal .
ok ?
we will terminate .
a trump administration will also stand up to china 's product dumping and currency cheating and the steel .
what they 're doing to our steel companies is unbelievable with the dumping .
we 're going to start making things again in america .
we 're going to have apple make their iphones and make things in this country , not make everything in china and vietnam and these other countries .
we 're going to bring apple and many other companies , they 're going to be back in the united states .
our jobs , we 're going with much lower business taxes .
we 're bringing the tax rate from 35 percent to 15 percent and we are going to be booming again .
our taxes are so high , our taxes are so high that businesses are forced to leave .
and by the way , when businesses want to be ripped out of florida , ripped out of your community , not going to happen anymore because there 's going to be consequences .
like carrier air conditioning in the state of indiana , where mike pence , by the way , is doing a great job for me .
do we like mike ?
ok .
so mike did a great job .
he absolutely beat tim kaine , who , you know , tim kaine raised taxes in his first week when he was governor of virginia , not a popular governor , he raised them by $ 4 billion .
mike on the other hand , indiana , you take a look , i mean , he has done such a great job .
so here 's my question to you ?
by cheering , who did better in the debate ?
are you ready ?
you 're going to cheer , you 're going to let me know .
so i did very well .
did you see hillary today ?
did everybody see the debate ?
yeah , you lost , got killed .
no , i look forward .
next week we have another one .
i look forward .
hey , did you see -- wait , wait , wait .
did you see where she said that i entered her space .
so here i am , i 'm standing , right ?
you saw that .
this is a liar .
so i 'm standing at my podium , i 've got my chair , and crooked hillary walks across the stage right in front of me .
i 'm standing .
i did n't move , right ?
right ?
so i 'm standing and she walks across the stage , she 's standing right in front of me .
i did n't care .
i did n't care .
and she 's answering a question and then she walks right back .
ok , that 's fine .
i did n't make a big deal .
next day i read the paper , he entered my space .
she entered my space , right ?
but did you see what she said , that i entered her space ?
i did n't move .
and i was very careful because years ago somebody did come in and talk to her and the poor guy , lazio , he got just killed .
so i said i 'm not getting near this woman .
no , i 'm not getting near this woman at all , no interest , no interest , i have no interest .
but you saw that , right ?
so i 'm standing there , she walks , she stands right next to me .
and the next day they said donald trump entered her space .
these are dishonest people .
anyway , but next week we have another debate in las vegas , so that 'll be fun .
america , if i get elected , will become -- when , when ?
they always go , when , when ?
but i like to , you know -- got ta leave here , you do n't want to sound too egotistical .
the polls are pretty even in florida .
you do n't let me down !
do n't let me down .
honestly , do n't let yourselves down maybe more importantly .
america will become the great jobs magnet of the world , remember that .
we 're also going to fix our inner cities and help our latino americans .
and believe me , that 's what we have to do .
the hispanics in this country have been treated very unfairly .
the african americans have been treated very , very unfairly .
forty - five percent of african - american youth live in poverty .
fifty - eight percent of american - american youth do n't have jobs .
only 41 percent own their own home .
that 's much , much lower than other groups , 41 percent .
that 's a very low number , one of the lowest .
more than 3,000 people have been shot in chicago since january 1st , 3,000 people .
so the inner cities do n't have jobs , have a lousy education , right , have lousy , horrible , and they 're unsafe .
you get shot walking to the store .
so i say to the african americans suffering in our inner cities , what do you have to lose ?
vote for donald trump , what do you have to lose ?
i will fix it .
i will do the job .
and in four years from now when we have another election , i will win with african americans and i will win with hispanics in very large numbers .
we 're going to fix it .
these politicians have been lying to you for years , these democrats .
they 've run the inner cities for up to a hundred years , even more , uninterrupted , and they come for your vote every four years .
hillary clinton comes for your vote and you 'll get a vote and then after you get the vote she 'll say bye - bye , i 'll see you in four years .
she does n't do anything .
she did n't do anything for new york state .
remember upstate new york ?
a disaster .
she came out and she said in upstate new york she 's going to create 200,000 jobs .
guess what ?
everybody left , it was , like , a disaster .
she was a disaster .
and she 's a bad person , remember that .
she 's a bad , bad person .
i will fight harder for you than anyone ever has fought before .
and that 's why i want to get the african - american vote and i want to get the hispanic vote .
we 're going to fix your communities , we 're going to fix those inner cities for once and for all .
we 're going to fix them and we 're going to create jobs and great education .
and we 're going to have safe inner cities instead of these horrible , horrible death traps .
and that 's what they are .
we 're going to fight for the latinos trapped in poverty , that includes school choice for every low - income african - american and latino , hispanic child in this nation .
disadvantaged children will be able to send their kids to the public , private , charter or magnet school of their choice .
i also have a message for our wonderful cuban - american community .
any cubans here ?
cuban , cuban american ?
not too many , but i 'll say it anyway , all right ?
obama made a one - sided deal with the castro regime by executive order .
everything 's executive order because he does n't have enough time because he 's playing so much golf .
he does n't have enough time to convince congress to do it .
this guy plays more golf than people on the pga tour .
we will cancel the obama order unless we get the deal that we want , including political and religious freedom for the people of cuba .
we will also stand with our friends in venezuela as they struggle for freedom .
and doral is located in a big community where we have tremendous numbers of people from venezuela , amazing people .
the people of venezuela and cuba know how dangerous corruption is and how dangerous socialism is , two more reasons why we have to keep crooked hillary clinton out of the white house .
here are some more amazing things as we finish up that we 're going to do for our country starting in 2017 , right around the corner .
we are going to massively cut taxes and regulations .
she is going to increase taxes substantially .
we 're going to protect internet freedom .
you see where they want to sell now , they want to have the internet run by the world ?
right ?
did you see what obama wants to do ?
oh , i hope we can stop that deal fast .
did you see that ?
wants to give up that tremendous right .
we 're going to defend religious liberty .
we 're going to safeguard our very obsolete electrical grid from cyberattack .
cyberattack is a new , big problem .
we 're going to rebuild our depleted military .
and we are going to take care of our great veterans .
we have tremendous veteran support , tremendous veteran support .
we 're going to construct a state - of - the - art system of missile defense .
we 're going to expand america 's true role as a leader in space .
we are going to save our second amendment which is under siege by hillary clinton .
and the national rifle association , the nra , as you know , endorsed me , the earliest endorsement they 've ever given to a presidential candidate .
and we are going to , and this is so important , appoint justices to the united states supreme court who will uphold and defend the constitution of the united states .
you have 28 days to make every dream that you ever dreamed for your country to come true , on november 8th , it 's so important .
the arrogance of washington , d.c. will come face - to - face with the righteous verdict of the american voter , you .
we are going to replace our corrupt global establishment that has failed us on the borders , on trade , on foreign policy , on the economy and so much more .
we do n't win anymore , folks .
we do n't win anymore .
when did you see us win ?
we lose on trade .
we ca n't beat isis .
oh , by the way , we 're going to knock the hell out of isis .
we 're going to knock the hell out of them .
we 're going to replace the failed leadership in washington , who have betrayed you , squandered your wealth and sold out your country .
and by the way , we 're going to have very strong borders and we will build the wall and we will stop drugs from pouring in .
no , we will build the wall .
ok , folks , are you ready ?
who 's going to pay for the wall ?
hundred percent .
they might not know it yet , but they will .
look , mexico 's great and the people are great i got to meet three weeks ago .
you probably saw , i went to mexico , i met with the president and it was great .
and we 're going to build a way and they 're going to pay .
the reason they 're going to pay , they 're making a fortune .
they 're making a fortune on trade .
our trade deficit with mexico is massive .
our trade deficit with china is beyond anything you could even imagine .
worldwide on trade , we lost almost $ 800 billion last year .
you say to yourself , who negotiates these deals ?
we have a few of my friends here , they 're good business people , they 're sitting here and they 're saying , who negotiates these deals ?
they 're in the audience .
one guy is looking at me , he 's laughing now , he 's saying , who ?
incompetent people or corrupt people , ok ?
they 're either incompetent or corrupt .
i 'm asking all americans , republicans , independents and democrats , to join us in our campaign to give our government back to the american people .
i am going to fight for every citizen of every background , from every stretch of this nation .
and i 'm going to fight to bring us all together as americans .
we 're a divided country , folks .
we 're divided in so many ways .
we 're going to be a unified country again .
we 're going to love each other , everybody , not just the people here .
we 're going to love each other .
and by the way , is there ever a better or safer place to be than a trump rally ?
you better make sure we win or there will be no more trump rallies , to hell with that , to hell with the rallies .
imagine what our country could accomplish if we started working together as one people under one god , saluting one american flag .
you 're going to look back at this rally for the rest of your life .
you 're going to remember this day .
this is a movement like nobody has ever seen before .
it really is , it 's an amazing thing .
we take it for granted almost .
it 's an amazing thing when we go out to pennsylvania , we had 20,000 people .
we go to alabaman , we had 35,000 people .
we go to different places and we get crowds that nobody has ever seen before for what we 're doing .
and i do n't have a guitar .
somebody said you get the biggest crowds in the world for a guy with a guitar , which is an interesting -- it 's an interesting way of looking at it .
i 'll tell you who said that , a very famous guy , but i better not , i 'll get him in trouble .
happens to be very liberal , i will really get him in trouble .
we 're going to make history together .
you 're going to look back at this election and say this is by far the most important vote that you 've ever cast at any time in your life , november 8th .
a vote for me is a vote for change .
a vote for me is really a vote for you .
we 're going to run things right .
america first .
remember , america first .
we are going to put our country first for the first time in a long time .
once again , we 're going to have a government of , by and for the people .
we will make america wealthy again .
we will make america strong again .
we will make america safe again .
and we will make america great again !
thank you .
god bless you , everybody .
god bless you .
thank you very much .
thank you .
thank you , everybody .
thank you .
unbelievable .
thank you very much .
thank you very much .
it 's a great honor .
thank you .
amazing .
amazing .
what great people .
we 're going to bring back our jobs to pennsylvania .
we 're going to bring back our jobs to the united states .
going to bring back our jobs , folks .
i 've looked at the numbers and i see what 's happening in pennsylvania .
i see what 's happening all over our country .
you look at new york state , you look at new england , you look anywhere in the country where you want to go to , all over it 's the same .
manufacturing way down , jobs way down .
you go to other countries , they 're taking our companies , they 're taking our jobs .
people are right now working harder than they 've ever worked .
eighteen years ago they made more money in real wages , 18 years , think of it .
eighteen years ago many of the people in this incredibly big room , and thank you for being here , you know it 's 93 degrees out .
and they still have a lot of people trying to get in , i do n't know if they can get them in .
should we let them in ?
just let them in .
but 18 years ago , people were making more money in real wages than they make today .
and today they 're working two jobs , some people are working three jobs .
so they 're older , and they 're working harder , and they 're making less money , all right ?
a friend of mine , i 've been telling this story over the last month because it 's better than going to wharton or better than going to harvard and asking them to do a study , because you learn it in three minutes .
but let me just tell you .
right now , mexico and other countries are building facilities , plants , the likes of which you 've never seen .
we 're going to build the wall , do n't worry , we 're going to build the wall , we 're going to build it , we 're going to build it .
but a friend of mine , and actually a supporter , big supporter , great guy .
he builds plants , that 's what he does , he builds plants .
he does n't want to build apartments , he does n't want to build office buildings , he wants to build plants .
and he 's just about the biggest there is .
and i said how are things going ?
he said very well , how are you doing in the u.s. ?
not good .
how are you doing in mexico ?
he said donald do you want to see , it 's the eighth wonder of the world .
they are building plants , the likes of which i 've never seen .
he 's building some of the greatest plants , big -- you look at ford moving vast operations to mexico .
the plants .
you look at -- look at , take a look .
by the way , millions of jobs , thousands of companies over the years , they 've left us .
and we have a few things .
we have unemployment , we have empty plants , i saw up in new york state , i saw it in pennsylvania , you were great to meet , you voted a big victory for donald trump , thank you .
that was a big victory .
i mean i assumed i was going -- if i do n't win pennsylvania -- and by the way , i was talking to our great congressman , and where is he ?
he 's here some place , where is he ?
he loves the people , and i have to say , of all of pennsylvania he wants to see this state do well .
thank you .
but just talking back to a few of my friends that live here , we have a few of the friends and we see what 's happened with general electric where they 're cutting way back .
not going to happen .
and you know why they 're cutting back , it 's one reason .
because we do n't take care of our miners and we 're not producing coal .
and they do n't need to make those big , big beautiful , you could call them locomotives i guess , right ?
whatever the hell they are , they 're big and they 're powerful and they do n't need them like they used to because we do n't make our government work for us .
they 're not working for us .
they 're working for others , they 're not working for us .
so when general electric goes out and you see the numbers , i see the numbers , and it 's about coal , so i just left parts of virginia and west virginia , and the coal industry 's decimated .
the miners are out of work , they 're totally out of work .
i mean there will be no such thing as coal in this country pretty soon .
and we 're talking clean coal , we 're talking clean coal .
so i was with the miners , we have such tremendous support , west virginia , the mining parts of virginia .
all over , ohio , because hillary clinton made the statement not so long ago .
a number of months she said , we 're going to put the mines and miners out of business .
all right ?
going to put the mines and the miners -- so ...   so , we 're not going to let that happen .
we 're not going to let that happen and we 're not going to let it happen in pennsylvania because you know what ?
a lot of your miners have already lost their jobs , but you have a lot of other jobs that are very reliant on the mines .
like , as an example , general electric .
and what we 're going to do , folks , is going to be so special .
we 're going to bring it back .
we 're going to bring back our jobs , we 're going to bring back our companies .
when a company wants to leave our country to go to another country and think they 're going to make their product , and because our politicians are weak , stupid , taken care of by lobbyists , special interests -- they 're taken care of by lobbyists , they 're taken care of by donors and special interests .
that 's what -- you know , a friend of mine -- very smart guy -- said -- i ca n't believe it .
we 're talking about a deal that took place about a month ago .
he said , i ca n't believe they could have gotten that through .
i said , why ca n't you believe it ?
well , it 's so bad for the country .
i said , yeah , but it 's good for the politician because they 're taken care of by their lobbyists and their donors and the special interests .
so even though you say we want , as an example , general electric to produce more , if they do n't want to or if for some reason one of the donors of crooked hillary clinton does n't want that to happen , even though it 's great for erie , even though it 's great you , even though it 's great for the state of pennsylvania , then it 's not going to happen , folks .
it 's not going to happen .
and by the way -- and i have to tell you this .
so when they think they 're going to take our companies are rip them out of -- as an example -- this area or this state or any other state and go to mexico and build massive new plants and employ people other than you , and you 're going to lose your jobs or you 're going to now get two part- time jobs that do n't add up to half of what you used to make .
that stuff is n't happening anymore .
so here 's what happens .
they 're going to build that plant .
now , if i were here five years ago and if president obama put me and maybe secretary of keeping business in the united states -- that 's my title , secretary of keeping business in the united states .
i mean , i like the sound of secretary of defense better .
oh , and by the way , we 're going to build our military .
we 're going to be very strong .
really .
and we 're going to take care of our vets .
we 're going to take care of our vets , believe me .
but i like the sound -- i like the sound of secretary of defense .
i like the sound of secretary of the treasury .
i like the sound of secretary of state .
but i 'll tell you , would i be good at keeping jobs over here .
would i be ...    i 'll tell you this .
i just have to say the bernie sanders protesters were much , much stronger .
they had much more passion , i have to say .
all right .
you know what 's interesting ?
if i could speak to them for like five minutes -- we want a strong military , we want to take care of our people , we want good education , we want good housing , we want good healthcare .
what do we want ?
we 're all in for the same thing .
really amazing .
really amazing .
so i 'll be your secretary of keeping companies in the united states , right ?
so , i would go to a company like carrier air conditioner , which decided to leave indianapolis , indiana , and i would say here 's the story .
we think it 's wonderful that you 're negotiating with mexico .
i 'm sure you 're going to have a wonderful plant , but here 's what 's going to happen .
if you build that plant and you fire all of these people , 1400 people who were so great to me .
indiana , i won that in a landslide .
actually , the timing was good .
i won it in a landslide because i know what to do .
hillary does n't know what to do .
did you see her yesterday ?
she has no clue about what we 're talking about .
folks , she has no clue .
she has no clue .
crooked hillary .
she does n't know anything about it and , by the way , if she did , she could n't do it anyway because her donors do n't want to do it .
there 's reasons .
but look , look .
i would go to them and say just to keep them .
just to keep them .
and i would n't even care that much .
i 'll tell you why .
ready ?
i 'd say here 's the story .
if you leave , in this case , indianapolis , you 're going to go to mexico , you 're going to make your air conditioning units .
every single unit that you make that crosses our now very , very strong border we 're going to charge you 35 percent of the cost of that unit .
ok ?
thirty five percent .
right ?
so simple .
thirty five percent the cost of that unit .
we hope you enjoy your new plant .
very hot weather out there , very hot .
we hope you enjoy your new plant , but 35 percent is coming to us .
now , here 's what 's going to happen if they have n't moved yet .
a lot of them have moved .
we 've lost thousands and thousands of companies , we 've lost millions of jobs - too late .
i should have been there 10 years ago .
nobody would have left .
nobody would have left because you need the right messenger , you know , i 'm your messenger in terms of this movement .
but you need the right person saying it .
so , here 's what 's going to happen .
normally they 'd call up whoever it is that was putting the little order down like the new president and they 'd have one of their lobbyists call up and they 'd say hillary , i 'm sorry , you ca n't do that , they gave you $ 2 million for your campaign .
ca n't do that , hillary .
ok , i wo n't do that .
with me , i 'm putting my money up , folks .
i 'm putting my money up .
putting my money up .
we 're raising money for reince and for the rnc , but that 's for a lot of other reasons .
we are putting - i 'm putting a lot of money up .
i financed my - i funded , not financed , i wish i financed , right ?
i funded but i funded my primaries and i spent less than anybody else in terms of the measures .
so , here 's a story - would n't that be nice ?
i spent less and won in a landslide .
other people spent much , much more .
three , four , five times more and they came in seventh .
who the hell do you want to have as your president , right ?
right ?
right ?
oh , boy , and then they do n't like me - couple of them , most of them have really supported us , but some of them just ca n't get over it .
you know what i say to them ?
get over it .
we 're just having fun .
get over it .
you signed a pledge , i hereby guarantee that i will endorse whoever wins - you know , the funny thing , all those pledges , you know they were signed for different - they were signed so that i would sign it .
and i would have honored it , i will say .
even if i was n't fond or did n't like - i would have honored it because a pledge is a very important thing .
but here 's the thing .
so , we are going to take these companies that have n't left - now , i 'm looking at your numbers folks , you 're not doing too well .
you 're not doing too well here .
pennsylvania has lost one in three manufacturing jobs since - you know , that 's massive , since nafta .
nafta was signed by bill clinton and i believe it 's the single worst trade document ever signed in the history of our country and probably in the history of our world .
it 's one of the most one - sided documents that i 've ever seen .
and it allowed mexico and places to do unbelievably well at our expense .
and did you see where say , i 'm going to renegotiate nafta , i 'm going to -- tpp disaster .
ok , do n't worry .
do n't worry .
and hillary was in favor of tpp .
she said it 's the gold standard .
thank you for reminding me .
i like this guy .
it 's the gold standard .
tpp .
transpacific partnership .
it is going to be -- i do n't think you can be worse than nafta honestly .
but it 's going to be as bad as nafta .
so tpp , she said it is the gold standard .
she 's reading it from a teleprompter .
it is the gold standard -- oh , boy .
our country is in trouble .
our country is in trouble .
our country is in trouble .
so she said it 's the gold standard .
but when she heard me make a speech , as i understand it .
and she heard me talking very negatively about it .
as an example , they do n't talk devaluation , which is the single greatest tool that these countries are using to kill the united states , including china .
they devalue their currency .
well , it does n't happen mention .
number one thing is not mentioned .
so complicated , this agreement .
too many countries .
by the way , i believe trade .
i believe in trade deals .
one country at a time .
boom .
boom .
boom .
you got to see the lines .
we 'll have one line .
and if they do n't do well .
if they do n't behave themselves , if they want to start devaluing their currency all over the place , very simple , we write them a notice like we do in business .
we serve them with a 30 day notice .
and by the way , you just saw , how great are our police , right ?
law and order .
we need law and order .
we need law and order and we will have law and order .
our police , our firemen - but our police do a fantastic job .
they are not recognized for the great job they do .
if they have 500,000 incidents all positively , beautifully handled , one bad thing happens , that one bad thing is on the news for two weeks and it 's a disgrace .
it 's a disgrace .
so we should be very thankful for the job they do .
so , pennsylvania is losing a lot of its business .
right now , we 're sitting here , we 're talking - oh , here 's another one .
go home to mom .
go home to mom .
and your mother is voting for trump !
she 's voting for trump .
it 's true .
it 's true .
by the way , just to interject - so i was told this whole area is democratic , meaning democrat .
and i was told that by a lot of different people outside and then they said i ca n't believe that you have 10,000 people , you have people outside trying to get in .
they said , the came up to me , this is - happens to be a democrat who i happen to know is a good guy -- came up to me and said i 've never seen anything like it .
it always goes democrat .
is that a correct statement ?
said , you are going to win erie in a and the surrounding area - you 're going to win in a landslide .
gon na be a landslide .
because people are tired of lies , they 're tired of losing their jobs , they 're tired of seeing their companies being ripped out and going to other places .
they 're tired of china coming in and dropping steel all over the place to put your companies out of business , so we have to go to china to get our steel , which is happening very quickly .
and that 's why the steel workers are with me , that 's why the miners are with me , that 's why the working people , electricians , the plumbers , the sheetrockers , the concrete guys and gals , they 're all - they 're with us .
and i grew up , you know they say , you know you 're really rich , how come you sort of relate to these people ?
well , my father built houses and i used to work in these houses and i got to know the electricians , i got to know all these people , i got to know the plumbers , the steamfitters -- i got to know them all .
and i liked them better than the rich people that i know .
i know a lot of rich people .
it 's true .
they 're better .
i like them better .
so , anyway -- and , we are going to put people back to work .
we 're not playing games .
and it 's going to go quickly .
by the way , it 's going to go quickly .
but look at this , ok .
so , erie , has lost one in three manufacturing jobs .
you know that , all i -- you do -- i flew over , you 're looking at the plants , plants that 25 years ago , 20 years ago , 15 years ago , some two years ago , were vibrant .
but no plant two years ago was too vibrant because it was down to half , down to a quarter , down to a tenth , and then ultimately they closed , but you see them .
they are falling over .
the rain , the sleet , the snow , the wind .
these are great buildings that are falling apart .
do n't feel bad , all over the country .
upstate new york is a disaster , which hillary clinton said that she was going to fix .
ok , so the washington post is extraordinarily dishonest and that 's fine .
but they wrote a story , i could n't believe i saw this story , they talked about hillary clinton .
it was a headline , hillary clinton and when she ran for the united states senator from new york , she said to the people in upstate new york , which was starting to really have problems because of her husband 's bill nafta .
and companies were leaving , tremendous unemployment , tremendous problems , making nothing and she said i will turn it around , i will create 200,000 jobs , we 're going to do a great job .
guess what ?
she got elected , she did nothing .
and the only ones that benefited were the consultants and the people that helped her out .
it is a disaster .
upstate new york is right now worse than anything you have in the state of pennsylvania , she did nothing .
and i watched her yesterday , which was hard to do , because she is boring , ok ?
i watched her yesterday talking about -- you know what 's funny ?
i said i 'm going to renegotiate nafta and they said what happens if you ca n't make a deal , i said we 're going to terminate , we 're getting out .
and ...   so i 've been saying that and i 've been saying we 're going to renegotiate different trade deals , and we 're going to make great trade deals and all this and she 's never said that .
all of a sudden , two days ago , i will renegotiate trade deals .
she 's not going to do it , folks .
she 's going to renegotiate trade deals the same way she was going to put 200,000 jobs in upstate new york .
it turned out to be a total fantasy and i have to tell you , i respect the washington post for writing one bad story .
because you what they 're doing ?
and reince was alluding to it a little bit , the only way she gets elected is if they do n't report on her .
they do n't show her .
they have me on so much television .
there 's cnn , you talk about dishonesty , it 's called the clinton -- wait -- it 's called the clinton news network , cnn .
now , think of it , clinton is ...   she 's hardly ever on .
so yesterday , they have yesterday , a scandal with the emails , another one .
i 'm not talking about the 33,000 emails that she deleted or got rid of .
can you imagine what was on those emails ?
can you imagine ?
i love that .
can you imagine what was on those emails , 33,000 emails were deleted .
and she said well it had to do with the wedding and yoga .
i give two to yoga , i give five to the wedding .
i 'll tell you , the lies , the deception .
we 're running like they run right now a third world country folks , ok ?
you saw what happened , it 's running like a third world country , we 're being talked about all over the world , nobody can believe it .
in fact , when they were going over the charges against hillary clinton , one after another after another after another , however , and yet other people , their lives have been destroyed for doing much less , all right ?
their lives have been destroyed .
so now they have a big scandal in new york .
it 's in the new york papers , but very little .
pay right ?
pay for play .
and it 's horrifying , it 's horrifying .
our government is for sale .
our government is for sale by a crooked person .
and what they 're doing is they 're trying to not talk about her .
take a look .
you go to cnn as an example .
story after story about trump .
story -- trump .
trump .
trump .
trump .
and yesterday , it was announced that people are tired of negative -- the hit jobs and cnn 's starting to do very poorly .
that 's good .
i like that .
i like that .
and i have to say , fox has been treating us fairly .
fox has been fair .
but cnn has been catastrophic .
it 's so dishonest .
but somebody was explaining to me their theory .
if they do n't report on her , people are n't going to know how bad she is .
look at her news conference .
she has n't had a news conference in like 260 days .
that last one was n't a news conference .
that was a few of her friends .
they asked her a question .
what did she say about the circuit , right ?
let me tell you , if i ever said that , short- circuited , if i ever said i short - circuited , it would be headlines all over the world .
they would call for the death penalty .
can you imagine if i said that i short - circuited ?
i mean , i stand up here for months in front of massive crowds , she gets 300 people going to her events .
she gets 300 people and then she reads something from a teleprompter and then she leaves and she goes home and she goes to sleep .
and then she wakes and she goes again .
and i 'm telling you -- and nobody does anything about it .
now me , i stand up here -- i 'm not looking at notes .
i 'm not reading teleprompters .
not easy .
not easy .
not easy .
but -- but -- remember -- but -- and if i make one mistake   say , he mention something wrong .
he got a wrong date .
it 's like headlines all over .
she can say she short - circuited up here .
i do n't want a president who short - circuits .
is that ok ?
i do n't want it .
i do n't want a president who short - circuits .
we 've got to deal with isis .
we 've got to deal with china .
we 've got to deal with lots of people .
they 're not short - circuiting .
but i do n't want somebody that short - circuits .
so let me just tell you -- let me just tell you .
over the last little while -- you know , every time , it 's always a big deal .
when i said that obama -- and of course , i 'm being sarcastic .
and they know that because after i said that , i said he 's the mvp , he 's going to collect his mvp award .
ok .
so i said obama is the founder of isis .
the founder .
and these dishonest media people -- they 're the most dishonest people .
they said oh , did he mean that ?
did n't he mean that ?
and after that , i 'd say a lot -- in fact , they like him so much because he 's been so weak and so bad .
i mean , he let this happen .
they had eight states .
they had eight countries .
they 're now in 28 countries .
they 're expanding .
so i said the founder of -- obviously , i 'm being sarcastic .
then -- then -- but not that sarcastic , to be honest with you .
and they all said , he should not say that .
they should call him an enabler .
call him an enabler .
he 's an enabler .
i said , that does n't sound the same .
he 's an enabler .
people are going to say what 's -- these people are the worst .
but listen , so i said the founder of isis .
and in fact , very soon he 's going over to pick up his most valuable player award .
did i say that ?
i say it all the time .
so they knew i was being sarcastic .
by now they 're analyzing .
did i really mean that ?
how could i say that ?
these people are the lowest form of life .
i 'm telling you .
the lowest .
they are the lowest form of humanity .
not all of them .
they have about 25 percent that are pretty good , actually .
but most of them .
ok .
so , here 's the story .
so erie has lost a lot .
right ?
you know that , right ?
hang in , do n't leave .
i promise we can fix it so fast .
we will stop these countries from taking our jobs .
we will stop these countries from taking our companies .
hold on .
our jobs will come back .
now , i came up with a great plan .
i 'm lowering corporate taxes so our companies stay , so i do n't even have to make the call .
the corporate inversions - you know , we have companies that have , they say , two and a half trillion dollars outside of our comp   - they ca n't get their money back .
we do n't let them .
everybody agrees that we should do it .
republicans , democrats , everybody agrees .
what 's the - look , why do we not want them to bring money back ?
you know why ?
because we do n't have a president that can sit the leaders of both parties around a table and in about five minutes let them say let 's bring this money back in so we can work it in this country , right ?
that 's what it is .
so we 're going to bring that money back in , we 're going to lower taxes , we 're going to keep our companies - and if our companies want to leave , they 're going to pay a nice big beautiful tax to get their product back in .
ok ?
that 's what 's going to happen .
so , the existing u.s. trade deficit with tpp participating nations has already cost pennsylvania 68,000 jobs , folks .
no more , folks .
we 're not going to be stupid people any more , we 're going to be the really , really smart people .
it 's going to be america first .
america first .
america first .
first .
so , the destruction of manufacturing in pennsylvania was caused by hillary clinton 's and her husband 's disastrous trade policies .
i mean , you take a look at what she 's done .
at the bidding of her corporate funders , hillary clinton has backed every job - killing trade deal for decades .
she has received so much money , she has approved virtually every tax increase put before her .
yesterday - you see 1.3 trillion in tax increases .
we 're the highest taxed nation in the land , essentially .
we 're the highest taxed nation in the world .
anywhere in the world .
and of the industrialized nations , we 're far and away the highest taxed nation .
and she 's proposing a massive tax increase .
folks , we ca n't do it .
it 's going to make our country non - competitive - it 's already non - competitive .
it 's going to make our country non - competitive and we 're not going to do it .
i 'm proposing a massive tax decrease for the middle class , for business , and businesses are going to pour in - not since ronald reagan has anything like this been proposed .
businesses instead of leaving because their taxes are so high , they 're going to stay .
i might not even have to make those calls .
now , if i do , i will , meaning my people will .
i 'll do some , i love doing it .
i would love telling some guy you 're not moving .
well , mr. president , sir , we would like to move to mexico .
you 're not moving and if you do you pay the 35 percent tax .
you say well , in that case , i 'm not moving , i 'm not moving .
in that case , i 'm not moving .
so easy .
so , your coal industry , your steel industry , which has been ravaged , your general electrics of the world , which have been ravaged , just ravaged , we 're going to end it and i 'll tell you why .
over the years , i 've watched .
for years , for 10 years , for 12 years , for 15 years , beyond obama , and i 've watched as politicians talked about stopping countries from leaving - companies from leaving our states .
you need strength , is right .
our states .
and i watched .
remember they give the low - interest loans ?
here 's a low - interest loan if you stay in pennsylvania , here 's a zero - interest loan , you do n't have to pay , here 's a this , here 's tax abatement of any kind you want , we 'll help your - it does n't work , folks , that 's not what they need .
they have money .
they want to go out , they want to move to another country and because our politicians are so dumb , they want to sell their product to us and not have any retribution , not have any consequences .
so all of that 's over and i think you understand it and hillary ca n't do it .
number one , she ca n't do it because the mentality is n't there .
she ca n't do it .
no , the mentality .
you know , she said fairly recently , i do n't like donald trump 's tone .
his tone is n't nice .
and i said , here we have a country that 's being taken advantage of by every country in the world .
our businesses are being taken .
our jobs being taken .
everything 's being taken .
here we have a world where isis is chopping off the heads of christians and many others , drowning people in steel cages , burying people in the sand , and we have somebody up there who wants to be our president that says , i do n't like donald trump 's tone .
folks , we better get smart , folks .
hey , look , let 's see what happens .
we better get smart .
we better get smart .
we better get smart .
we better get tough .
and if we 're not smart and we 're not tough , we 're not going to have a country left .
and one of the things i have to talk to you about before i leave is our borders .
illegal immigrants are pouring into our country .
in fact , i brought something for you people .
i brought -- i brought -- i had to do this .
i did n't want to depress you .
ok , look .
the clinton legacy .
nearly one in three manufacturing jobs in erie , pa -- erie , pa , sound familiar -- have been lost since clinton allowed a certain deal with china to happen .
now , look at this -- look at this chart .
this is 2001 , not long ago .
this is now .
congratulations , folks .
i hope you 're doing well .
ok ?
i hope you 're doing well .
i do n't want to hurt them .
i hope you 're doing well .
but you know what ?
you ca n't do well .
when you have a government that is so stupid , that is so -- that is so incompetent , you ca n't do it .
here 's another one , folks .
this is what we 're talking about .
syrian refugees -- we have no idea who they are , where they 're coming from , no paperwork .
you saw what happened in san bernardino .
you saw what happened -- frankly , take a look at all over the world .
take a look at what 's happening .
if we do n't get smart and we do n't get smart fast -- barack obama is allowing syrian refugees to come into our country by the thousands .
now , i have as big a heart as anybody in this room and i want to build safe zones and i want , by the way , the gulf states to pay for it because they 've got plenty of money and they 're not doing much .
ok ?
we 'll supervise it .
opm , other people 's money .
we 'll supervise it , right ?
we 'll supervise it .
but they 're going to pay for it because we 're protecting these people .
if it were n't for the united states , those countries would n't even exist .
they 'd be gone .
the power we have is so enormous , but we have people that do n't know what they 're doing .
we have an incompetent president .
we have people that do n't know what they 're doing .
so look at this .
look at this .
syrian refugees admitted to the united states on a monthly basis .
look what 's happening .
look what 's happening .
now , in all fairness , we want to help people .
ca n't take a chance .
san bernardino , they walk in .
they start shooting .
paris , the best , the toughest gun laws in the world , paris , france .
they walk in .
they kill 130 people .
they wound so gravely hundreds of people .
now , let me just tell you because well -- we 're on   the second amendment , right , second amendment .
if we had in san bernardino -- if we had in san bernardino or in orlando or someplace , somebody in that room like this guy right here , right , or that guy with the blue make america great again hat on or the one with the red make america -- or that woman with the beautiful blonde hair .
i wish i had hair that looked like that .
but if we had somebody and they happened to have a gun , san bernardino , they see him come in -- first of all , if they knew there was a gun where the bullets would be flying in the other direction , they probably would n't have got   in , ok ?
but let 's assume they did .
the carnage would not have been what the carnage was .
we have to protect our second amendment .
hillary clinton wants to kill our second amendment .
she wants to kill it .
so here 's our chart .
and i was thinking about doing a -- i bring -- every once in a -- like , one in ten i do it , you know a lot of these .
i love the people .
we have such a movement going on .
who likes the snake ?
do you know the snake ?
do you like it ?
who likes the snake ?
here we are with this .
we know bad things are going to happen .
we know as we allow more and more people to come in from these terror areas , bad things are going to happen .
has anybody heard the snake ?
not that many ?
should i do it again ?
so think of this , folks , think of this , think of it .
this is what is going on in our country with our borders .
and by the way , we 're going to have a strong border , we 're going to have a wall , it 's going to be a powerful wall that mexico 's going to pay for the wall .
and we have no choice , and we have no choice .
but think of this .
this is now a situation where this was written by al wilson many years ago and i read it and i said you know that really pertains to what 's happening to the united states and it has to do with being fooled , it has to do with a lot of different things but when you 're listening to this , think of our border , think of the people that we 're letting in by the thousands and hillary clinton , you saw those numbers right ?
with the chart , it 's through the roof .
hillary clinton wants to allow 550 percent more coming into our country .
how stupid are we ?
so , are you ready , you ready , you like it , you sure ?
on her way to work one morning , down the path along the lake , a tender hearted woman saw a poor , half - frozen snake , his pretty colored skin had been all frosted with the dew .
oh well , she cried , i 'll take you in and i 'll take care of you .
take me in , oh tender woman , take me in for heaven 's sake , take me in oh tender woman , sighed the broken snake .
she wrapped him up , all cozy , in a curvature of silk .
then laid him by the fireside with some honey and some milk .
now she hurried home from work that night .
as soon as she arrived , she found that pretty snake she 'd taken in , had been revived .
take me in oh tender woman , take me in for heaven 's sake .
take me in oh tender woman , sighed the broken snake .
now she clutched him to her bosom .
you 're so beautiful , she cried .
but if i had n't brought you in by now , you certainly would have died .
now she stroked his pretty skin and then she kissed and held him tight .
but instead of saying thank you , that snake gave her a vicious bite .
take me in oh tender woman , take me in for heaven 's sake .
take me in oh tender woman , sighed the vicious snake .
i saved you , i saved you , i saved you , cried that woman .
and you 've bit me , heaven 's why .
you know your bite is poisonous and now i 'm going to die .
oh shut up , silly woman , said the reptile with a grin .
you knew damn well i was a snake before you took me in .
get ready folks , get ready .
we 're led by stupid people .
we 're led by leaders and you know honestly , i did n't need this .
this i did n't need .
i had a nice life , built a great company -- a great company , some of the great real estate assets of the world .
i may never see them .
you know if i win , i may never see them again , and i love them -- all over the world .
but you know what ?
this is so important .
and i watched what was happening with the iran deal , and i watched what was happening with jobs , and i watched what was happening with trade where china makes $ 500 billion in trade deficits with us .
i look and i saw .
take a look at mexico .
you know , the politicians say , you 'll never , ever be able to get mexico to allow you to build a wall .
i say trust me .
now , they do n't say that anymore .
now they say , they wo n't put the money up to build a wall .
so easy .
mexico -- our trade deficit is massive , massive .
they make a fortune off the stupidity of the united stated .
mexico will 100 percent -- you hear -- 100 percent pay for the wall , 100 percent .
ok ?
one hundred percent .
but the story of the snake is what 's happening to our country .
we 're letting people in .
many of these people hate us .
many of these people do n't have good thoughts .
and you see what one person can do -- one sick wacko can do in orlando .
and then you see his father sitting behind hillary clinton with a big smile on his face -- with a big , fat smile on his face , right ?
and he was wearing a red hat , and i said , i hope that 's not one of my hats .
it was n't .
i was concerned .
i saw that hat .
i said , i hope it does n't say make america great again .
bad guy -- bad guy .
horrendous son -- horrendous son .
so here 's the story , folks .
we have to win -- we have to win pennsylvania , so important .
so ...   hillary clinton is run by people that do this very professionally .
they 're very good .
they keep her out of the spotlight .
she does n't talk to reporters -- very rarely .
she does n't do press conferences .
she does n't expose whatever 's going on up here .
she does n't -- which is n't good .
she does n't expose her mind to questions .
and what they want to do is they want to try and fake it through .
we need strength .
we need toughness .
we need a strong temperament .
we need a strong tone .
at the same time -- at the same time , let me tell you -- at the same time , we need real , big , beautiful heart because we have to straighten out healthcare .
obamacare 's going to be repealed and replaced .
it 's going to repay -- did you see -- did you see what 's happening with obamacare ?
did you see where the numbers are going up 30 , 40 , and 50 percent ?
wait until you see what happens on november 1st .
now , on november 1st , they 're trying to delay it .
but you 're going to get increases , the likes of which probably no country , nobody has ever seen .
ok ?
anybody in the history of healthcare -- in texas , through going through blue cross blue shield , they just had almost a 50 percent increase in their premiums .
and the deductibles are so high that unless you get hit by one of those general electric locomotives and you live for like a long time prior to death , you 'll never , ever be able to use your healthcare -- the healthcare .
because here 's what 's happened -- here 's what 's happened .
the deductible is so high , you never get to use it .
so , you 're spending money , your   raises by 17 , 18 , 19 percent .
but now , it 's going to go really bad , really bad .
it 's going to die of its own volition , but we have to kill it first .
it 's killing our country , it 's killing our jobs -- it 's killing our jobs .
so , here 's the story , folks -- folks .
we have to win pennsylvania .
we have to beat this professional group of people that are running her for her own -- for their own purposes .
we have to win pennsylvania .
we win pennsylvania , we 're going to win it .
you know , we 're up in florida .
we 're doing well in ohio .
and i 'm hearing we 're doing well here .
we 'll find out .
here 's the story ...   here 's the story .
we have to win the state of pennsylvania .
i went to school here .
my kids went to school here .
we 're going to win pennsylvania .
if we win pennsylvania , i 'll tell you what .
we are very much on our way .
you know , the republicans do have a tougher path , just so you -- not my fault .
not my fault .
it 's a tougher path .
for the presidency , it 's just a tougher , winding road .
but if win pennsylvania , we win florida where we 're doing really well , i think we can win ohio , it 'll be over .
it 'll be over .
it 'll be over .
so , on november 8th , you have to get out and vote or do some balloting , and i do n't care -- look , here 's the story .
if you 're not feeling well , if you 're so sick , if you go to your doctor and he goes , i 'm sorry sir , but you 've only got a few weeks left .
and it 's november 1st .
and he gives you the ultimate word , not looking good .
you have n't got long left .
i do n't care and nobody else in this room cares .
you have to on november 8th get out of bed and get out and vote , right ?
get out and vote .
now , in a lot of cases , you can do your early ballots too .
all i 'm telling you though -- look , folks .
i 'm just saying your jobs have been taken .
your military and all of the other things , we 're going to save your second amendment , which is protection , we 're going to get of common core , you 're going to bring your education locally .
all things -- i 'm going to repeal and replace obamacare .
all these things .
we 're going to take care of our vets .
but here 's the story , folks .
for you people in particular because you have been devastated .
supreme court , he said .
yes .
yes .
thank you .
who did that ?
who said that ?
thank you .
by the way , and i have to just stop for a second .
look , supreme court justice scalia great .
was supposed to live for a long time .
he died .
so you have already an empty .
this next president could have the most supreme court nominations of any president .
could take more justices than -- it could be up to five .
probably going to be three , could be four , could be five .
ok ?
if hillary clinton gets to put hard - leaning left judges on the supreme court , number one , your second amendment will be gone .
our country will never ever be the same .
we will have problems like we 've never had before and you wo n't have -- you will have a whole different deal going , which we do n't want , believe me .
so , here 's the story .
if for no other reason , i am going to put -- and you know , i 've picked through federalist society   -- we picked 11 supreme court justices .
we 're going to add probably four more , all vetted through federalists , through heritage , highly -- i actually got very good marks .
we 're going to pick these people or people very like that .
so , here 's the story , here 's the story .
you ready ?
we do n't win anymore , you people do n't win , that 's for sure .
you just have to look at the statistics for jobs .
we 're going to start winning again .
we 're going to win so much that you 're going to get sick and tired of winning .
you 're going to say mr. president -- you 're going to send the congressman to see me in washington .
he 's going to say , mr. president , we have to do something .
the people of pennsylvania , and in particular our friends in erie , they 're sick and tired of winning .
they ca n't stand winning so much .
mr. president , we just do n't want to win that much .
we really want to give other nations like it used to be , where it 's good for them and bad for us , at least a little bit .
and i 'm going to say -- i 'm going to say , mr. congressman , i do n't think you know your people very well , they want to win .
and we want to win .
and you want to win .
and we 're going to win .
we 're going to win so much .
we 're going to win with our military , we 're going to knock the hell out of isis .
we 're going to win for our vets .
we 're going to take of our vets .
we 're going to win at the border , we 're going to build a wall , we 're going to have mexico pay , believe me 100 percent .
we 're going to win with education .
we 're going to win for our second amendment .
we 're going to win on all of the things we discussed .
we 're going to win again and you 're going to be proud of your country again .
we 're not going to be the people that are laughed at all over the world for not knowing what we 're doing , for allowing others to come in and just strip us of what we have .
we are going to win .
we are going to be america first .
we are going to make america great again .
and it 's going to happen quickly .
thank you everybody , thank you .
